Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                                             FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                             Report No: PADHI00700

                                                     INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                                                                                   ON A
                                                                              PROPOSED LOAN

                                                                      IN THE AMOUNT OF US$200 MILLION

                                                                                      TO THE




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                REPUBLIC OF PERU

                                                                                       FOR A

                                                      WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULAR ECONOMY PROJECT

                                                       AS PHASE 1 OF THE MULTI-PHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH

                                                       WITH AN OVERALL FINANCING ENVELOPE OF US$609.4 MILLION

                                                                                September 5, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  Water Gobal Department
                                  Latin America And Caribbean Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.




                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                       CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                (Exchange Rate Effective July 31, 2025)

  PERUVIAN SOLES (PEN) 3.57 = UNITED STATES DOLLARS US$1.00

                      GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
                       January 1 - December 31




Regional Vice President: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo
      Regional Director: Benoit Bosquet
      Division Director: Issam A. Abousleiman
     Practice Manager: David Michaud
   Task Team Leader(s): Malva Baskovich, Zael Sanz Uriarte




                                                              Official Use Only
                            ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ANA       Autoridad Nacional del Agua, National       MINAM   Ministerio del Ambiente, Ministry of
          water authority                                     Environment
BOD       Biological Oxygen Demand                    MPA     Multiphase Programmatic Approach
CBA       Cost Benefit Analysis                       MVCS    Ministerio de Vivienda, Construcción y
CC        Climate Change                                      Saneamiento, Ministry of Housing,
CEI       Cost-Effectiveness Index                            Construction and Sanitation
COD       Chemical Oxygen Demand                      M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
DGAA      Dirección General de Asuntos                NAP     National Adaptation Plan
          Ambientales, Directorate of                 NDC     Nationally Determined Contribution
          Environmental Affairs                       NLTA    Non-Lending Technical Assistance
                                                      NPV     Net Present Value
DGPPCS    Dirección General de Programas y            NRW     Non-revenue water
          Proyectos de Construcción y                 O&M     Operation and Maintenance
          Saneamiento, Directorate for Projects &     PAC     Project Advisory Committee
          Programs
                                                      PASLC   Programa de Agua Segura para Lima y
DGPRCS    Dirección General de Políticas y                    Callao, Water Security Program for Lima
          Regulación de Construcción y                        and Callao
          Saneamiento, General Directorate for        PIT     Project Implementation Teams
          Construction and Sanitation Policies and    PNSU    Programa Nacional de Saneamiento
          Regulations                                         Urbano, National Urban Sanitation
DMA       District Metering Area                              Program
EME       Early Market Engagement                     PCM     Private Capital Mobilization
ESCP      Environmental and Social Commitment         PDO     Project Development Objective
          Plan                                        PIU     Project Implementation Unit
ESA       Environmental and Social Assessment         POM     Project Operation Manual
ESF       Environmental and Social Framework          PPP     Public Private Partnerships
ESIA      Environmental and Social Impact             PPSD    Project Procurement Strategy for
          Assessment                                          Development
ESMP      Environmental and Social Management         PrDO    Program Development objective
          Plans                                       PVC     Polyvinyl chloride
ESS       Environmental and Social Standards          RP      Resettlement Plans
FM        Financial management                        SDG     Sustainable Development Goals
GDP       Gross Domestic Product                      SEA     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
CPF       Country Partnership Framework               SEP     Stakeholder Engagement Plan
GHG       Greenhouse Gas                              SH      Sexual Harassment
GWh       Gigawatt-hour                               SIAF    Sistema de Administracion Financiera,
HDPE      High-Density Polyethylene                           Financial Information System
HLO       Higher Level Objectives                     STEM    Science, Technology, Engineering and
HR        Human Resources                                     Mathematics
IADB      Interamerican Development Bank              ToC     Theory of Change
IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction       ToR     Terms of Reference
          and Development                             WICER   Water in Circular Economy and Resilience
ICC       Intersectoral Coordination Committee        WSS     Water Supply and Sanitation
IPF       Investment Project Financing                WWTP    Wastewater Treatment Plant
JMP       Joint Monitoring Program
LMP       Labor Management Procedures
MAR       Managed Aquifer Recharge
MEF       Ministry of Economy and Finance
MIDAGRI   Ministerio de Desarrollo Agrario y Riego,
          Ministry of Agricultural Development and
          Irrigation




                                                                                                     Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... ii
      I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT........................................................................................................................ 1
      A. Country Context ............................................................................................................................... 1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 1
      C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................... 5
      D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach................................................................................................ 7
      II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................................... 10
      A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 10
      B. Project Components ...................................................................................................................... 10
      C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 14
      D. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 14
      E. Lessons Learned .............................................................................................................................. 15
      III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ........................................................................................... 16
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 16
      B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ......................................................................... 17
      C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 17
      IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY................................................................................................... 18
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................... 18
      B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 22
      C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 24
      D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 24
      V. KEY RISKS ....................................................................................................................................... 27
      VI. RESULTS FRAMEWORK .................................................................................................................. 29
      ANNEX 1: Maps .................................................................................................................................. 41




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
                                                                                                                                                                               i


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Peru                     Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy
                                                      Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                      Classification
                         Investment Project
P505093                                               Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpaprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[✓] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                       [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                     [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                          [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                                [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                      [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                            [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                   [✓] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                  Expected Closing Date                     Expected Program Closing Date
29-Sep-2025                             31-Dec-2030                               31-Dec-2035
Bank/IFC Collaboration                  Joint Level
Yes                                     Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpa#doctemplate
MPA Program Development Objective
Increase access to inclusive and climate resilient water and sanitation services in selected basins adopting circular
economy approaches.

MPA FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

MPA Program Financing Envelope                                                     609.40


                                                                                                                          ii


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


Components
 Component Name                                                                                          Cost (US$)
 Infrastructure                                                                                      248,300,000.00
 Governance and Project Management                                                                    18,100,000.00


Organizations
Borrower:                        Republic of Peru
                                 Ministry of Housing Construction and Sanitation, Safe Water Program for Lima and
Implementing Agency:
                                 Callao - PASLC, National Urban Sanitation Program - PNSU


MPA FINANCING DETAILS (US$, Millions)


MPA Program Financing Envelope:                                               609.40

     of which Bank Financing (IBRD):                                          500.00

     of which Bank Financing (IDA):                                           0.00

     of which Other Financing sources:                                        109.40


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                       266.40

  Total Financing                                                                                            266.40
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               200.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                    iii


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                         200.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Counterpart Funding                                                                                    66.40

      National Government                                                                                 66.40


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                   2026             2027              2028             2029             2030       2031

Annual                 5.00             40.00             60.00            60.00            25.00      10.00
Cumulative             5.00             45.00            105.00           165.00            190.00    200.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas
Water                                                         Agriculture and Food

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Substantial
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Moderate
                                                                                                                iv


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Substantial
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial
Overall MPA Program Risk                                                    ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

                                                                                                                        v


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1 The Borrower, through MVCS, shall maintain at all times during implementation of the Project
the Project Implementation Teams within PNSU and PASLC, with budgetary and administrative autonomy, functions,
responsibilities and resources, and staffed with personnel in number and with qualifications, terms of reference,
experience and functions acceptable to the Bank, including, inter alia: (a) their respective Key Staff; and (b) the
following personnel to be hired or appointed, within PNSU and PASLC, no later than ninety (90) days after the Effective
Date: a project coordinator; a technical coordinator; an administrative coordinator; a financial management specialist; a
procurement specialist; an environmental specialist; a social specialist; and a monitoring and evaluation specialist; all as
further detailed in the Project Operational Manual.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.2 The Borrower, through MVCS, shall establish no later than sixty (60) days after the Effective
Date and thereafter maintain at all times, the PAC to oversee the implementation of the Project, under terms and
conditions and with detailed functions, processes and membership as further defined in the Project Operational
Manual.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.3 The Borrower, through MCVS, shall maintain at all times the DGPPCS for the overall Project
technical assistance, coordination and oversight with a dedicated team in charge of: (i) the overall technical
management of the MPA Program; (ii) the preparation of the terms of reference for activities to be developed under
Part 2.1 of the Project; (iii) the coordination between participating Project entities, including DGPRCS, DGAA, SEDAPAL,
EMSAPUNO and the Project Implementation Teams; and (iv) the monitoring and evaluation of the Project, including the
consolidation of technical reports; all as further detailed in the Project Operational Manual.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.4 The Borrower, through MCVS, DGPPCS, PNSU and PASLC, shall carry out the Project in
accordance with a manual satisfactory to the Bank (the “Project Operational Manual”), which shall include, inter alia: (i)
the procedures for the carrying out Project implementation, reporting, monitoring and evaluation activities; (ii) the
institutional arrangements for the Project; (iii) the procedures for carrying out Project’s procurement, financial
management, environmental, social and disbursement activities; (iv) terms of reference for key personnel in the Project
Implementation Teams; (v) the indicators for carrying out Project monitoring and evaluation; (vi) procedures to ensure
compliance with the Anti-Corruption Guidelines and the ESCP; (vii) the procedures for carrying out personal data
collection and processing activities in accordance with applicable national law and good international practice; and (viii)
codes of conduct for the Project. The Borrower, through MVCS, DGPPCS, PNSU and PASLC shall not amend, suspend,
abrogate, repeal, or waive any provision of the Project Operational Manual without the prior written approval by the
Bank. In case of conflict between the terms of the Project Operational Manual and those of this Agreement, the terms
of this Agreement shall prevail.
Schedule 2, Section I.C.1 To facilitate the carrying out of Parts 1.1, 1.2, and 2.1.c of the Project, the Borrower shall,
through PNSU and PASLC, enter into Cooperation Agreements with, respectively, EMSAPUNO and the Provincial
Municipality of Puno (before the Effective Date) and SEDAPAL (no later than sixty - 60 - days after the Effective Date),
and thereafter maintain said Cooperation Agreements during the implementation of the Project, on terms and
conditions acceptable to the Bank, including, inter alia, the obligation of EMSAPUNO to ensure the operation,
maintenance and monitoring of the performance of El Espinar Wastewater Treatment Plant in accordance to the terms
established in the EAS-C.
Schedule 2, Section IV.A The Borrower, through PNSU, shall not initiate the bidding process for the procurement of
works to be carried out under Part 1.1(a) and 1.1(b) of the Project until and unless the Bank has approved the EAS-C,
                                                                                                                          vi


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


which includes the management and mitigation measures associated with the increase in flow rates over the El Espinar
Wastewater Treatment Plant, in accordance with the ESCP.
Schedule 2, Section IV.B The Borrower, through PNSU, shall not initiate the bidding process for the procurement of
works to be carried out under Part 1.1(c) of the Project until and unless the Bank has received a signed copy of the Puno
WWTP Contract in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                          Citation                       Description                     Financing Source
                                                             The Project Operational
                                                             Manual has been adopted
                                                             by the Borrower, through
Effectiveness                 5.01.a                                                         IBRD/IDA
                                                             MVCS, in a form and
                                                             substance satisfactory to
                                                             the Bank.
                                                             The Project
                                                             Implementation Teams in
                                                             PNSU and PASLC have been
                                                             created and their
Effectiveness                 5.01.b                                                         IBRD/IDA
                                                             respective Key Staff
                                                             appointed in form and
                                                             substance satisfactory to
                                                             the Bank.
                                                             The Cooperation
                                                             Agreement among PNSU,
                                                             Provincial Municipality of
Effectiveness                 5.01.c                         Puno and EMSAPUNO has           IBRD/IDA
                                                             been signed by all parties in
                                                             form and substance
                                                             satisfactory to the Bank.




                                                                                                                      vii


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
 A. Country Context
1.       In 2024 Peru recovered from a decade of relatively low growth, but still almost one in three Peruvians is living
in poverty. Peru has had six presidents in the last six years, a reflection of the volatile political climate in the country. The
weakening of institutions and shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic and climate events led to a slowdown in growth in
the last decade, resulting in the 2023 recession. In 2024, the economy recovered and grew by 3.3 percent, and it is
projected to grow by 2.9 percent in 2025 and 2.5 percent in 2026, close to its potential. The recovery can be explained by
the return to more stable conditions, greater public investment, and increased business confidence. According to recent
World Bank studies, Peru has the potential to become a high-income country within two decades if bold reforms are
implemented. However, under current conditions, it would take the country 64 years to achieve high-income status.
2.       Water is a key driver of economic development and job creation in Peru. Water-intensive sectors account for
nearly two fifths of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), with about 13 percent from manufacturing, 12 percent from mining
and hydrocarbons, 7 percent from construction, 6 percent from agriculture, and 2 percent from water and electricity.1
Mining and agriculture sectors account for 63 percent and 16 percent of Peru’s total exports, respectively. The agriculture
sector alone, which productivity depends heavily on irrigation, employs almost a quarter of the total labor force. This is
significant for rural development, given that 46 percent of rural populations remain poor and about 14 percent are mired
in extreme poverty2. Water’s contribution to the economy and overall livelihoods is further highlighted when considering
the impact of electricity— about 57 percent of which is produced through hydropower—on all GDP-contributing sectors.
Water is also essential for sustaining Peru’s diverse ecosystems, which include about 8 million hectares of wetlands and a
vast network of rivers and lakes. These contribute to Peru’s tourism industry, which accounts for 4.5 percent of its GDP in
2020. Therefore, improving water security3 is crucial to Peru’s path to shared prosperity while addressing climate risks.
 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
3.      Water is unevenly distributed among Peru’s hydrographic regions, with population and economic growth
concentrated and pushing demand in the water stressed Pacific coast. While Peru is the eighth-most water-rich country
in the World and the third in Latin America, access to this resource is increasingly threatened by climate change, pollution,
and uncontrolled and inefficient use. Watersheds in the coastal region experience the greatest water scarcity (only 1.8
percent of the country's water resources) yet cover Peru’s most populous (70 percent of population) and productive area
(80 percent of GDP)4. Peru also faces rainfall distribution challenges in much of the Andes and parts of the Amazon. Most
precipitation occurs between November and March, resulting in a large dry period with water deficits. The scarcity
manifests as droughts and is worsened by rapid demand growth fueled by economic development and climate change,
with increasing rainfall variability: annual precipitation can vary from a 40 percent decrease to a 50 percent increase in
key productive basins, potentially resulting in exacerbated droughts and floods.
4.      Pollution is further limiting the water endowment available to the people, the environment, and the economy
of Peru. Only 25 percent of monitored water bodies have “good” ambient water quality, meaning they are not harmful to
people or ecosystems. The main cause of water pollution in urban areas is the discharge of domestic wastewater into
waterways. Only about 60 percent of wastewater generated by urban households is treated at wastewater facilities before
being released into the environment. The impact of untreated wastewater is especially acute along the Pacific coast,
where high population densities and low-flow rivers have resulted in a concentration of pollution hotspots. In inland areas,


1 BCRP (Banco Central de Reserva del Perú), 2022. “GDP by Sector” (220 series).
2 INEI, 2021. “Evolución de la Pobreza Monetaria 2019–2020: Informe Técnico”
3 Water security is defined as the availability of an acceptable quantity and quality of water for health, livelihoods, ecosystems, and production,

coupled with an acceptable level of water-related risks to people, environments, and economies. Grey and Sadoff 2007. “Sink or swim? Water security
for growth and development”, Water Policy, 9, 545–571.
4 ANA, 2023. “Plan Operativo Institucional”.


                           Official Use Only                                                                                                Page 1
         The World Bank
         Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


agricultural pollution, due to the runoff of nitrogen, sediments, and pesticides, tourism and illegal mining activities in the
compounds with the effects of untreated and poorly treated wastewaters. The impact of untreated discharges is
exacerbated by climate change, which intensifies runoff during flooding events and, during droughts, leads to higher
pollutant concentrations and diminished natural treatment and dilution capacity.
5.       Climate change will further reduce water availability and increase uncertainty, threatening economic growth,
development, Peruvians’ wellbeing and millions of water-dependent jobs. Water-intensive sectors such as agriculture,
mining, construction, and manufacturing—employing over 2.4 million people5—are particularly exposed to water-related
shocks. Peru is becoming increasingly vulnerable to climate change, with floods, droughts and landslides occurring more
frequently and with greater intensities.6 The country’s diverse geography makes it highly susceptible to a range of climate-
related hazards. Rising temperatures and glacial retreat pose a significant threat to water security, particularly in the
Andes, where many communities rely on seasonal meltwater. Peru has lost more than half of its glaciers over the past 50
years due to rising temperatures, leading to significant changes in hydrological patterns. This loss, combined with
permafrost degradation, is reducing river flows and increasing the risk of high-magnitude glacial lake outburst floods,
which can cause catastrophic flooding downstream and damage critical infrastructure. Additionally, more frequent frosts
and erratic rainfall patterns are accelerating land degradation and reducing crop productivity, putting livelihoods at risk.
6.       In the Lima metropolitan area, climate change, untreated wastewater, insufficient infrastructure and water
deficit pose critical risks to water security and public health. The Lurín river, located in the coastal region and southern
expansion area of Lima city, is born in the central mountain range of the Andes and flows 111 km into the Pacific Ocean.
By 2041-46 the annual flows of Lurín river are expected to decrease 21 percent due to climate change, resulting in lower
aquifer recharge, water shortfall and higher contaminant concentrations. Of the total water demands in the basin, 86
percent is for irrigation and 14 percent is for municipal, industrial, and mining uses. However, only 20 percent of the
agricultural water demand is met during the dry period (September-November), mainly due to Lurín river’s non perennial
nature and the basin’s unregulated condition. In addition to having an unmet demand, according to the last water balance
for 2023-2024, the Lurín aquifer is being overexploited. This overexploitation, along with sea level rise and lower aquifer
recharge rates derived from climate change, is resulting in saline intrusion and the degradation of groundwater quality.
The lower, peri-urban segment of the basin falls within SEDAPAL’s (Lima’s WSS utility) service area and covers a population
of 306,485 people in the Lurín, Pachacamac and Cieneguilla districts. In this area, sewage coverage averages just between
46 and 65 percent, and, treated water is discharged into contaminated rivers or directly into the ocean.
7.       Climate change is increasingly destabilizing Lake Titicaca’s delicate hydrological balance, exacerbating existing
environmental and socio-economic challenges. Lake Titicaca is the world’s highest navigable lake and a vital resource for
communities in the altiplano region. The accelerated glacial melt is a key source of inflows for the Lake, yet paradoxically,
prolonged droughts and increased evaporation rates are outpacing replenishment, leading to alarming declines in water
levels. The basin’s primary water demands—agriculture, domestic use, and fisheries—are heavily reliant on the lake, with
agriculture being the largest consumer and essential for local livelihoods. However, municipal wastewater discharges and
fish farming have led to severe pollution, accelerating eutrophication and further deteriorating water quality. Addressing
these issues requires robust and ambitious pollution abatement program to ensure the sustainability and climate
resilience of Lake Titicaca and its surrounding regions. In this context, the Government of Peru is implementing a national
program to enhance the treatment of wastewater discharged into the Titicaca. With an Interamerican Development
Bank’s (IADB) lending operation approved in 2023 to improve wastewater management in Juliaca, the most populous city
in the basin, the Government now seeks support to finance the other five wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in the
province of Puno under the proposed MPA. In Puno city, the capital and the largest city of the province and the second
largest in the basin after Juliaca, existing facilities administrated by EMSAPUNO (the local water utility) are non-functional,
resulting in deficient WSS services and poorly treated sewage being discharged into the lake.

5 World Bank, 2019. “Peru Strategic Actions Toward Water Security”. Peru Water Security Diagnostic.
6 IPCC, 2021. “Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis: Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the IPCC”


                           Official Use Only                                                                                                  Page 2
         The World Bank
         Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


8.       The Lurín (Lima) and Lake Titicaca (Puno) basins are served by utilities with contrasting capacities. SEDAPAL is a
strong and regionally recognized utility despite ongoing financial constraints and EMSAPUNO is a significantly weaker
utility with limited capacity. On average, EMSAPUNO’s and SEDAPAL’s customers receive water in their taps 10.4 and 21.3
hours per day, 16 and 10 percent of the connections are not equipped with a water meter, and their NRW level stands at
44.5 and 32 percent, respectively. EMSAPUNO has a liquidity ratio of 0.35 percent, and in 2023 had a negative debt ratio
of -4.37 and its return on assets was -5.38 percent7. EMSAPUNO’s debt level is high, and the net worth of the company is
negative. Meanwhile SEDAPAL return on assets in 2023 was 3.56 percent. EMSAPUNO’s difficult situation calls for
improving the governance and technical capacity of the utility, equipping its staff with the required tools, procedures and
know-how, and empowering and giving them the opportunity to excel and contribute to the transformation of the utility.
However, as shown in textbox 1, existing barriers prevent both utilities from benefitting from the full potential of its staff,
particularly women.
                                         Box 1: Women in SEDAPAL’s and EMSAPUNO’s workforce
 Water and sanitation utilities in Peru have been historically male dominated, reinforcing gender stereotypes that frame technical
 roles as more suitable for men. Rooted in social norms, these translate into gender stereotypes, occupational sex-segregation,
 lower participation of women in STEM fields, insufficient policies to reconcile work and family, weak provisions towards sexual
 harassment in the workplace, and even self-perceptions among women in the sector themselves 8. A set of policies supported by
 the Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru (P181263, Peru, DPF) aim at advancing women’s
 participation in decision making in the WSS sector by introducing the guiding principles for improving gender inclusion.
 Both EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL have completed HR gender diagnostics. The latest assessments found that women represent only
 27.6% of SEDAPAL’s workforce, a slight increase from 26.6% in 2022, however their representation in management positions
 dropped from 22.6% to only 9.1%. Female representation among engineers remains stable at 25% in 2024 and engineering roles
 (23.3%). In EMSAPUNO, the share of female employees is low overall, at 17.2% in 2024 (vs. 16.5% in 2022). The share of engineers
 increased from 33.3% in 2022 to 48.4% in 2024, but the gap among managers remains high, with just 20% of managers being
 women. Moreover, there is no female representation on the board directors of these two utilities. These gender gaps limit diversity
 in decision-making and technical innovation. The proposed Program will support SEDAPAL’s and EMSAPUNO’s efforts to reduce
 gender gaps in decision-making positions. There is evidence that when women take on leadership roles, utilities benefit from
 stronger governance, more customer-focused service delivery, greater equity, and superior organizational performance.9

9.       In this challenging context, embracing circular economy principles is essential for Peru’s roadmap towards
water security and mitigation of the impact of climate change on water availability and service reliability. A circular
economy is an economic system aimed at minimizing waste and making the most of resources. It is restorative by design,
intending to keep products, materials, and resources in use for as long as possible. Adopting a circular economy model
can drive economic growth by creating new business opportunities and jobs, and it encourages innovation in product
design and production processes, leading to more efficient use of resources and reduced costs. Historically, the WSS sector
has followed a predominantly linear “take, make, consume and waste” model. In Peru’s coastal areas, such as Lurín, urban
wastewater infrastructure relies, in the best of cases, on large collectors to convey wastewater to centralized WWTPs,
with effluent discharged into the sea, resulting in the loss of valuable resources. Across the country, technical losses in
drinking water supply systems are high, which, compounded with the lack of wastewater treatment, is putting pressure
on natural water bodies. In the Altiplano, cities like Puno face unique challenges, including droughts, reduced water
availability and heightened risks of contamination in critical water bodies like Lake Titicaca. These practices not only
degrade water quality but also contribute significantly to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, with the water and agriculture
sectors together responsible for over 16 percent of the country's total emissions.


7 Sunass 2024 “Acta de Inspección”
8 Cooperación Económica Suiza (2024). “Oportunidades y Barreras para el Desarrollo de la Carrera Profesional o Técnico de las Mujeres en el Sector

de Saneamiento”. Lima, Peru.
9 World Bank, 2019. “Women in water utilities. Breaking barriers.”


                           Official Use Only                                                                                                Page 3
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


10.      Circular economy offers an opportunity to recognize and capture the full value of water as a service, an input
to processes, a source of energy and a carrier of nutrients and other materials. This requires shifting towards “reduce-
reuse-recycle-recover-restore” approaches that regenerate natural systems, reduce water use and other external inputs
by closing nutrient loops, reduce waste and pollution, reuse and recycle water effluents, recover energy and nutrients from
wastewater to minimize land, water, and carbon footprints and regenerate natural systems. Reducing pollution is essential
to ensure appropriate water resources quality for all uses, and improving water use efficiency and recycling and reusing
wastewater effluents is key to increasing water availability for all, as well as improving resilience against climate change
exacerbated droughts. Additionally, to achieve their full benefits, circular water systems need to embrace resilience and
inclusiveness, preparing for uncertain shocks and stressors to avoid the undesired impacts from disruptions or failures of
water services. Figure 1 captures the Water in Circular Economy and Resilience (WICER) framework developed by the
World Bank to guide decision makers to incorporate these principles in policies and strategies, planning, investment
prioritization, and design and operations. This framework structures interventions around three main pillars: (i) deliver
resilient and inclusive services; (ii) design out waste and pollution; and (iii) preserve and restore natural systems.
11.      Circular economy is at the heart of climate adaptation and is essential to reduce GHG emissions of the water
sector. Increasing operational efficiency to reduce non-revenue water (NRW), reclaiming and reusing treated effluents
                                                                 and storing them adopting managed aquifer recharge (MAR)
  Figure 1. The WICER Framework
                                                                 practices, as well as restoring natural ecosystems by
                                                                 reducing pollutant discharges (both increasing wastewater
                                                                 treatment capacity to reduce single point discharges and
                                                                 promoting the use of treated sludge biosolids to displace
                                                                 inorganic fertilizers to tackle diffuse pollution), are essential
                                                                 measures to preserve scarce natural water bodies and
                                                                 diversify the mix of water resources to build resilience of
                                                                 drinking WSS systems against climate change exacerbated
                                                                 droughts. Additionally, restoring natural ecosystems to
                                                                 increase water absorption and storage capacity is critical to
                                                                 build resilience both against floods and droughts. Similarly,
                                                                 using reclaimed water for MAR can be instrumental to
                                                                 prevent saline intrusion into coastal aquifers. In turn,
                                                                 expanding the network to increase inclusive access to utility-
                                                                 run resilient WSS services increases the climate resilience of
                                                                 poorer households that today rely on unimproved and
                                                                 unreliable water sources. Finally, reducing NRW, increasing
                                                                 energy efficiency of WSS and capturing methane generated
  World Bank, 2021. “Water in Circular Economy and Resilience”   during the wastewater treatment process to generate
                                                                 renewable energy, reduce the carbon footprint of the sector.
12.      Peru is building a policy and regulatory framework to pursue a circular economy transition, but the
interinstitutional collaboration required to unlock its full potential for improving water security remains a challenge. In
2024, the Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation (MVCS) issued a circular economy roadmap for drinking WSS
services, but regulatory and financial incentives for its effective application by utilities remain to be developed. Moreover,
the legal framework of the energy and solid waste management sectors creates barriers for the technical and economic
viability of projects aimed at cogenerating renewable energy as part of the wastewater treatment process and for the
valorization of the sludge generated as a byproduct of said process. Likewise, the Ministry of Agriculture (MIDAGRI) has
also prepared a circular economy road map, but it does not contemplate specific lines of action for the uptake of reclaimed
wastewater for irrigation, nor for the use of treated sludge as fertilizer. Additionally, while the 2009 Water Resources Law
foresees the establishment of mechanisms to incentivize water use efficiency, these are still to be developed. Also, the

                        Official Use Only                                                                                   Page 4
         The World Bank
         Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


economic regime of water rights and discharge authorizations and the economic regulation of WSS services do not create
the required incentives for the uptake of reuse for productive purposes and hinders the financial viability of reclamation
activities. Similarly, the Water Resources Law does not establish regulations for the use of reclaimed water for MAR. In
this context, it is essential to establish effective platforms for the development of coordinated cross-sectoral action to
overcome governance gaps and unlock the full potential of circular economy to achieve water security.
13.      The heavy investments required to move forward the circular economy agenda and achieve universal access to
safely managed WSS services, combined with low sector execution capacity and weak utility performance, call for
rethinking delivery models. The 2022–26 National Sanitation Plan estimates that additional annual funding of US$2.6
billion per year will be needed to achieve universal access to safely managed WSS services by 2030. However, in the past
five years, Peru allocated about US$1.6 billion per year and budget execution ranged between 50 and 60 percent. As a
result, still only 50 and 43 percent of Peruvians have access to safely managed drinking water and sanitation services,
respectively. Women are particularly burdened by this situation, as they dedicate on average 20.21 hours per week to
cooking and housecleaning whereas men only dedicate 7.31 hours. Moreover, low WSS tariffs weaken utilities’10 financial
sustainability, limiting service quality and efficiency improvements. Combined with aging infrastructure, this leads to high
water losses and poor wastewater treatment, with 77 percent of WWTPs failing to meet standards. Addressing these
governance and management issues requires a shift in WSS delivery models, including clustering treatment facilities to
allow for economies of scale, leveraging public-private partnerships (PPPs), and adopting context-specific technologies,
including nature-based solutions, for sector authorities to achieve inclusive and climate resilient WSS access across Peru.
14.      Faced with these challenges, the Government of Peru requested the World Bank support to roll out the national
circular economy agenda to increase climate resilience of WSS services and achieve water security, starting in two
different but equally critical basins. This support entails strengthening the capacity of the MVCS to support utilities in this
journey, creating an enabling policy and regulatory environment, retrofitting priority WSS projects in their pipeline for the
Lurín and the Lake Titicaca basins to adopt and test innovative circular economy approaches, and developing a new
generation of circular economy interventions for wastewater treatment, resource recovery and water reuse across the
country that contribute to mitigation efforts and reduce vulnerability to climate change exacerbated droughts, floods and
pollution. The Lurín and Lake Titicaca basins are selected considering that they represent two very different contexts of
the Peruvian reality when it comes to water security, with Lurín and the broader Lima water basins system (integrated by
the Rimac, Chillón and Lurín basins) as one of the most water scarce basins in the country, representative of the situation
faced in urban areas of the Pacific Region; and Lake Titicaca, an area where water quality and the degradation of natural
ecosystems is the defining challenge, rather than water scarcity. This, along with the socioeconomic priority and high level
of readiness of WSS infrastructure subprojects, make these two basins an adequate laboratory to test circular economy
approaches for water security in different contexts, that can be subsequently scaled up.
 C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives
15.     The proposed MPA aligns with the World Bank Group’s Peru Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY23-
FY27 and the Systematic Country Diagnostic update12. It will contribute to the three High Level Objectives (HLO) of the
     11

CPF: increased economic opportunities (HLO1), improved access to quality public services across the territory (HLO2), and
increased resilience to shocks (HLO3). The MPA also aligns with the Peru Climate Change Development Report13,
highlighting the need to improve the resilience of infrastructure and public services and tackling the decarbonization path
by treating and reusing wastewater. The proposed operation will contribute to the World Bank’s vision “to end extreme
poverty and boost prosperity on a livable planet”; and aligns with the Bank’s Water Strategy and Global Challenge Program
to Fast-Track Water Security and Climate Adaptation, which is designed to strengthen water security and related climate

10 On average, utilities apply a tariff of US$0.62 per cubic meter, well below the Latin America and Caribbean regional average of US$1.44
11 World Bank, 2022. “IBRD, IFC and MIGA Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Peru for the period FY23-FY27”. Report # 179046-PE
12 World Bank, 2022. “Systematic Country Diagnostic update”. Report # 177197
13 World Bank, 2022. “PE-Peru Country Climate Development Report” P177137


                           Official Use Only                                                                                                 Page 5
         The World Bank
         Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


adaptation through systems change and targeted investments in water and sanitation, and by reducing flood and drought
risks.
16.      The MPA is also aligned with Peru’s 2020 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), its 2021 National
Adaptation Plan (NAP), and to the policy priorities established by water sector authorities. The National Water
Resources Policy issued by the National Water Authority (ANA) in 2015 establishes five policy axes that are aligned with
water security principles and with the objectives of the MPA, namely: (i) water quality; (ii) water quantity; (iii) water
opportunity; (iv) water culture; and (v) climate change adaptation. The MPA will also support the implementation of the
circular economy roadmap for WSS published in July 2024. Moreover, the program will strengthen interinstitutional
coordination and improve the efficiency of service delivery across different sectors, aligning with strategic priorities
outlined in Peru’s NAP.
17.      The MPA was developed in coordination with IFC, and it is aligned with the World Bank Maximizing Finance for
Development approach. The MPA will contribute to unlocking private sector solutions, amongst others, for delivering
wastewater treatment and reclamation infrastructure services that will be adopted in Phase 2. Hence, Phase 1 is counted
towards Private Capital Enabling (PCE), while Phase 2 may generate additional opportunities for Private Capital
Mobilization (PCM) and/or PCE. Phase 1 is verified as PCE as it will support the strengthening of the enabling environment
for private sector participation in circular economy projects and the preparation and launch of specific projects to be
implemented during Phase 2 (i.e., within a line of sight of 3 years after Phase 1 closure) subsequently. Specifically, Phase
1 governance component includes support for: (i) developing the capacity of the MVCS to unbundle bottlenecks currently
affecting the pipeline of WWTPs’ PPP transactions; and (ii) screening of specific opportunities for tapping into private
sector capacity for wastewater treatment and reuse projects and to develop fit-for-purpose management and business
models. In addition, the MVCS-led multistakeholder dialogue platform Unidos por el Agua brings together public and
private water-related institutions for collaboration on water sector issues. The World Bank leads the working group on
Circular Economy solutions which is working on promoting this agenda and specific private sector investment
opportunities. PCE generated during Phase 1 will be measured through the non-monetary indicator: “No. of
Wastewater/Reuse PPP project bid out as result of project-supported technical assistance”. Other additional opportunities
for PCM and/or PCE (and suitable indicators) during Phase 2 would be identified at the approval stage, while making sure
to avoid double counting with PCE accounted for Phase 1.
18.      The MPA follows a one WBG approach for the engagement with Peru’s water sector, and a Joint
Implementation Plan (JIP) for Peru, structured around three pillars: (i) Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) for wastewater
treatment, reuse, and desalination projects; (ii) Commercial financing for municipal WSS utilities, focusing on circular
economy and digital transformation; and (iii) Innovative private sector financing mechanisms, including “Works for Taxes”
mechanisms for O&M of WWTPs, RWSS multisector projects, and small irrigation initiatives. For the case of the MPA, and
as part of the JIP, the Bank will collaborate with IFC and MIGA to create an enabling environment for PCM in phase 2.
Indeed, IFC investment and advisory teams, along with MIGA, will also participate in the policy dialogue for mainstreaming
circular economy principles and private capital in the WSS sector in the Unidos por el Agua platform. IFC will also
participate in the definition of the procurement strategy and bidding documents of the WWTPs subprojects to be
implemented in phase 2, and in the screening of other PCM opportunities at the national level mentioned above.
19.      The MPA will also contribute to the achievement of the objectives set forth in the World Bank’s 2024-2030
gender strategy14. As explained above, by increasing access to and improving WSS services in program intervention areas,
the Program will have a particularly positive impact among their female residents. The Program will also develop and
adopt gender-sensitive citizen engagement mechanisms to promote best practices among male and female residents of
Puno to ensure a responsible and sustainable WSS services. Finally, the Program will support SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO in
identifying the barriers and root causes of women’s underrepresentation in managerial positions of the utility and in the
definition and implementation of an action plan to tackle identified barriers.

14 World Bank Group Gender Strategy (2024-30): Accelerate Gender Equality to End Poverty on a Livable Planet -- P179663


                           Official Use Only                                                                              Page 6
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


 D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach
Rationale for Using MPA
20.      Mainstreaming circular economy requires ensuring better interinstitutional coordination, developing circular
projects in critical basins, and improving management models to leverage private sector capital and know-how. The
political commitment to water security and circular economy creates the required enabling environment to move forward
these important agendas. However, their complexity requires the adoption of a flexible approach and the possibility of
incorporating lessons learned through implementation into the program design to enable the achievement of a
development objective that can only be reached with a long-term vision. This, along with the need to articulate reforms
in different sectors around a common goal, and the need to balance uncertainties about the volume of private capital that
can be mobilized, calls for adopting an MPA approach that will provide the necessary time, flexibility and learning space.
21.      The MPA offers flexibility by enabling a focus on immediate challenges and developing institutional capacity,
case studies and pilots that serve as the foundation for longer-term changes in Phase 2, with the learning agenda playing
a crucial role for rollout at scale. Phase 1 infrastructure subprojects constitute priority sectoral interventions from the
socioeconomic standpoint. Those subprojects have the required engineering designs and therefore present a high level of
readiness. Yet these interventions were not designed consistently considering the principles of circular economy for water
management and lack the multisectoral approach required to tap the full resource recovery potential of wastewater
management activities. Moreover, mainstreaming circular economy and promoting efficient water use and the uptake of
reclaimed water effluents, as well as increasing resilience to climate-induced droughts and floods, requires an appropriate
governance framework that is not there yet. In this context, the MPA approach allows implementing priority infrastructure
interventions, retrofitting their design and complementing them with technical assistance activities for the incorporation
of circular economy principles, while in parallel develop and test innovative approaches for circular economy that can be
applied at scale and adjusted in Phase 2, informing required reforms for the application at the national level. It also allows
designing critical treatment infrastructure to be built in Phase 2 without having to commit debt resources and fiscal space
for investments that are not yet ready, and which exact budget is still to be defined. In other words, the MPA approach
optimizes the use of concessional and fiscal resources, ensures continuity, coherence in achieving program objectives
across its entirety, and the adaptability in changing its strategy as priorities evolve and lessons are learned through
implementation. Such transformational changes are challenging to achieve under a single stand-alone operation. The
option of a Series of Projects has also been discarded, given the strategic alignment and scalability focus.
Program Theory of Change and development objective
22.     The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to “Increase access to inclusive and climate resilient water and
sanitation services in selected basins adopting circular economy approaches”. Figure 2 represents the Theory of Change
of the MPA, which will finance technical assistance activities to inform required reforms, as well as infrastructure
investments contributing to the achievement of the intermediate outcomes set up by the WICER framework:
(a) Increase access to climate resilient and inclusive WSS services by: (i) rehabilitating and extending water supply and
    wastewater collection networks to connect unserved peri-urban communities; (ii) diversifying supply sources through
    wastewater reuse and MAR; and (iii) supporting WSS utilities develop and plan for climatic uncertainties developing
    water security and circular economy master plans. All these activities contribute to increasing the resilience of utilities
    and their customers to deal with climate change exacerbated droughts and floods.
(b) Design out waste and pollution by: (i) increasing wastewater treatment capacity to reduce pollution of natural water
    bodies; (ii) capturing methane from the treatment process to cogenerate renewable energy; (iii) recovering valuable
    biosolids from the wastewater treatment process; and (iv) improving energy efficiency and reducing water losses. This
    contributes to climate change mitigation and to tackling the effects of floods and droughts, which could derive higher
    pollutants concentrations in natural water bodies.
                       Official Use Only                                                                                 Page 7
                   The World Bank
                   Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


 (c) Preserve and regenerate natural systems by: (i) recharging aquifers with reclaimed water to balance demand and
     supply and prevent saline intrusion; (ii) restoring surface water bodies reducing contamination from wastewater
     effluents; and (iii) incorporating nature-based solutions for wastewater treatment. This also contributes to mitigating
     the effects of climate change that exacerbates droughts.
        Figure 2: Results chain of the MPA

        Problem statement: The prevailing linear approach to water management hinders water security and adversely affects natural ecosystems' health, economic and human development in Peru


                                         INCREASE ACCESS TO INCLUSIVE AND CLIMATE RESILIENT WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES IN SELECTED BASINS ADOPTING CIRCULAR ECONOMY APPROACHES



                                                                                               Increase access to inclusive and resilient water services


                                                                                                                                                                   4
         Retrofit the design and implement rehabilitation and extension works of        Retrofit the design and implement rehabilitation and extension works of        Implement MAR and recovery for drinking water supply in the Lurin Basin,
        the WSS network of Puno, reducing NRW and improving energy efficiency            the WSS network of Pachacamac, reducing NRW and improving energy                   diversifying supply sources and increasing climate resilience



                                                                                   Design out waste and pollution and preserve and regenerate natural ecosystems


    3
        Support the structuring and bidding of commercially viable industrial and agricultural reuse projects, leveraging
                                                                                                                                        Design, build and operate 7 WWTPs in Lurin and Titicaca leveraging private sector know-how
                                            private sector financing and know-how.


                                                                                                                                 Formulate the projects and prepare bidding documents for 7 WWTPs in Lurin and Titicaca with energy and
         Screen and formulate WWTPs projects with potential for commercially viable agricultural and industrial reuse
                                                                                                                                               biosolids recovery and effluent reuse for MAR and landscaping applications


                                                  Build institutional capacity of selected water utilities to plan, develop and manage infrastructure services embracing circular economy principles



                                                                                                                                  Technical assistance to SEDAPAL & EMSA Puno to improve its financial, managerial & technical capacity,
                         Develop CE and water security master plans for the utilities of Puno and Lima
                                                                                                                                                                 empowering women in management


                                                               Create economic and regulatory incentives for the adoption of circular economy principles for water service delivery by
                                                                                      supporting the implementation of the WSS circular economy roadmap

    2                                                                                                                                                                                  1
          Adjust regulatory fraeworks in water and related                                                                                                                                  Develop regulations for managed aquifer recharge
          sectors to create incentives for reuse & resource                                                                                                                                 based on the analysis performed in phase I for the


          Inform the adjustment of WSS, water resources,              Develop technical norms and guidelines for the         Inputs for adjusting the public investment appraisal          Studies and pilots to identify solutions and determine
          energy and environmental regulations to create              design of WSS infrastructure adopting circular         system (Invierte.pe) and PPP structuring approaches             the potential of MAR to restore and increase water
            incentives for resource efficiency, reuse and                         economy principles                                 to facilitate adoption of CE principles                          availability in the Lurin aquifer



              Strengthen the capacity of the of key MVCS’ institutions and directorates to design and implement infrastructure projects aligned with circular economy principles, using both public procurement and PPP mechanisms



         Strengthen the capacity of DGPPCS to prepare and manage WSS PPP               Strengthen the capacity of PASLC and PNSU to prepare and manage WSS               Strengthen the capacity of the DGAA to monitor the performance of
                           projects adopting CE principles                                          infrastructure projects adopting CE principles                                wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities


Critical assumptions:                                                                                                                                                            Legend:
1       The methodology developed for Lurin is adopted by ANA to develop national regulations                                                                                                  Program Development Objective
2       The recommendations under the program and discussed in the PCC are taken by ANA                                                                                                        Intermediate outcomes - Governance Component
3       Economic and regulatory incentives proposed under the MPA are adopted and make certain reuse projects commercially viable                                                              Intermediate outcomes - Infraestructure Component
        The pilot and studies developed in phase I demonstrate that MAR and indirect reuse is a viable solution and ANA grants the required permits                                            Phase I activities
4
                                                                                                                                                                                               Phase II activities

 23.      The achievement of the PrDO will be assessed using six result indicators. PrDO indicators cover aspects related
 to the three outcome areas of the WICER framework, i.e., deliver inclusive (PrDO indicators # 1 and 2) and climate resilient
 (PrDO indicator # 3 and 4) WSS services; design out waste and pollution (PrDO indicators # 5) and preserve and regenerate
 natural ecosystems (PrDO indicator #6):
 (a) PrDO indicator # 1: People provided with access to safely managed water services, disaggregated by gender.
 (b) PrDO indicator # 2: People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services, disaggregated by gender.
 (c) PrDO indicator # 3: Reduction of Non-Revenue Water levels.
 (d) PrDO indicator # 4: Annual volume of reclaimed water used for industrial, agricultural and environmental applications.
                                                 Official Use Only                                                                                                                                                                         Page 8
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


(e) PrDO indicator # 5: Renewable energy cogenerated in water treatment facilities developed under the program.
(f) PrDO indicator # 6: Reduction Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) discharges into the environment.


 Program framework
24.      The proposed MPA is a comprehensive, two-Phase program, comprising of two IPF operations over a 10-year
implementation period, with a two-year overlap between phases. Phase 1 will have a duration of 5 years and will set the
foundations for the adoption of circular economy principles in the WSS sector. It will strengthen the capacity of
participating utilities to plan and invest in climatic and non-climatic uncertainties and will finance the design and
implementation of critical infrastructure adopting circular economy approaches in Puno. Phase 2 will be implemented
over 7 years and will build on the analytical work, pilots and engineering designs developed in Phase 1 to support the
implementation of required regulatory reforms, test new management models for wastewater treatment and reuse
leveraging private sector financial and technical capacity, increase access to WSS services in the Lurín basin and increase
wastewater treatment and resource recovery capacity both in Lurín and Puno, scaling up reuse and MAR in Lima. While
the above-mentioned regulatory reforms are not a precondition for the successful completion of Phase 2 activities, they
are critical for scaling up circular economy principles for water security at the national level. The Borrower and the Bank
will explore the incorporation of additional policy actions associated to this reform agenda in the second operation of the
Development Policy Lending series on “Green and Resilient Growth for a Decarbonized Economy” (P181263), whose first
operation—approved by the Board on March 26, 2025—included initial policy actions.

 Table 1: MPA Phases, development objective and budget
                                                                                   Estimated   Counterpart
                                                                            IPF                              Estimated
 Phase             Sequential or                                                      IBRD      financing                     E&S
       Project #                           Phase’s Proposed DO               or                              Approval
   #               Simultaneous                                                     Amount        (US$                    Risk Rating
                                                                           PforR                                Date
                                                                                    (MUS$)       million)
                                   Introduce      circular     economy                                       Septembe
                                   principles in WSS sector and increase                                     r 2025 (5-
    1   P505093                                                             IPF      200          66.4                    Substantial
                                   access to inclusive and climate                                              year
                                   resilient WSS in selected basins.                                         operation)
                                   Increase access to inclusive and
                                   resilient water and sanitation in
                                                                                                              Jan 2029
                                   selected basins adopting circular
    2              Simultaneous                                             IPF      300           43          (7-year    Substantial
                                   economy       approaches,      reduce
                                                                                                             operation)
                                   pollution and restore key natural
                                   ecosystems in selected basins.
                                                                           Total     500          109.4


Learning Agenda
25.      The Program will use the adaptive learning feature of the MPA to ensure a flow of lessons from Phase 1 to the
other. Pilots, technical norms and guidance notes, incentives and management models developed as part of Phase 1 to
facilitate the uptake of circular economy principles for water management will inform the design and implementation of
Phase 2. Similarly, the lessons learned through implementation will inform the enhancement and complementarity of
existing policies and regulations with a focus on mainstreaming circular economy principles to contribute to enhancing
water security. The learning agenda in these domains is briefly discussed here below:
(a) Intersectoral coordination, policy and regulatory frameworks for mainstreaming circular economy in WSS service
     delivery. As explained, reforms across sectors are required to tap into the full potential of circular economy for water
     management. This includes aligning the circular economy roadmap of the agricultural sector to facilitate the uptake

                       Official Use Only                                                                                            Page 9
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


    of reclaimed wastewater for irrigation and sludge biosolids for their use as fertilizers, identifying and addressing
    regulatory barriers in the energy sector that hinder the viability of renewable energy cogeneration initiatives, as well
    as environmental and hazardous waste management regulations that hamper the uptake of sludge biosolids for
    productive or environmental uses. Similarly, the economic regulation of WSS services, as well as the economic regime
    of water resources (water rights and discharge permit taxes) might have to be adjusted to create incentives and make
    financially viable wastewater reused at scale. In Phase 1 of the MPA, studies and pilots will be developed to identify
    these regulatory barriers, as well as the reforms that could be implemented to tackle them. An Intersectoral
    Coordination Committee (ICC) established and chaired by MVCS will play a critical role in this, articulating relevant
    sector authorities for the roll out these reforms with the support of the MPA under Phase 2 (see institutional
    arrangements sections for more details). Once this enabling environment is established, sustainable business
    management models for wastewater treatment, resource recovery and reuse will be tested in Phase 2.
(b) Business, management and project delivery models leverage private sector capital and know-how for wastewater
    treatment, resource recovery and reuse. In parallel to the identification of regulatory barriers and required reforms,
    Phase 1 will support the screening of wastewater treatment, resource recovery and reuse subprojects with PCM
    potential and will conceptualize the above-mentioned models, to be deployed under PPP schemes. These transactions
    will be structured and bidden out with the support provided under Phase 2.
(c) Reclaimed water MAR for climate resilience, indirect reuse and aquifer restoration. Pilots and studies to be
    developed under Phase 1 will aim at determining how and by how much water resources availability could be
    increased in the Lurín basin using reclaimed water for MAR. These activities will serve as a basis to define the
    regulation of this use of reclaimed water, which will be subsequently adopted and tested at scale in the Lurín basin as
    part of Phase 2.

  II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
  A. Project Development Objective

26.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) of Phase 1 is to introduce circular economy principles in the WSS
sector and increase access to inclusive and climate resilient WSS in selected basins. Progress will be measured against
five indicators:
(a) Increase in the percentage of WSS investments adopting circular economy principles in the public investment
     system.
(b) People provided with access to safely managed water services, disaggregated by gender and youth.
(c) People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services, disaggregated by gender and youth.
(d) NRW levels in drinking water distribution networks intervened under the project.
(e) Volume of reclaimed water used annually for agricultural, industrial or environmental applications in program
     intervention areas.
  B. Project Components
27.      The project consists of two components: (i) Infrastructure component and (ii) Governance and Project
Management component.
28.      Component 1 - Infrastructure (US$248.3 million, including US$186.2 million in IBRD financing). This component
will finance engineering services and works for the rehabilitation and expansion of WSS infrastructure in the Lake Titicaca
and Lurín basins. The goals of this component are to design out waste and pollution from WSS services, preserve and
regenerate natural ecosystems and increase access to inclusive and climate resilient services in the project intervention
areas. The component consists of the following subcomponents:



                       Official Use Only                                                                             Page 10
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


(i)   Subcomponent 1.1 – WSS infrastructure in the Lake Titicaca Basin (US$225.0 million, including US$168.8 million in
      IBRD financing). This includes the rehabilitation and expansion of the WSS networks of the city of Puno, the
      development of the engineering designs of five WWTPs in the Puno region, as well as the supervision of works and
      engineering activities. Network works will also be accompanied by gender-sensitive citizen engagement activities to
      maximize sewer connectivity rates and ensure responsible use of WSS services. Works will be procured under three
      contracts: (a) one for the improvement and reconfiguration of the primary drinking water supply and main
      wastewater collection networks; (b) a second contract for the rehabilitation of the secondary drinking water supply
      distribution and wastewater collection network in areas currently served by the utility; and (c) a third one for the
      expansion of the drinking water distribution and wastewater collection networks to currently unserved areas. All
      these investments are expected to result in significant emissions reductions, both associated with drinking water
      service delivery (46 percent annually relative to the baseline from 94,214 tCO2eq/yr to 51,357 tCO2eq/yr) and with
      sanitation (26 percent, from 64,421 tCO2eq/yr to 47,481 tCO2eq/yr). These reductions are mainly due to the lower
      NRW levels, improved pumping efficiency, reduced reliance on private wells, water tankers and vacuum trucks, and
      reduction of fugitive emissions from septic tanks, cesspools and pits. More details on the activities under the
      subcomponent scope are included below:
      (a) Improvement, reconfiguration and operation of the primary drinking water supply and main wastewater
          collection networks (US$102.0 million, US$76.5 million IBRD). This includes the construction of a new
          subaquatic intake, raw water pumping station and transmission pipeline; the expansion, rehabilitation,
          retrofitting and assisted operation of the Aziruni drinking water treatment plant, the construction of new and
          rehabilitation of existing drinking water pumping stations, water mains and reservoirs; as well as the construction
          and rehabilitation of principal sewer mains and pumping stations to convey wastewater to El Espinar WWTP. The
          engineering designs of this infrastructure are ready and integrate climate-informed principles that enhance
          climate resilience of the supply and sewer systems and of the benefiting population. In fact, the subaquatic intake
          will be deeper than the existing one, which capacity is reduced during drought periods as the level of the lake
          decreases. Moreover, its larger capacity, along with the larger capacity of the associated raw water pumping
          stations and transmission pipeline, and of the drinking water treatment facility and drinking water reservoirs,
          allows to ensure continuity of service even when other water sources feeding the system lower their mobilization
          capacity during drought periods. Greater water distribution capacity will also allow for expanding the network,
          contributing to enhance the resilience against droughts of currently unserved families, and to reduce GHG (see
          paragraph below for more details). The construction and rehabilitation of sewer mains will result in a reduction
          of freshwater infiltration into the sewer system, which in turn will reduce the volumes to be pumped and will
          enhance the performance of the treatment facility. This, along with the renewal of pumping equipment, will
          enhance energy efficiency of service delivery and contribute to reducing GHG emissions.
      (b) Reconfiguration and rehabilitation of the secondary drinking water supply distribution and wastewater
          collection network in areas currently served by EMSAPUNO (US$68.0 million, US$51.0 million IBRD). The
          reconfiguration of the DMAs and the rehabilitation of the distribution networks will bring down significantly the
          NRW levels in the system, contributing both to adaptation (as more water will be available for distribution as
          losses decrease) and mitigation (as smaller volumes of water will have to be pumped to satisfy a given level of
          demand). On the other hand, and as for the case of principal sewer mains rehabilitation works, the rehabilitation
          of the secondary sewer network will increase the resilience against floods of the wastewater management
          system, as currently storm and groundwater infiltration represent around 30 percent of the volume conveyed by
          the network to the treatment facility, a value that is significantly higher during rainfall events.
      (c) Expansion of the drinking water distribution and wastewater collection networks to unserved areas (US$47.0
          million, US$35.3 million IBRD). The expansion of the water supply network will allow connecting households that
          rely on private wells (11.2 percent of the population) and water tankers (9.4 percent) contributing to enhance
          the resilience against droughts of currently unserved families, and to reduce GHG, as private wells (that require
                        Official Use Only                                                                             Page 11
          The World Bank
          Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


            electricity to run) and tankers (that use fuel for service delivery) are displaced by the more energy efficient utility
            run water supply service. Similarly, the expansion of the sewer network will increase the climate resilience of
            unserved families, which will no longer rely on cesspools and pits that often collapse and overflow during floods.
        (d) Procurement strategy, engineering designs adopting CE principles and bidding documents for five WWTPs in
            Lake Titicaca basin (US$8.0 million, US$6.0 million IBRD), i.e. Puno City, Moho, Ilave, Juli, and Ayaviri WWTPs.
            The procurement strategy will assess the potential different contractual approaches for leveraging private sector
            technical, managerial and financial capacity. The IFC/MIGA will collaborate with the Bank for the development of
            this procurement strategy as part of the one WBG joint implementation plan for Peru. The project will also finance
            the development of the engineering designs for the facilities, which level of detail will be determined by the
            choice of the procurement route. Bidding documents for these facilities will subsequently be developed under
            the project, for procurement under Phase 2. The designs will be developed to maximize renewable energy
            cogeneration (contributing to climate change mitigation), recover valuable biosolids and incorporate nature-
            based solutions where feasible. These WWTPs will also contribute to climate change adaptation, reducing
            drought-exacerbated freshwater quality degradation in Lake Titicaca.
(ii)    Subcomponent 1.2 – WSS infrastructure in the Lurín Basin (US$23.3 million, US$17.5 million IBRD). This includes:
        (a) Procurement strategy, engineering designs adopting circular economy principles and bidding documents for
            the Jose Galvez and Julio C. Tello WWTPs and associated WSS networks (US$15.2 million, US$10.5 million
            IBRD). Engineering designs will cover water reclamation and MAR facilities and a reuse scheme for land scaping
            irrigation (see subcomponent 1.3). Under this activity the project will also develop engineering designs for the
            extension and rehabilitation of the drinking water supply and sewer network of the Pachacamac district. These
            plants and the associated MAR and reuse schemes will contribute to increase climate resilience of water services,
            as they will increase water availability and reduce climate change-exacerbated groundwater quality degradation
            and aquifer depletion. Similarly, they will contribute to climate change mitigation, as the two WWTPs will
            incorporate cogeneration facilities to capture methane emissions for renewable energy production.
        (b) MAR pilot in the Lurín Basin (US$8.1 million, US$7.0 million IBRD). Lurín’s aquifer water table is descending, and
            water quality is worsening due to over exploitation and climate change-induced lower river stream (which
            translates into reduced aquifer recharge) and seawater level rise (which translates into greater saline intrusion).
            The pilot will recharge the aquifer using treated wastewater from the existing Cieneguilla WWTP through
            infiltration ponds and riverbed recharge systems, thus helping mitigate the aquifer’s water deficit, enhance
            groundwater reserves, and improve water quality. The MAR pilot will also include hydrogeological assessments,
            stakeholder engagement (focused on developing social acceptability of MAR), and scaling plans to address both
            the immediate challenges of the Lurín Basin and long-term national water security objectives. The results of the
            pilot project will serve to determine how and by how much water availability could be increased in the basin
            using reclaimed water for MAR. This, along with the associated studies developed under component two, is
            expected to inform the definition of regulations for MAR, the decision-making process to grant new groundwater
            use rights associated to MAR initiatives, and the design of the wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities
            of Julio C. Tello and José Galvez, which will be financed under Phase 2 to increase water availability for indirect
            potable and irrigation reuse. This will allow SEDAPAL to revisit its plans to build a seawater desalination plan to
            satisfy increasing water demand in the area (see technical appraisal section for more details), which would come
            along with a significant increase of energy intensity and GHG emissions of drinking water supply activities.
(iii)   Subcomponent 1.3 – Designs for wastewater reuse schemes for the watering of parks and recreational areas in the
        Lurín Basin (US$0.5 million, US$0 million IBRD). Lima’s peri-urban areas located in the Lurín basin are experiencing
        rapid and unorganized growth, and local authorities are struggling to keep up with the provision of essential services
        for the well-being of local communities. This does not exclusively relate to the WSS, but also others like access to
        parks and recreational areas. Villa Maria del Triunfo, where the José Gálvez WWTP is located, is the district of Lima

                           Official Use Only                                                                                Page 12
          The World Bank
          Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


         with the lowest ratio of green areas: 0.54 m2/inhabitant. This value is significantly lower than the target set by WHO
         of 9 m2/inhabitants. In this context, the program will finance a reuse scheme for landscaping applications, allowing
         for the irrigation of two new parks, also to be developed under the program in the vicinity of the treatment facility.
         This subcomponent will finance the required designs, and works will be implemented under Phase 2. One of the two
         parks, located across the fence of the José Gálvez facility, will host a permanent water and circular economy
         education and visitor center, to expose and sensibilize local communities about the importance of preserving water
         and associated ecosystems. This center will contribute to building social acceptance of water reclamation and reuse.
    29.      Component 2 – Governance and Project Management (US18.1 million, including US$13.8 million in IBRD
    financing). This includes: (i) Governance and (ii) Project Management subcomponents.
(i)      Subcomponent 2.1. – Governance (US$6.8 million, US$5.1 million IBRD). Activities included under this component
         will develop the capacity of sector stakeholders to enhance climate adaptation and mitigate the climate impact of
         WSS service delivery, creating the required enabling environment for the scaling up of initiatives aimed at reducing
         NRW, increasing energy efficiency, reclaiming and reusing water, cogenerating renewable energy and recovering
         valuable resources from wastewater effluents. These activities are described below:
         (a) Supporting the implementation of the WSS circular economy roadmap (US$0.6 million, US$0.5 million IBRD).
               This subcomponent will focus on informing the creation of policy and regulatory incentives for the adoption of
               circular economy principles for water service delivery. Activities will include: (i) the definition of technical norms
               and guidelines for the development of WSS infrastructure adopting circular economy principles; (ii) the definition
               of WSS circular economy indicators for their inclusion in the national investment system, and the establishment
               of associated baselines and targets, as well as the update of methodological tools for the formulation and
               evaluation of WSS investments in the public investment system; (iii) the identification of policy and regulatory
               barriers and proposal of required reforms to tap the full potential of circular economy to improve water security
               and climate adaptation of WSS services; and (iv) studies and pilots to inform the regulations of MAR initiatives.
         (b) Strengthening the capacity of key MVCS’ institutions and directorates (US$2.3 million, US$1.7 million IBRD).
               This subcomponent will finance goods, consulting and not consulting services aimed at strengthening the
               capacity of: (i) the two PIUs of the project (PASLC and PNSU) to design and implement WSS infrastructure works
               adopting circular economy principles and integrating climate-informed principles in engineering designs to
               enhance climate resilience; (ii) MVCS’ General Directorate for Construction and Sanitation Programs and Projects
               (DGPPCS) to identify, prepare and manage PPP projects incorporating circular economy and climate resilience
               principles, and (iii) MVCS’ General Directorate for Environmental Affairs (DGAA) to monitor the performance of
               wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities. The technical assistance to DGPPCS includes, among others,
               support to perform a screening of wastewater treatment, resource recovery and wastewater reuse projects at
               the national level with potential to leverage private capital and know-how, conceptualizing procurement and
               management models that could be adopted to structure and bid the corresponding transaction in Phase 2.
         (c) Build institutional capacity of selected water utilities (US$3.9 million, US$2.9 million IBRD). This
               subcomponent will finance: (i) consulting services for the development of circular economy and water security
               master plans for SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO, aligned with the National WSS Circular Economy Roadmap, which
               will look at required infrastructure investments (both grey infrastructure and nature-based solutions) with
               circular economy, climate resilience and climate change mitigation lenses and will incorporate financing,
               communication, stakeholder engagement and business plans focused on the creation of a market for reclaimed
               water and treatment byproducts, such as biosolids; and (ii) technical assistance and capacity-building activities
               for SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO to ensure sound management of the infrastructure to be financed through the
               project, thereby ensuring its sustainability. In the case of EMSAPUNO, given its weak financial and management
               capacity, the technical assistance will be comprehensive and will cover all aspects of utility management and will


                          Official Use Only                                                                                   Page 13
             The World Bank
             Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


               be implemented following World Bank’s “Utility Turnaround” and “Utilities of the Future” frameworks15. The
               technical assistance provided to the utilities will also support SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO to develop and adopt
               emergency preparedness and response plans to manage climate change induced natural disasters, such as floods
               and droughts. Likewise, the assistance will identify the barriers and root causes of women’s underrepresentation
               in managerial positions and in the definition and implementation of an action plan to tackle identified barriers,
               with the objective to increase the share of women in such positions. This may require attracting and hiring more
               women into the sector or improving working conditions to ensure the retention and professional growth
               opportunities of existing female employees, such as by identifying and offering solutions to help them better
               manage childcare responsibilities, provide access to trainings and mentoring programs.
(ii)      Subcomponent 2.2– Project Management (US$11.3 million, including US$8.5 million in IBRD financing). This
          subcomponent will finance the procurement of goods, consulting and non-consulting services for the management
          of project implementation activities, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E), procurement, financial (FM),
          environmental and social (E&S) management.
       C. Project Beneficiaries
   30.     Phase 1 will provide access to climate resilient and safely managed water supply and sanitation services to the
   entire population of the city of Puno, i.e. 155,000 people16, out of which 52 percent are women and 37 percent are youth.
   MAR activities will increase water availability and contribute tackling the overexploitation of the Lurín aquifer, benefiting
   the 306,500 inhabitants of the Cieneguilla, Lurín and Pachacamac districts, whose drinking water supply depends on
   groundwater. The project will also benefit indirectly the entire customer base of SEDAPAL (11 million people) as it will
   contribute to strengthening the capacity of the utility to deliver sustainable, efficient and climate resilient services,
   developing and supporting the implementation of a circular economy and water security master plan.
       D. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners
   31.     The World Bank is exceptionally well-positioned to support the rollout of the circular economy agenda
   leveraging private sector capital and know-how. Project design and implementation will be informed by international
   best practices in the field of circular economy and resilience of WSS services, building on the experience of the Bank across
   regions under its WICER initiative, on the one WBG “Scaling Rewater” framework for leveraging private sector capacity for
   water treatment, and on the analytical work developed by the Bank under “The Governance and Economics of
   unconventional resources” knowledge series, which provides guidelines and tools to develop the required policy,
   regulatory and institutional enabling environment for mainstreaming reclaimed water in the water resources mix.
   32.     The MPA will benefit from the convening power of the Bank, key to fostering the required intersectoral and
   public-private collaboration for mainstreaming circular economy in the sector. Indeed, the role of the Bank facilitating
   dialogue across water stakeholders was essential for the identification of key governance reforms agreed upon with the
   OECD for the accession of the Republic of Peru to this organization. These reforms were also captured and further
   developed by the Bank in its 2023 “Peru Water Security Diagnostics” (WSD), which in turn served as a steppingstone to
   support MVCS in the preparation of the “Law on the Universal Service of Drinking Water and Sanitation” (enacted in Nov
   2024), where the Bank supported stakeholder dialogue for the reforms related to circular economy and economic
   regulation of the WSS sector. The project will also benefit from the close coordination of IFC and IBRD in the Peruvian
   water sector to bring in the private sector into the dialogue to inform transaction design and required reforms.
   33.     Additionally, the project will build on lessons learned through the long-standing operational support provided
   by the Bank to water sector institutions. This includes the support provided to: (i) MVCS under the ongoing WSS sector
   modernization project (P157043), which was instrumental to develop the capacity of PNSU to manage World Bank

   15 The Utilities of the Future Program supports water and sanitation utilities in adopting innovative, strategic management approaches. By enhancing

   operational efficiency, resilience, and adaptability, the program enables utilities to deliver reliable, inclusive, and sustainable services.
   16 These beneficiaries figure combines water supply (78.4% supplied, 11.2% private wells, 9.4 tankers) and sanitation components (73.8% connected).


                              Official Use Only                                                                                                Page 14
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


financed operations and that funded an analysis of the bottlenecks affecting the rollout of the PPP pipeline in the WSS
sector; (ii) MIDAGRI under the ongoing Irrigation for Climate resilient Agriculture project (P179037), which equips the Bank
with a good understanding of governance issues of the irrigation sector and lessons on stakeholder engagement with
water user associations, which will prove valuable for mainstreaming reuse for irrigation; (iii) ANA, under the recently
closed Integrated Water Resources Management in Ten Basins project (P151851), that provided the Bank with a clear view
of the strengths and weakness of the water resources legal framework, which is essential to move forward the required
reforms to facilitate reuse for environmental and productive purposes; and (iv) SEDAPAL through numerous lending
operations and the ongoing joint IFC-IBRD technical assistance, which will contribute to the sustainability of investments
made under the program for the benefit of this utility. The MPA also creates synergies with the “Green and Resilient
Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru” development Policy Lending operation (P181263), which includes prior
actions and disbursement indicators linked to the roll out of the circular economy roadmap in the WSS sector.
34.      The World Bank will coordinate the implementation of the MPA with the interventions of other development
agencies operating in the sector, promoting knowledge sharing and the creation of synergies. The World Bank is a key
member of the "Grupo Agua" water development partners’ group, a 20-year platform that has collectively contributed to
sector reforms. Currently, the European Union and German Cooperation (GIZ-KFW) are supporting MVCS on circular
economy initiatives, while Swiss Cooperation focuses on utility efficiency and gender initiatives. The World Bank will
coordinate with these agencies to ensure complementarity and maximize learning. Furthermore, the IADB is developing
a WSS project in Juliaca, in the Lake Titicaca basin, focused on the rehabilitation and expansion of WSS networks and the
construction of a WWTP. Insights from this project have been incorporated into the design Program.
 E. Lessons Learned
35.     The Project design is based on the World Bank’s global knowledge and incorporates lessons learned from
operations and analytical work conducted in Peru. As explained, the project design and its implementation will be
informed by the experience gained globally by the Bank under the WICER, ReWater and “The Governance and Economics
of Unconventional Water Resources” initiatives, as well as from the Peru Water Security diagnostics. Additionally, the
design of Phase 1 was informed by the lessons learned through the implementation of the Modernization of WSS Services
Project (P157043), and other relevant IPF operations financed by the Bank in Peru and mentioned above. Specific areas
on which lessons learned informed Project design are briefly discussed below:
(a) Institutional arrangements. A key lesson learned from the implementation of the Modernization project (P157043)
    was the importance of granting enough autonomy and responsibility over fiduciary aspects to different PIUs involved
    in implementation, while establishing appropriate coordination mechanisms among them and with other entities
    benefiting from project activities. In the Modernization project, one PIU managed fiduciary aspects of activities whose
    implementation was under the control of two different PIUs, creating bottlenecks and delays. To mitigate these issues,
    the Project will ensure each PIU is responsible for its own fiduciary aspects. Additionally, a Project Advisory Committee
    (PAC) will be established, limiting its responsibilities to providing overall guidance, oversight, and monitoring.
(b) Management of resettlement activities. Securing financing for resettlement compensation is key for ensuring the
    timely availability of land before the start of the works. When financial resources are meant to be mobilized by
    benefiting institutions that are not responsible for project implementation, the risk of construction delays is higher.
    For this reason, POM and cooperation agreements requested in the Loan agreement will ensure clarity regarding the
    roles and responsibilities of the various institutions involved (PIU, municipalities and utilities), thereby facilitating
    decisive action and avoiding bottlenecks during implementation.
(c) Readiness. Special attention has been given to the preparation and readiness of activities included in the Project
    scope. This includes feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs, and E&S studies, which should be completed by
    the relevant authorities in due course. Due to the cumbersome regulations of the Peruvian public investment system,
    under which the approval of the required feasibility studies can take between 1 to 3 years, works to be implemented
    under Phase 1 are limited to the expansion and rehabilitation of the WSS network of the city of Puno, which feasibility
                       Official Use Only                                                                              Page 15
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


    studies are already approved and for which the detailed engineering designs are ready for procurement. The
    preparation of the feasibility studies and engineering designs for the WWTPs to be constructed under Phase 2 will be
    developed under the scope of Phase 1, conditioning the preparation of Phase 2 to their completion.
(d) Sustainability of project results. Sustainability depends on the ability of the benefiting utilities to operate, maintain
    and replace the assets when their life reaches its end. This requires building the managerial, technical and financial
    capacity of the utilities, which in turn requires a corporate governance structure that ensures independence from
    political interference, efficiency measures in the utility’s operational, administrative, and commercial management,
    as well as financial solvency and capacity. Global knowledge gained by the Bank on this domain, particularly those
    gained through the Utilities of the Future, Digital Transformation and EqualAqua initiatives, as well as learned locally
    through implementation of the WSS sector modernization project, has been incorporated into the project, informing
    the design of capacity building activities for SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO included in Component 2 of the project.
 III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

     A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                                                                      36. The Government of Peru will be the Borrower
 Figure 3: Implementation arrangements for Phase 1 of the MPA.
                                                                      and will be represented by the Ministry of Economy
                                                                      and Finance (MEF), which will be responsible for the
                                                                      allocation of loan and counterpart resources to
                                                                      MVCS’ annual budget.
                                                                      37. Two of the three infrastructure development
                                                                      agencies operating in the WSS sector under the
                                                                      control of MVCS will play the role of PIUs. These two
                                                                      agencies are PASLC, in charge of the design and
                                                                      development of WSS infrastructure in the Lima
                                                                      Metropolitan area, and PNSU, with a similar
                                                                      mandate but for all other urban areas of the country.
                                                                      After commissioning, infrastructure developed by
                                                                      PASLC (the MAR pilot) and PNSU (Puno city WSS
                                                                      network) will be transferred to the corresponding
                                                                      utility, i.e., SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO, for operation.
                                                                       38. PASLC will oversee all works and engineering
                                                                       designs of infrastructure to be developed in the
                                                                       Lima metropolitan area and of technical assistance
to be provided to SEDAPAL. For Phase 1, this includes (i) the implementation of the MAR pilot; (ii) the preparation of the
procurement strategy, engineering designs and bidding documents of the Julio C. Tello and José Galvez WWTPs; (iii) the
design of the WSS network in the Pachacamac district; (iv) the design of the Villa Maria del Triunfo parks and reuse scheme
for land scaping operations; and (v) the development of SEDAPAL’s circular economy and water security master plan.
PASLC will be responsible for all technical, fiduciary, environmental and social (E&S) management aspects.
39.       Besides the design and implementation of works in the Puno province and of activities included under the
governance component, PNSU will be responsible for consolidating interim financial reports for the project and
preparing the annual financial audit report. The scope of activities included under the responsibility of PNSU includes: (i)
the supervision and implementation of the works for the extension and rehabilitation of the WSS networks of the city of
Puno; (ii) the preparation of the procurement strategy, engineering designs and bidding documents of the Puno, Moho,
Ayaviri, Ilave and Juli WWTPs; (iii) the development of EMSAPUNO’s circular economy and water security master plan,

                       Official Use Only                                                                              Page 16
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


including the technical assistance to strengthen utility managerial, technical and financial capacity; (iv) the technical
assistance to the DGPPCS and DGAA to prepare and manage WSS PPP projects and to monitor the performance of water
treatment and reclamation facilities; and (v) the technical assistance to the MVCS to identify regulatory barriers and
solutions to incentivize the adoption of circular economy principles for service delivery, the development of technical
norms for circular economy in WSS, the screening of water reclamation, resource recovery and reuse opportunities across
the country, and the conceptualization of sustainable management models for wastewater treatment and reuse. As for
the case of PASLC, PNSU will be responsible for managing all fiduciary, technical, E&S dimensions of these activities. PNSU
will also consolidate interim financial reports for the project and will prepare an annual audit report.
40.      The DGPPCS will be responsible for overall project coordination and oversight. A dedicated team, led by a project
director and comprising technical and administrative staff, will be set up within the DGPPCS for this. This team will be
responsible for: (i) the overall technical management of the program, (ii) the preparation of the terms of reference (ToR)
for activities to be developed under the governance component; (iii) the coordination between benefiting entities
(DGPRCS, DGPPCS, DGAA, SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO) and the PIUs, (iv) the monitoring and evaluation of the project,
including the consolidation of technical reports in accordance with the loan agreement requirements.
41.      A Project Advisory Committee (PAC) will be established for each Phase of the program. The PAC will report
hierarchically to the Deputy Minister of Construction and Sanitation (who will chair the PAC), and it will be composed of a
representative of MEF, the directors of DGPPCS, DGAA, and DGPRCS, as well as by the executive directors of PNSU and
PASLC. The PAC will provide overall guidance, oversight, and monitoring of the projects. It will approve the original project
operation manual (POM) and will be informed on any subsequent modifications, authorize changes in key project staff to
ensure continuity, and prevent political instability from affecting project performance. The PAC will also help projects’
PIUs to unbundle bottlenecks and barriers affecting project performance and bring them to the attention of relevant
authorities, directly or through the ICC, depending on their nature. Figure 3 illustrates the implementation arrangements.
42.      The ICC is part of the Unidos por el Agua platform, led by the MVCS, with MIDAGRI, ANA, MINAM, and the
private sector as permanent members. Its objective is to offer a permanent space for dialogue between public and private
actors, academia, and international cooperation, to report on the MPA progress, find mechanisms for public-private
collaboration, and specific spaces for intervention with a contribution from the private sector in the MPA intervention
areas. The ICC will analyze lessons learned through implementation, identifying institutional, policy, and regulatory
barriers that may hinder the program’s success, and formulating reforms needed to scale up water security and circular
economy approaches nationally, based on the analytical work performed as part of the governance component, and
engage with other sector stakeholders to facilitate the required policy dialogue to push for identified governance reforms.
Other non-permanent members that could be invited to ICC sessions, depending on the area of discussion, include the
ministry of energy, the economic regulator of WSS services (SUNASS), Proinversión and industry and professional
associations. A World-Bank funded non-lending technical assistance will support the functioning of the ICC.
 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
43.    The DGPPCS will have overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluating the operation. This directorate will
monitor and evaluate project progress based on the Results Framework. It will submit semiannual progress reports to the
Bank covering the status of implementation in terms of outputs, outcomes, financial statements, procurement plans,
environmental and social safeguards instruments, and actions taken to ensure satisfactory project implementation. The
DGPPCS will develop required baseline studies, a midterm review, and an evaluation at project closing.
 C. Sustainability
44.     Peru has implemented critical reforms, including improvements to the policy and legal framework for the WSS
sector, and the promulgation of the Circular Economy Roadmap for WSS. These instruments provide the legislative and
policy foundations for the reforms supported by Phase 1. Notable instruments include Legislative Decree No. 1620 on
Universal WSS Service, which aims to: (i) incorporate circular economy approaches in WSS service provision; (ii) promote

                       Official Use Only                                                                              Page 17
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


the efficient use of water resources, including measures for redundancy in water sources; and (iii) integrate principles of
inclusion to ensure equal participation of women and men in the sector. The Circular Economy Roadmap outlines the
vision and goals of the government, with measurable indicators, and demonstrates its commitment to increasing access
to safely managed WSS services through the adoption of circular economy principles.
45.       Phase 1 includes activities aimed at enhancing the sustainability of project results. First, participating WSS
utilities will be required to adopt a circular economy master plan establishing a long‐term vision for mainstreaming circular
economy principles in WSS investments. These planning instruments will outline mechanisms to meet WSS infrastructure
sustainability, embed resilience into planning, adequately address growing demands in line with water resources
availability, link development of investments to basin approach, while promoting private sector participation for
sustainability and efficiency. Secondly, under the governance component, the project also contemplates measures to
improve the managerial, technical and financial capacity of participating WSS utilities. Finally, the WSS economic regulator
approved a 15 percent tariff increase to ensure that the revenues of EMSAPUNO cover the incremental operation and
maintenance (O&M) cost associated with project investments. This tariff increase will become effective once the
infrastructure to be developed in Puno under phase 1 comes into operation.
 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis
Technical appraisal
46.       The expansion of the Julio C. Tello and Jose Galvez WWTPs has been identified as priority interventions under
SEDAPAL’s 2015-2044 Master Plan. These facilities will serve the Pachacamac and Villa Maria del Triunfo districts,
respectively. The works for the expansion and rehabilitation of the WSS network in this latter district are already being
implemented by PASLC, while those for Pachacamac will be designed under the project and implemented under Phase 2.
In this context, expanding the capacity of the associated WWTP is critical to ensure appropriate treatment of the
wastewater that will be collected. Moreover, water rights allocated to serve these areas are insufficient to ensure the
ability of SEDAPAL to satisfy projected long-term demand due to the overexploitation of the Lurín aquifer. SEDAPAL master
plan considered the construction of a desalination facility and a transfer from the Atlantic basin through the
implementation of the “Obras de Cabecera” project. However, the complexity and costs of these solutions, as well as the
uncertainty about their implementation timeline, calls for analyzing other lower-cost and more sustainable solutions,
taking the most of scarce local resources. Thus, the MAR pilot could be instrumental in identifying such solutions.
Moreover, a small-scale MAR pilot performed in the Lurín Basin in 2023, on which this larger one will build to determine
the replicability at scale in the basin, evidenced that the effluents of the Cieneguilla WWTP are of enough quality to ensure
that, if properly designed and managed, their use for aquifer recharge would not entail environmental and health risks.
47.       The level of readiness of key subprojects included under the scope of the project will allow for an early start of
critical activities after the declaration of effectiveness. Detailed engineering designs for the extension and rehabilitation
of the WSS networks of Puno have been completed. The Julio C. Tello WWTP, the Pachacamac drinking water supply and
sewer networks and the MAR pilot have approved feasibility studies, and their engineering designs will be developed
under the project. The feasibility studies and designs of the other six WWTPs will also be financed by the project.
48.       The technological solution preliminarily retained for Julio C. Tello WWTP will be reassessed during the
preparation of the engineering designs. The feasibility study considered five alternative treatment technologies: (i)
stabilization ponds, (ii) percolating filters, (iii) UASB plus stabilization ponds or percolating filters; (iv) activated sludge and
(v) moving-bed biofilm reactor (MBBR). The first three alternatives were discarded due to the wastewater flow to be
treated and the limited size of the site. Out of the two remaining alternatives, the activated sludge option was retained
due to its lower operational costs, associated with the lower air injection requirements. However, this analysis was
performed considering a wastewater flow of 398 l/s, half of which would be coming from the Pachacamac district, and


                        Official Use Only                                                                                    Page 18
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


the other half from other settlements that will finally be served by other WWTPs. In this context, the viability of other
treatment technologies, and in particular the percolating filters and UASB option will be reassessed.
49.      The poor service quality and coverage gaps of drinking water supply and wastewater collection services in the
city of Puno highlight the need to rehabilitate and expand the network. As highlighted above, 26 and 31 percent of the
population is not connected to the drinking water supply and sanitation network, respectively. Moreover, those connected
receive water in their pipes just 10.4 hours per day, on average, and raw water intake and drinking water treatment
capacity is insufficient to satisfy current demand, with a per capita mobilization and treatment capacity well below the
typical per capita endowment in urban areas of the country. Additionally, commercial and technical losses in the
distribution system represent 44.5 percent of water withdrawals, and treated drinking water does not comply with
applicable quality standards, particularly those related to trihalomethanes’ concentrations. This context constitutes a solid
business case for the proposed extension and rehabilitation of the existing network.
50.      The design of the raw water intake and drinking water treatment facility is fit for purpose and according to best
industry practice. Three different alternative locations were considered for the installation of the subaquatic raw water
intake structure, and the retained alternative is the most viable one considering the bathymetry, historic low lake water
level and historic water quality registries. The evaluation of the performance of the existing drinking water facility
evidenced that the latter could meet applicable quality standards, except for the thresholds established for salinity
(sulphates and chlorides). For this reason, the existing drinking water treatment facility will be rehabilitated and retrofitted
with an additional line to increase treatment capacity. The new line will adopt the same treatment process used for the
existing one, i.e., flocculation dosing and rapid mixer, flocculation chamber, decanter, filtration and disinfection. The
treatment plant will also be retrofitted with a reverse osmosis facility, that will treat part of the filtered water (10 percent),
so that, once mixed with the rest of the treated effluent, it meets applicable standards for sulphates and chlorides.
51.      The proposed rehabilitation and reconfiguration of the drinking water supply distribution system will allow for
efficient service. The project addresses critical deficiencies in Puno's drinking water supply system through key
interventions, including pipeline replacement, renewal of pumping equipment, installation of water meters, sectorization
and instrumentation and control. Ductile iron will be used for new primary distribution pipelines, while welded high-
density polyethylene (HDPE) will be used to replace all asbestos cement and most deteriorated Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pipes of the secondary distribution network. HDPE is a more robust, flexible and durable material, and its jointless nature
allows to minimize water losses. The design proposes the creation of 22 DMAs, smaller than those existing today, allowing
to optimize reservoir storing and regulation capacity, and working pressure. This in turn, in conjunction with the
installation of flow and water meters, automatic pressure indicators, data loggers and control valves, allows for greater
energy efficiency and for better NRW management. The replacement of obsolete pumps with high efficiency ones -
equipped with frequency variators- will also contribute to optimizing energy consumption. Finally, the design considers
the development of a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system, that will optimize operations.
52.      The two WWTPs currently treating sewer effluents collected in the city of Puno are failing to comply with
applicable discharge standards. The sewer network of the city of Puno currently discharges collected wastewater into El
Espinar and Yanamayo WWTPs, which have a nominal capacity of 85 and 6.5 l/s, respectively. However, due to the lack of
maintenance, actual treatment capacity has decreased significantly, and the effluents of the two facilities are failing to
comply with applicable discharge standards, particularly biological oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD)
and nutrient concentrations (phosphorus and nitrogen). This situation could potentially deteriorate once the works for
the expansion and rehabilitation of the WSS network are completed, as the number of households connected to the
service will increase, along with drinking water supply service continuity, which will be translated into an increase of
wastewater flows and pollutant loads. Moreover, the design for the extension and rehabilitation of the network
contemplates the decommissioning of the Yanamayo WWTP, which will be transformed into a pumping station that will
drive the wastewater to El Espinar WWTP, where all sewage collected in the city will be concentrated for treatment.


                        Official Use Only                                                                                  Page 19
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


53.       The new WWTP to be constructed in Puno under Phase 2 will prevent any negative environmental impacts
associated with the extension and rehabilitation of the Puno WSS networks. This new facility will be constructed on the
premises of El Espinar WWTP. The implementation of Phase 2 will start as soon as the engineering designs for this new
facility are completed, and it is expected to run in parallel to the implementation of Phase 1 for 3 years. This will allow for
the new WWTP to be commissioned before the completion of the network expansion and rehabilitation works.
54.       Ongoing major maintenance works in El Espinar WWTP, and the phasing of WSS network works will avoid
incremental environmental impacts even if the commissioning of the new treatment facility is delayed. Puno WSS
network rehabilitation and expansion works will be procured under three different processes: (i) one for the construction
of primary water supply infrastructure (raw water mobilization infrastructure, drinking water treatment, pumping
stations, transfer lines and reservoirs), sewer mains and associated wastewater pumping stations; (ii) a second one for the
rehabilitation and reconfiguration of the DMAs and the wastewater collection networks in currently served areas; and (iii)
a third one for the expansion of both networks to currently unserved areas. The completion of the first two contracts will
translate into an increase in wastewater flows (approximately 29 percent) but not in an increase of overall pollution loads,
as the population served will remain constant. EMSAPUNO is currently dredging the facultative and maturation ponds of
El Espinar WWTP to recover treatment capacity, which is currently reduced because of the accumulation of sludge. It is
expected that the dredging will result in an increased retention time that could offset the increase in wastewater flows.
In this context, and to avoid any incremental environmental impact on the Lake Titicaca associated to the implementation
of the project, the award of the contract for the rehabilitation of the WSS network will be contingent on the completion
of dredging activities, and the launching of the procurement process for the expansion of the WSS network will be
conditioned to the award of the works of the new WWTP to be developed under Phase 2.
Paris Alignment
55.       The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The NDCs
emphasize the need to pursue GHG reductions through investments in energy efficiency across sectors, including water.
Complementary, the NAP aims to reduce vulnerability to climate change and promote planned adaptation, also for water.
For this sector, the NAP prioritizes, among other areas of intervention, the adoption of water sowing and harvesting
practices such as MAR, the diversification of water sources for drinking water supply, the restoration of natural ecosystems
feeding supply systems, the reduction of NRW, the development and adoption of water security planning instruments
considering the adaptation to climate change for water service delivery and the implementation of water quality
monitoring systems in basins affected by climate change. The proposed project contributes to all these priorities
contemplated in the NAP through all activities considered under the governance and infrastructure components.
Moreover, there are no significant risks identified concerning the mitigation and adaptation aspects of the Paris
Agreement, aside from the mitigation-related risk highlighted in this section, classified as moderate. Thus, the project is
considered aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement.
56.       Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The Project presents minimal material risk to Peru’s low-GHG
emissions development pathways. Most activities fall under the universally aligned list, such as the rehabilitation and
expansion of water supply systems, water quality improvements, NRW reduction, more efficient and effective distribution
and treatment processes, energy efficiency improvements, and use of wastewater reuse technologies. No activities
supported by the project will rely on the use of on-site fossil fuels as the main energy source. The proposed use of reverse
osmosis technology for the drinking water treatment plant of Puno is regarded as a moderate risk. PNSU, with the support
of the Bank, will assess the possible use of alternative water treatment processes other than reverse osmosis (specifically
low-pressure membranes). It should be noted that reverse osmosis and electrodialysis are the most energy efficient
desalination technologies for low salinity waters, and reverse osmosis presents a lower technical complexity and lower
operation and maintenance costs than electrodialysis. By enhancing access to improved sanitation solutions and
implementing activities to change community behavior, the Project aims to reduce methane and nitrous oxide fugitive
emissions from onsite sanitation systems. Water supply investments will further enhance water use efficiency and reduce
energy consumption, contributing to climate change mitigation by lowering (commercial and operational) NRW losses,
                       Official Use Only                                                                                Page 20
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


improving energy efficiency in operations, and reducing GHG emissions related to energy use and water tanker usage.
Due to this, the project is expected to achieve emission reductions of 59,797 tCO2eq/yr over 20 years, from 158,365 tCO2e
in the baseline to 98,838 tCO2e in the project scenario. The annual breakdown for emissions reduction is 2143tCO2e (46
percent) corresponding to drinking water supply and 847 tCO2e (26 percent) to wastewater services.
57.         Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Peru’s diverse geography renders it particularly vulnerable to
climate change impacts. A preliminary screening for climate change and disaster risks was conducted for the Project with
the main climate and disaster risks affecting the project area being droughts and floods. By the end of the century, the
northwest region of South America, where Peru is located, is expected to experience an increase in the number of days
per year of extreme heat and cold, an additional loss of glacier volume and permafrost in the Andean mountains (causing
reductions in river flows), and high-magnitude glacial lake outburst floods. Declining river flows, lake and groundwater
levels will also increase the concentration of contaminants unless wastewater collection and treatment capacity are
significantly improved. The project will support the adaptation of WSS service delivery in the Lake Titicaca and Lurín basins,
and elsewhere through activities aimed at creating and enabling governance environment for the adoption of circular
economy principles in service delivery at national scale, promoting water reuse for the diversification of water sources,
rehabilitating and expanding drinking water supply capacity, reducing water losses through NRW reduction, optimizing
water use including under projected climate change scenarios, recovering aquifer levels adopting MAR practices and
reducing pollution and pressure on natural water bodies. The reduction of infiltration due to the rehabilitation and
expansion of sewer networks will contribute to increasing resilience against floods of wastewater collection and treatment
services and improve public health outcomes, while wastewater reuse will strengthen drought resilience by increasing
water availability while reducing reliance on freshwater. Thus, risks from climate risks have been reduced to an acceptable
level and are not likely to have material impact on the operation and its development objectives.
Economic and financial appraisal
58.         The economic analysis of the project focuses on the WSS networks rehabilitation and expansion investments
proposed for Puno city. This subproject represents 90 percent of the overall project budget.
59.         The economic analysis performed by MVCS confirms the economic efficiency of the proposed drinking water
                                                                                  supply and sewer networks rehabilitation and
 Table 2: Economy Analysis Indicators (In Nov, 2023 prices, US$)
                                                                                  expansion investments proposed for the city of
                                                               Sewer
 Variable                                                                         Puno. This analysis compares separately, both
                                                     6% discount    2% discount
                                                                                  for drinking water supply and sewer collection
 Social prices coefficient for CAPEX                           0.807
                                                                                  services: (i) the addition of the per capita net
 Social prices coefficient for OPEX                            0.872
                                                                                  present value (NPV) of social costs of all capital
 People connected thanks to the project                       172,943
                                                                                  investments and incremental O&M and asset
 Total beneficiaries and total costs                                              replacement costs for a 20-year period (referred
 NPV of CAPEX market prices                           63,465,021      68,646,358  to as the cost-effectiveness index or CEI), with (ii)
 NPV of CAPEX in social prices                        51,230,522      55,413,024  the cutoff value considered as an acceptable per
 NPV of OPEX + replacement of assets (market prices)   5,406,852       8,636,027  capita cost of service provision established by
 NPV of OPEX + replacement of assets (social prices)   4,714,930       7,530,863  the MVCS for drinking water supply and
 Cost-effectiveness index                               323             364       sanitation services in 202117. These cutoff values
 Increnebtak beneficiaries and incremental costs                                  were established considering per capita
 People connected thanks to the project                        65,703             investment costs of projects executed in the
 NPV of OPEX + replacement of assets (market prices)   -2,411,667      -3,401,333 country. The analysis considers an 8 percent
 NPV of OPEX + replacement of assets (social prices)   -2,103,043      -2,966,060 discount rate, as instructed for investments
 Cost-effectiveness index                               748             798       processed through the national public
 Cut-off efficiency value                                      1,579              investment system. The per capita NPV of capital

17 MVCS (2021). “Informe Técnico No. 264-2021/VIVIENDA-OGPP-OI”


                         Official Use Only                                                                                      Page 21
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


investments were calculated considering both network rehabilitation and extension costs divided by the total population
of the city, regardless of if they were previously connected or not.
60.       The Bank complemented MVCS’ cost-efficiency evaluation with a cost-benefit assessment (CBA) for drinking
water supply investments and performed a sensitivity analysis for the cost-efficiency analysis of sanitation investments.
A CBA could not be performed for sanitation since most benefits, particularly those perceived by households currently
connected to the service, will materialize once the new WWTP is constructed under Phase 2.
61.       Even in the more conservative scenario considered by the Bank, the proposed wastewater subproject is cost
efficient. The cost efficiency assessment methodology adopted by MVCS is sound. However, the economic discount rate
considered is relatively high compared to the ones that could be adopted following World Bank guidelines issued in the
2016 “Discounting Costs and Benefits in Economic Analysis of World Bank Projects” paper. According to this, the average
discount rate for Bank’s country clients is 6 percent and, following the discount rate calculation methodology it proposes,
2 percent would be the appropriate figure for Peru. On the other hand, the counterpart analysis can be considered
optimistic to the extent that it estimates the CEI as the ratio between the NPV of the incremental investment and O&M
costs and the entire population of Puno (ignoring that most of them are already connected to the network), to compare
with a cutoff value intended for expansion projects or construction of new networks. For this reason, the Bank revisited
MVCS’ calculations considering both a 6 and a 2 percent discount rate in two scenarios: (a) that both extension and
rehabilitation investments and incremental O&M expenditures benefit exclusively the population that will be connected
to the network thanks to the project (i.e., the population living in service expansion areas) and (b) that the benefits are
for the entire connected population, but considering total (and not incremental) O&M costs. Since it is not possible to
determine with precision the distribution of costs and benefits between existing and new customers, the actual CEI should
be between the values calculated for the two scenarios. As shown in Table 3, the analysis determines a reasonable CEI
below the cut-off value used by the counterparty for the sewerage project.
62.       The CBA performed for drinking water supply shows a positive NPV. The NPV of social costs were calculated as
explained above. In the lack of local data, benefits were estimated based on the analysis performed by the Bank under
the “WSS sector modernization project” for the city of Arequipa, as the addition of: (i) the greater consumption of water
(consumer surplus); (ii) the costs averted by the population that is connected to the network thanks to the project, which
derive from savings in the purchasing of water from alternative sources; and (iii) the economic benefits that come along
 Table 3: CBA of Drinking Water investments (In Nov. 2023 prices, US$)                  with the reduction of GHG
                      Variable                    2% discount rate 6% discount rate     emissions. Two scenarios were
 NPV of GHG emission reduction benefits                  3,774,459          5,533,550 evaluated: (a) benefits for the new
 Total beneficiaries and total costs                                                    connected population and 80
 NPV of net benefits + GHG reduction                    17,971,372         86,820,063 percent of the benefits for current
 (B+GHG r)/C                                                   1.11              1.47 users and incremental costs and (b)
 Incremental beneficiaries and Incremental costs                                        benefits for the entire connected
 NPV of net benefits + GHG reduction                    20,675,544         90,826,289 population and total costs. Table 4
 (B+GHG r)/C                                                   1.15              1.63 shows the results.
63.       The project will contribute to improving the financial situation of EMSAPUNO. The economic regulator approved
a tariff increase of 15 percent to cover the incremental O&M costs associated with the project. Thanks to this increase,
along with the incremental sales derived from the expansion of the WSS network (which will result in an increase of the
customer base) and from the increased service continuity (which will translate into greater consumption per customer)
will allow for revenues to grow at a faster pace than O&M costs, resulting in an improvement of 16 percent of
EMSAPUNO’s operating cash flow. This surplus could be allocated to reserves and used for debt service payment,
potentially contributing to reducing EMSAPUNO’s high level of indebtedness.
 B. Fiduciary
Financial Management
                       Official Use Only                                                                            Page 22
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


64.     A robust coordination and fiduciary structure have been designed to support project implementation and
mitigate key risks. The PAC and a dedicated team within DGPPCS will oversee and coordinate the work to be performed
by the two PIUs—PNSU and PASLC—which will manage fiduciary activities in accordance with the Loan Agreement. Both
PIUs, operating with budgetary and administrative autonomy under the MVCS, will be guided by the provisions of the
POM defining financial management responsibilities, procedures, and reporting mechanisms.
65.      Each PIU will appoint a senior financial management specialist responsible for budgeting, accounting, reporting,
managing internal controls and auditing activities. While each PIU prepares its own financial reports, PNSU will
consolidate them and manage the external audit process, hiring the audit firm through the General Comptroller’s Office
(CGR), ensuring unified financial accountability. The project will leverage Peru’s strong public financial management
systems, using national budgeting, the Single Treasury Account (with segregated project codes), SIAF, and the General
Chart of Accounts. This approach will promote transparency and operational efficiency. Frequent delays in the allocation
of external financing budgets in the first year represent a known risk that will require close monitoring. To reinforce
institutional capacity, the World Bank will support fiduciary staff recruitment and deliver targeted capacity-building once
teams are in place. These measures will strengthen financial management and facilitate smooth project implementation.
66.     Based on the assessment performed on the PIUs, the FM residual risk is considered Moderate. In general, the
project design and implementation arrangements pose some complexities as two different PIUs will be in charge of
implementation under the coordination of a third party (DGPPCS), which could create delays and risks related to fiduciary
compliance. While PNSU brings valuable experience from implementing Bank-financed operations, PASLC lacks prior direct
experience with World Bank projects. However, this risk is partially mitigated by the limited scope of PASLC’s
responsibilities during Phase 1, which will primarily comprise consulting services and small works contracts. The relatively
smaller fiduciary burden on PASLC reduces the immediate exposure to implementation risks in the early stages.
Procurement
67.      A procurement capacity assessment of PNSU and PASLC was carried out by the Bank. The assessment analyzed
the organizational structure, staffing, and procurement systems in place in both entities to identify risks and mitigation
measures. Based on the information reviewed, it was found that PNSU has experience carrying out complex procurement
processes and it is the PIU of the ongoing Modernization of WSS Services Project (P157043). On the other hand, PASLC
has not previously executed World Bank-financed projects. For the implementation of the Project, both PIUs will have to
strengthen their procurement capacity by hiring at least one procurement specialist in each PIU, fully dedicated to the
Project, according to the ToR cleared by the Bank and incorporated in the POM. The specialists will also benefit from
training in the application of World Bank regulations and guidelines provided by the Bank. As established in the POM, the
appointment and removal of project procurement specialists will be approved by the PAC, to minimize the risk of high
staff turnover. The POM and the draft project coordination agreement establish the roles and responsibilities of project
stakeholders, notably DGPPCS, PNSU and PASLC, related to the preparation of ToR, specifications (under the responsibility
of DGPPCS for activities included in the governance component and the pilot MAR subproject) and procurement activities.
Given the complexity of the key works contracts included in the scope of the Project, and following the request of the
borrower, the Bank will be providing Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) to PIUs, if requested by them,
to expedite procurement bids at an early stage, paying particular attention to the design of the selection criteria.
68.      A Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) has been completed by PNSU and PASLC with the
support of the World Bank. The PPSD establishes the best procurement arrangements to ensure value for money while
efficiently achieving the PDOs. The PPSD focuses on the high-risk and high-value contracts (particularly those for the
procurement of works for the extension and rehabilitation of the WSS network of the city of Puno and of key consulting
services) and summarizes the operational environment in which the Project will be implemented, the market analysis, the
risk assessment, and the analysis of different approaches to carry out the procurement for these activities. A Procurement
Plan for the first 18 months of Project implementation has been prepared.
                       Official Use Only                                                                             Page 23
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


 C. Legal Operational Policies
69.      Operational Policy (OP) 7.50 related to projects on international waterways has been triggered associated with
works to be performed in Puno. This policy applies to projects involving the “use or potential pollution” of international
waterways. OP 7.50 was triggered because of the expansion of the Aziruni treatment facility, which has Lake Titicaca as
its source of water; and the five WWTPs located in the Titicaca basin, which will be designed in Phase 1 and constructed
in Phase 2. A Memorandum, confirming Peru’s notification to Bolivia as a riparian country, was approved by regional
management on July 7, 2025.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No


 D. Environmental and Social
70.      The environmental and social risks of the project are considered substantial, and trigger the Environmental and
Social Standards (ESS) related to the Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts (ESS1),
Labor and Working Conditions (ESS2), Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management (ESS3), Community
Health and Safety (ESS4), Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement (ESS5), Biodiversity
Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources (ESS6), Indigenous Peoples (ESS7), Cultural
Heritage (ESS8), and Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure (ESS10). The Substantial rating is associated
with potential impacts of the construction and operation of drinking water supply and wastewater collection and
treatment infrastructure in Puno, and to MAR activities in Lurín. No adverse impacts are expected from the development
of analytical activities included in the governance component and the engineering designs for works to be implemented
in Phase 2 of the MPA. At this stage, the E&S risks of Phase 2 of the MPA are expected to be of similar magnitude to those
of Phase 1. However, these will be assessed as part of the preparation of each Phase, adjusting the corresponding ratings
as necessary.
71.     The rehabilitation and expansion of drinking water supply and sanitation infrastructure in Puno City involves
large-scale construction activities, which may lead to temporary, site-specific, and reversible environmental impacts.
These potential impacts relate to: (i) resource consumption, (ii) disposal of sludge, debris and hazardous material
(asbestos), (iii) traffic disruptions, (iv) dust and noise nuisances, (v) air quality deterioration, and (vi) risks to community
and worker safety. Additional risks include potential pollution of Lake Titicaca or ecosystem impacts during the
construction Phase, due to the proximity of some facilities to the Lake Titicaca National Reserve, i.e., raw water intake and
transmission infrastructure, a reservoir, and five pumping stations.
72.      The risk of environmental impacts on Lake Titicaca during the operational Phase of the Puno WSS infrastructure
is mitigated by the measures described in the technical appraisal section. The new treatment facility to be constructed
on the premises where El Espinar WWTP is located is expected to be operational before the completion of the WSS
network’s rehabilitation and extension works. Nevertheless, to mitigate the risk associated with potential delays in the
construction of this facility, the contract for the expansion of the network will not be bided until the contract for the
construction of the new treatment facility has been awarded. Similarly, works for the expansion of bulk water supply
capacity and the rehabilitation of the WSS network in served areas will be contingent on the completion of dredging
activities currently under implementation by EMSAPUNO to recover the nominal capacity of El Espinar. This will ensure
that project activities in Puno do not result in any incremental environmental impact. Additional complementary

                        Official Use Only                                                                                Page 24
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


preventive measures to ensure appropriate O&M of the treatment facility and monitoring of effluent discharges will be
established in the corresponding Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs).
73.        The MAR pilot also poses environmental risks during construction and operation. Main construction phase
environmental risks relate to (i) water quality, (ii) hydrological changes, and (iii) regulatory and management complexities
which will be mitigated through hydrogeological assessments, and adherence to circular economy principles. During
operation, risks include Cieneguilla WWTP underperformance, which could adversely affect ground water quality. These
risks will be addressed through rigorous planning, and the implementation of best practices for E&S management.
74.        The social risk rating is considered Substantial based on the project scope, the sensitivity of the social context
(mainly in Puno), and the potential need for land acquisition. The main social risks and impacts that contribute to this
rating include: (i) physical and economic displacement associated to easements and land acquisition potentially needed
in Puno and/or Lurín; (ii) potential opposition from local communities to the construction of wastewater treatment plants
in Puno, or to the use of reclaimed water for the aquifer recharge in Lurín; (iii) a high sensitivity of the social and political
context in Puno with high levels of citizen participation and mobilization capacity, recent experiences of social conflicts
with the government, and high urgency/interest for the project; (iv) misinformation from the local media in Puno; (v)
presence of indigenous peoples in the areas where three WWTPs are to be constructed under Phase 2 (Ayaviri, Juli and
Moho) for which the Project will finance the engineering designs and social and environmental studies; (vi) typical impacts
associated with the execution of civil works (such as noise, dust, odors and traffic disruptions), which can affect the
relationship with local communities; (vii) risks of non-compliance with labor regulations covered by ESS2, including hiring
modalities and occupational health and safety risks for project workers; (viii) potential exclusion of vulnerable groups from
project benefits; and (ix) low institutional capacity of EMSAPUNO and Puno local government.
75.        While ESS5 is considered relevant, the need for land acquisition and resettlement is expected to be minimal, if
necessary at all. Although the Borrower indicated that all land and areas necessary for the works in Puno City have been
acquired and paid for, changes in the design may arise during project implementation, requiring the acquisition of new
areas. Additionally, it is also possible that some properties already acquired in Puno could be inhabited and/or used by
other individuals who do not have legal rights to the land or the property, under national law. Consequently, there could
be a need to evict these individuals. In these situations, the Borrower would have to prepare and implement a
Resettlement Action Plan in accordance with the ESS5, and would need resources to finance these activities. To ensure
the project has sufficient and timely resources to secure the free availability of affected areas in compliance with ESS 5,
the Borrower, through the PNSU and/or PASLC, and with technical assistance from the DGPPCS, shall allocate the
necessary resources to cover costs related to land acquisition, easements, restrictions on land use, and the
implementation of any future Resettlement Plans. To minimize delays in project implementation due to inaction by the
responsible agency, the POM and cooperation agreements, as requested in the Loan Agreement, will clearly define the
roles and responsibilities of all institutions involved (PIU, municipalities, and utilities) in relation to land acquisition,
easements, and resettlement compensation.If the need for land acquisition, or restrictions on land use, causing
Involuntary Resettlement is confirmed, the PIU will prepare a Ressettlement Action Plan in accordance with the ESS5, prior
to implementing any activities or works in those areas.
76.        Proposed measures for the management and mitigation of E&S risks and impacts. The PIU is preparing the
instruments listed below to manage E&S risks and impacts. The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
establishes the obligation of the PIUs to finalize E&S management instruments according to the calendar detailed below,
along with the implementation of other agreements related to capacity building:
(a) Already prepared and disclosed instruments, disclosed on the Bank’s website on July 5, 2025:
    (i) Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
    (ii) Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
    (iii) Environmental Impact Assessment of Puno city WSS network rehabilitation and expansion works. These works have
          an Environmental License granted based on a semi detailed Environmental and Social Impact Study (ESIAsd)
                        Official Use Only                                                                                 Page 25
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


         approved by the MVCS in July 2021 and valid until July 2026.
   (iv) Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) of the Puno WSS network rehabilitation and expansion works. The ESA
         included a gap analysis of the EIAsd. This document includes guidelines for the preparation of a Supplementary
         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (S-ESIA) to fill identified gaps.
(b) Instruments to be prepared during implementation and prior to initiating the bidding process of the different works:
   (i) S- ESIA for the Puno city WSS network rehabilitation and expansion works.
   (ii) ESMPs for works to be implemented under Phase 1 (MAR pilot and Puno city WSS network works).
   (iii) Resettlement Action Plans, if needed.
   (iv) Archeological Management Plan for Julio C. Tello WWTP. the Julio C. Tello WWTP is adjacent to the Archaeological
         Sanctuary of Pachacamac and is within its buffer zone.
   (v) Archeological “chance and find” procedures for works to be performed in the City of Puno. Lake Titicaca is included
         in the indicative list of the World Heritage of the UNESCO Convention of 1972 as a mixed site.
   (vi) Environmental Assessments for the 7 WWTPs to be designed under the Project.

Citizen Engagement
77.      Stakeholder and citizen engagement is critical for the success of all project activities, particularly for those
related to the use of reclaimed water for MAR, indirect potable and agricultural reuse and for those related to the
conduction of works that might disturb domestic and economic activities during execution. Stakeholder engagement is
also particularly critical to ensure the appropriate use of WSS services and to achieve high connectivity rates to the sewer
network in areas of Puno where this will be expanded. Key stakeholders to engage with on these topics include local
communities in project intervention areas, water users and their associations. During the preparation of the technical
studies and the ESIA for the Project in Puno, more than 80 consultations and meetings were implemented, with affected
population and their representatives, including local authorities, social organizations and leaders. Additionally, in the case
of the Puno subproject, communication activities have been developed through local mass media (local radio, local
television, written press and digital web broadcasting). All the information about this process is summarized in the ESA.
78.      The SEP prepared by the PIUs considers additional consultations to be carried out during project
implementation. The consultation process for activities to be performed in the Lurín basin will be implemented once
technical and engineering studies are completed and before the start of works for the implementation of the MAR pilot
and will continue during implementation. The SEP identifies and characterizes key stakeholders, paying particular
attention to vulnerable groups, it includes plans for all project activities during implementation and project specific
grievance redress mechanisms. All community engagement and awareness-raising efforts will take into account local
cultural norms, knowledge systems, and linguistic diversity, ensuring that information is accessible to all communities,
including through translation into relevant local languages when necessary. Engagement activities will be adapted to local
social structures to ensure inclusivity and effective participation. SUNASS is already collecting information about customer
satisfaction on an annual basis through its Customer Satisfaction Survey. The results framework will include a customer
satisfaction indicator for customers in Puno and SEDAPAL to monitor how the project is improving delivery of service.
Gender
79.      The project is expected to contribute reducing the burden of unpaid work on female residents of Puno. Because
Peruvian women dedicate on average 20.21 hours per week to cooking and housecleaning activities (compared to men’s
dedication of 7.31 hours), the poor quality of WSS services are particularly burdensome for women.
80.      WSS network expansion activities will be implemented alongside gender-sensitive social mobilization activities.
These activities, focused on promoting a responsible use of water and sanitation services and on creating incentives to
achieve high connectivity rates in expansion areas, will include change-inspiring elements in the sensitizing messages,
which play a crucial motivational role among families, will revolve around a gender approach (to encourage women’s
participation) and will avoid discriminatory messages, while including emotional components, mostly dealing with the
                       Official Use Only                                                                               Page 26
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


wellbeing of users themselves, their children, and their families. The gender-sensitive messaging in sanitary education
activities will entail messages tailored to respond to men’s and women’s needs.
81.      The project will also support SEDAPAL’s and EMSAPUNO’s efforts to reduce women’s underrepresentation in
its workforce. The project will address these disparities by supporting SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO in identifying barriers to
women’s participation in decision-making roles and developing action plans to tackle identified barriers, increase their
representation, including strategies for recruitment, retention, and improved working conditions (e.g., leadership skills,
childcare support). Progress towards this objective will be measured by tracking the indicator increase in female
representation in decision making positions within SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO. The project will also promote gender-
responsive procurement by facilitating the participation of female in contractors.
82.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention
of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.
 V. KEY RISKS
83.     The overall risk of the MPA Program is rated as Substantial. Substantial risks are inherent to long-term programs.
However, the adaptable nature of the MPA instrument enables learning from emerging risks and adjustments to program
design and implementation to mitigate these risks, bringing it down to substantial. Phase 2 risks will be assessed in detail
based on lessons learned from Phase 1.
84.     The risk to the PDO of MPA Phase 1 is rated as Substantial, considering the political and governance, institutional
capacity, environmental, social and stakeholder risks, described below.
85.      Political and governance risk is rated as Substantial. Political instability results in high turnover of decision-
makers, political appointees, changes in government priorities, and in weaker institutional capacity. In addition, upcoming
elections in 2026 increases uncertainty around the continuity of authorities and priorities. This risk is mitigated by the fact
that water ranks high on the agenda across the full political spectrum, as demonstrated by the consistently high level of
public investment in the sector and the relevance of WSS in World Bank’s lending portfolio, historically and across
administrations. Also, the circular economy agenda has been identified as a priority in Peru’s OECD accession roadmap, a
shared objective across political parties. This is also the case for the decontamination of Lake Titicaca, which, besides a
priority for civil society and national politics, is a shared commitment both for the Peruvian and the Bolivian Governments,
formalized in 1996 with the international treaty for the creation of the Binational Lake Titicaca Authority. This, along with
the legal and regulatory foundation for the adoption of circular economy principles, established by the 2024 “Law on the
Universal Service of Drinking Water and Sanitation”, mitigates the risk of potential shifts on development priorities
associated to political changes.
86.     Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability is rated as Substantial. The weak managerial,
technical and financial capacity of EMSAPUNO hinders the sustainability of program interventions in the Lake Titicaca
basin. To mitigate this risk, the project incorporates technical assistance and institutional strengthening activities under
its governance component focused on building the capacity of the utility. The utility will benefit from a broad support

                       Official Use Only                                                                                Page 27
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


covering all areas of utility management, particularly in the domain of financial management, adopting the frameworks
developed by the Bank under the “Utility Turnaround” and the “Utilities of the Future” initiatives. Similarly, the risk
associated with PASLC’s lack of previous experience managing World Bank financed operations is mitigated by the fact
that the responsibilities of this PIU during the first phase of the MPA are limited to the management of engineering
consulting activities and the implementation of minor works. The experience gained through implementation of phase 1
activities, and the possibility of cross fertilization and learning from the other PIU (i.e., PNSU) during implementation,
along with the supervision support provided by the Bank, will allow to develop PASLC implementation, E&S and fiduciary
management for phase 2, which includes in its scope activities of higher risk and complexity.
87.     E&S risks are currently rated as Substantial. These risks are discussed in the previous section.
88.      Stakeholder risks are rated as Substantial. This risk relates to the multisectoral nature of the reforms to be
supported under the program. The limited synergy in multisector policies and strategies leads to fragmented water
interventions and hinders the integrated approach of water governance. However, recent adjustments to the WSS Services
Framework Law, the approval of related norms such as the WSS Circular Economy Roadmap, and the ongoing revision of
the Water Resources Law, create an adequate enabling environment for promoting multi-sector coordination. To
strengthen this positive context, the project considers the following mitigation measures: (i) non-lending technical
assistance to support ICC including key sector stakeholders, namely MVCS, MINAGRI, and ANA, (ii) maintaining continuous
policy dialogue to keep authorities engaged, and (iii) aligning the project with national priorities.




                       Official Use Only                                                                           Page 28
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)



VI. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                 Closing Period
    Increase access to inclusive and resilient water services
   People provided with access to safely managed water services (Number of people)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
   0                                                                                        154,888
      ➢People provided with access to safely managed water services - Female (Number of people)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
   0                                                                                        79,922
      ➢People provided with access to safely managed water services - Young (Number of people)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
   0                                                                                        57,572
   People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services (Number of people)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
   0                                                                                        47,648
      ➢People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services - Female (Number of people)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
   0                                                                                        24,586
      ➢People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services - Youth (Number of people)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
   0                                                                                        17,711
   Increase in the percentage of WSS investments adopting circular economy principles in the public investment system (Percentage)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
   0                                                                                        20
   Design out waste and pollution (focus on optimize operations)
   NRW levels in drinking water distribution networks intervened under the project (Percentage)
   Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030




                                                                                                                                        Page 29


                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


   44                                                                                      25
   Preserve and regenerate natural systems
   Volume of reclaimed water used annually for agricultural, industrial or environmental applications in program intervention areas (Cubic Meter(m3))
   Jan/2026                                                                                Dec/2030
   0                                                                                       1,261,440


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                               Closing Period
   Infrastructure
   Expansion of the water treatment plant has been built (Yes/No)
   Jan/2026                                                                               Dec/2030
   No                                                                                     Yes
   Kilometers of new water network built in the Project area (Kilometers)
   Jan/2026                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      207.05
   Kilometers of rehabilitated water network in the Project area (Kilometers)
   Jan/2026                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      100.01
   Kilometers of new sewerage network in the Project area (Kilometers)
   Jan/2026                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      100.61
   Kilometers of sewerage network rehabilitated in the Project area (Kilometers)
   Jan/2026                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      68.01
   New piped household water connections that are resulting from the Project intervention (Number)
   Jan/2026                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      10,199
   El Espinar Wastewater Treatment plant functioning according to the environmental management plan (Yes/No)
   Jan/2026                                                                               Dec/2030
   No                                                                                     Yes
   New household sewerage connections that are resulting from the Project intervention (Number)




                                                                                                                                                           Page 30


                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        6,892
Managed aquifer recharge solutions in Lurín basin tested (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        2
WWTP projects including circular economy principles formulated (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        7
Bidding documents for WWTP in Lurín and Titicaca with energy and biosolids recovery and allowing for MAR prepared (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        4
Projects for irrigation reuse in landscape designs (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        2
Governance and Project Management
Recommendations to WSS, water resources, energy and environemental regulations to create incentives for reuse endorsed by ICC (Yes/No)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
No                                                                                       Yes
Technical norms and guidelines for the design of WSS infrastructure adopting CE principles issued (Yes/No)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
No                                                                                       Yes
Adjustments of the public investment appraisal system (Invierte.pe) and PPP structuring approaches to facilitate adoption of CE principles adopted by Invierte.pe (Yes/No)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
No                                                                                       Yes
Studies to identify solutions and determine the potential of MAR to restore and increase water availability in the Lurín aquifer completed (Yes/No)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
No                                                                                       Yes
Trainings to strengthen the capacity of the DGPPCS to prepare and manage WSS PPP projects adopting CE principles developed (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        5
Trainings to strengthen the capacity of PASLC and PNSU to prepare and manage WSS infrastructure projects adopting CE principles developed (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                Page 31


                                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


Trainings to strengthen the capacity of the DGAA to monitor the performance of wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities developed (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        5
Circular Economy and water security Master Plans adopted by SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        2
Increase in the share of decision-making positions held by women in SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO (from project baseline) (Percentage)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        10
Technical asssistance to SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO to improve its financial, managerial & technical capacity, empowering women in management developed (Yes/No)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
No                                                                                       Yes
Screening of opportunities for private sector participation in wastewater treatment and reuse developed (Yes/No)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
No                                                                                       Yes
Increase in customer satisfaction indicator in EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL (percentage points) (Percentage)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        5
Wastewater/Reuse PPP project bid out as result of project-supported technical assistance (Number)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        3
Working ratio reduced in SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO (from project baseline) (Percentage)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        3.50
Guidelines for cost-benefit analysis of the design and implementation of constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment (Yes/No)
Jan/2026                                                                                 Dec/2030
No                                                                                       Yes




                                                                                                                                                                Page 32


                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
 Increase access to inclusive and resilient water services
  People provided with access to safely managed water services (Number of people)
                                    Measures the cumulative number of people who have benefited from safely managed water services
 Description
                                    constructed through the project. It incorporates circular economy principles.
 Frequency                           Annual
 Data source                         PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
 Methodology for Data               Number of new and rehabilitated water connections installed by the Project multiplied by the average
 Collection                         number of people per household
 Responsibility for Data
                                     PIT Puno
 Collection
 People provided with access to safely managed water services - Female (Number of people)
                                    Measures the cumulative number of women who have benefited from safely managed water services
 Description
                                    constructed through the project. The infrastructure incorporates circular economy principles.
 Frequency                           Annual
 Data source                         PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
                                    Census data will provide demographic information, including gender distribution, which will be applied to the
 Methodology for Data
                                    total number of people provided with safely managed water to estimate the number of young people
 Collection
                                    between 14 and 29 years.
 Responsibility for Data
                                    PIT Puno
 Collection
 People provided with access to safely managed water services - Youth (Number of people)
                                   Measures the cumulative number of youth who have benefited from safely managed water services
 Description
                                   constructed through the project. The infrastructure incorporates circular economy principles.
 Frequency                          Annual
 Data source                        PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
 Methodology for Data              Census data will provide demographic information, including the age distribution, which will be applied to the
 Collection                        total number of people
 Responsibility for Data
                                    PIT Puno
 Collection
 People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services (Number of people)
                                   Measures the cumulative number of people who have benefited from safely managed sanitation services
 Description
                                   constructed through the project. The infrastructure incorporates circular economy principles.
 Frequency                          Annual
 Data source                        PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
 Methodology for Data              Number of new and rehabilitated sewerage connections installed by the Project multiplied by the average
 Collection                        number of people per household
 Responsibility for Data
                                    PIT Puno
 Collection
 People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services- Female (Number of people)
                                   Measures the cumulative number of women who have benefited from safely managed sanitation services
 Description
                                   constructed through the project. The infrastructure incorporates circular economy principles.
 Frequency                          Annual
 Data source                        PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
 Methodology for Data              Census data will provide demographic information, including the gender distribution, which will be applied to
 Collection                        the total number of people.




                                                                                                                                            Page 33


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


 Responsibility for Data
                                    PIT Puno
 Collection
 People provided with access to safely managed sanitation services- Youth (Number of people)
                                   Measures the cumulative number of women who have benefited from safely managed sanitation services
 Description
                                   constructed through the project. The infrastructure incorporates circular economy principles.
 Frequency                          Annual
 Data source                        PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
                                    Census data will provide demographic information, including the age distribution, which will be applied to the
 Methodology for Data
                                    total number of people provided with safely managed sanitation to estimate the number of young people
 Collection
                                    between 14 and 29 years.
 Responsibility for Data
                                   PIT Puno
 Collection
 Increase in the % of WSS investments adopting circular economy principles in the public investment system (%)
                                  This indicator measures the annual increase in the percentage of Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS)
                                  investments that incorporate circular economy principles within the public investment system. The target is to
 Description
                                  achieve a 20% annual increase in such investments, aligned with the Ministry of Housing, Construction, and
                                  Sanitation (MVCS) Circular Economy Roadmap to 2030.
 Frequency                         Annual
 Data source                      DGPPCS Reports
                                    The indicator is calculated by comparing the percentage of WSS investments adopting circular economy
 Methodology for Data
                                    principles each year relative to the MVCS budget. The goal is to increase this percentage by at least 20% in the
 Collection
                                    year of closing period
 Responsibility for Data
                                    DGPPCS
 Collection
 Optimize operations
 NRW levels in drinking water distribution networks intervened under the program (Percentage)
                                    This indicator evaluates the climate resilience dimension of the PDO and indicates the percentage of Non-
 Description
                                    Revenue Water reduced in the project
 Frequency                          Annual
 Data source                        PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
                                    This will be assessed as the average difference between the volume of water treated in drinking water
 Methodology for Data
                                    treatment facilities and the volume of water billed divided by former registered during the first four months
 Collection
                                    after the commissioning of the works.
 Responsibility for Data
                                     PIT Puno
 Collection
 Preserve and regenerate natural systems
 Volume of reclaimed water used annually for agricultural, industrial or environmental applications in program intervention areas (m3)
                                 For Phase 1, this indicator measures the additional freshwater resources made available to meet demand
 Description
                                 through the implementation of Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR) techniques in the Lurín basin.
 Frequency                        Annual
 Data source                     PASLC and SEDAPAL Reports
 Methodology for Data            It will be calculated as the daily injection capacity of the MAR pilot developed in the Lurín basin (both verified
 Collection                      at commissioning), times 365.
 Responsibility for Data
                                 DGPPCS with guidance of PIT Lurín
 Collection

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
 Infrastructure component
 Expansion of the water treatment plant has been built (Yes/No)




                                                                                                                                              Page 34


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                 This indicator measures whether the expansion of the Aziruni water treatment plant in Puno City has been
Description
                                 completed and is operational. It is a binary indicator with possible values of "Yes" or "No."
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
                                 The indicator is determined by verifying the completion and operational status of the Aziruni water treatment
Methodology for Data
                                 plant expansion project. A "Yes" value is recorded if the expansion has been fully built and is operational. A
Collection
                                 "No" value is recorded if the expansion is incomplete or not yet operational.
Responsibility for Data
                                PIT Puno
Collection
Kilometers of new water network built in the Project area (Kilometers)
                               This indicator measures the total length of new water distribution pipelines that have been constructed within
Description
                               the project area. It is expressed in kilometers.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
                                 The indicator is calculated by summing the lengths of all new water distribution pipelines constructed within
Methodology for Data
                                 the project area during the reporting period. This includes primary, secondary, and tertiary pipelines that are
Collection
                                 part of the new network.
Responsibility for Data
                                  PIT Puno
Collection
Kilometers of rehabilitated water network in the Project area (Kilometers)
                                 This indicator measures the total length of existing water distribution pipelines that have been rehabilitated
Description
                                 within the project area.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
                                 The indicator is calculated by summing the lengths of all water distribution pipelines that have been
Methodology for Data
                                 rehabilitated within the project area during the reporting period. This includes primary, secondary, and tertiary
Collection
                                 pipelines that have undergone rehabilitation.
Responsibility for Data
                                  PIT Puno
Collection
Kilometers of new sewerage network in the Project area (Kilometers)
                                 This indicator measures the total length of new sewerage pipelines that have been constructed within the
Description
                                 project area. It is expressed in kilometers
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                      PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
                                 The indicator is calculated by summing the lengths of all new sewerage pipelines constructed within the project
Methodology for Data
                                 area during the reporting period. This includes primary, secondary, and tertiary pipelines that are part of the
Collection
                                 new network.
Responsibility for Data
                                  PIT Puno
Collection
Kilometers of sewerage network rehabilitated in the Project area (Kilometers)
                                 This indicator measures the total length of existing sewerage pipelines that have been rehabilitated within the
Description
                                 project area. It is expressed in kilometers.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
Methodology for Data             Data for this indicator is collected from project reports, construction records, and field surveys. The
Collection                       documentation should include detailed maps and measurements of the rehabilitated pipelines.




                                                                                                                                             Page 35


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


Responsibility for Data
                                 PIT Puno
Collection
New piped household water connections that are resulting from the Project intervention (Number)
Description                      Number of household connections established due to expansion of supply systems
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Information collected site visits, billing
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 PIT Puno
Collection
New household sewerage connections that are resulting from the Project intervention (Number)
Description                      Number of household connections established due to expansion of treatment systems
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Information collected from site visits
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 PIT Puno
Collection
El Espinar Wastewater Treatment plant functioning according to the environmental management plan (Yes/No)
                                 To prevent overloading of El Espinar WWTP in case of a delay in awarding the El Espinar WWTP contract,
Description                      mitigation measures under the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be implemented
                                 under Phase 1.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PNSU and EMSAPUNO Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Information collected from site visits
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 PIT Puno
Collection
Managed aquifer recharge solutions in Lurín basin tested (Number)
                                This indicator measures the number of Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR) solutions that have been
                                implemented in the Lurín Basin. MAR solutions involve techniques to recharge the aquifer using treated
Description
                                wastewater from the Cieneguilla WWTP through methods such as infiltration ponds and riverbed recharge
                                systems.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PASLC and SEDAPAL Reports
                                 Data for this indicator is collected from project reports, implementation records, and monitoring data. The
Methodology for Data
                                 documentation should include details of the MAR techniques used, the volume of water recharged, and the
Collection
                                 outcomes achieved.
Responsibility for Data
                                 DGPPCS with guidance of PIT Lurín
Collection
WWTP projects including circular economy principles formulated (Number)
                                 This indicator measures the number of Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) designs that incorporate circular
Description                      economy (CE) principles. These principles include wastewater reuse, water reclamation, energy cogeneration,
                                 nutrient recovery, and the use of treated sludge.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PNSU and PASLC Reports




                                                                                                                                          Page 36


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                  The indicator is calculated by counting the number of WWTP designs that have been developed and
                                  documented to include CE principles. Each design must be verified to ensure it aligns with the specified CE
Methodology for Data              principles. The designs will incorporate a watershed approach and CE principles, including wastewater reuse,
Collection                        water reclamation, energy cogeneration, nutrient recovery, and treated sludge use. The designs will explore
                                  opportunities for private sector participation in the design, construction, and/or operation and maintenance of
                                  the WWTPs.
Responsibility for Data
                                PIT Puno, PIT Lurín
Collection
Bidding documents for WWTP in Lurín and Titicaca with energy and biosolids recovery and allowing for MAR prepared (Number)
                               Bidding documents to procure wastewater treatment, resource recovery and water reclamation and reuse
Description
                               infrastructure to be developed in Phase 2.
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                        PNSU and PASLC Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Request to PIT
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                     PIT Puno, PIT Lurín
Collection
Projects for irrigation reuse in landscape designs (number)
Description                         Designs for wastewater reuse schemes for the watering of parks and recreational areas in the Lurín Basin
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                        PASLC, PNC Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Request to PIT
Collection
Governance component
Recommendations to WSS, water resources, energy and environmental regulations to create incentives for reuse endorsed by ICC (Yes/No)
                                  Technical norms and guidelines for the development of WSS infrastructure adopting circular economy
Description                       principles endorsed by ICC (chaired by MVCS through its DGPPCS, and will have MIDAGRI, ANA and MINAM as
                                  permanent members)
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                       DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  The indicator is binary (Yes/No).
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection
Technical norms and guidelines for the design of WSS infrastructure adopting CE principles issued (Yes/No)
                                  This indicator measures whether technical norms and guidelines have been issued that incorporate Circular
Description                       Economy (CE) principles into the water supply and sanitation (WSS) sector. The indicator is binary, with a "Yes"
                                  indicating that such norms and guidelines have been issued, and a "No" indicating that they have not.
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                       DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data              The indicator is assessed based on the issuance of official technical norms and guidelines that explicitly
Collection                        incorporate CE principles
Responsibility for Data
                                 DGPPCS
Collection
Adjustments of the public investment appraisal system (Invierte.pe) and PPP structuring approaches to facilitate adoption of CE principles
adopted by Invierte.pe (Yes/No)




                                                                                                                                               Page 37


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                 Update of methodological tools for the formulation and evaluation of WSS investments in the PPP and public
Description
                                 investment system
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                      DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 The indicator is binary (Yes/No).
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                   DGPPCS
Collection
Studies to identify solutions and determine the potential of MAR to restore and increase water availability in the Lurín aquifer completed
(Yes/No)
Description                        Studies that inform the definition of pilots and regulations for the development of MAR initiatives
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                      DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 The indicator is binary (Yes/No).
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 DGPPCS
Collection
Trainings to strengthen the capacity of the DGPPCS to prepare and manage WSS PPP projects adopting CE principles developed (Number)
                                 Support DGPPCS to prepare and manage PPP projects incorporating CE principles, with collaboration with
Description
                                 IFC/MIGA
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                      DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Request to DGPPCS
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 DGPPCS
Collection
Trainings to strengthen the capacity of PASLC and PNSU to prepare and manage WSS infrastructure projects adopting CE principles developed
(Number)
                                 Support PASLC and PNSU to design and implement WSS infrastructure works adopting circular economy
Description
                                 principles. Goods and services to be procured include tools, equipment, training and technical assistance.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                      PASLC and PNSU Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Request to DGPPCS
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection
Trainings to strengthen capacity of the DGAA to monitor the performance of wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities developed
(Number)
                                  Support DGAA to monitor the performance of wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities. Goods and
Description
                                  services to be procured include tools, equipment, training and technical assistance.
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                      DGAA Reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Request to DGPPCS
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 DGPPCS
Collection
Circular Economy and water security Master Plans adopted by SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO (Number)




                                                                                                                                              Page 38


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                  This indicator measures the number of Circular Economy (CE) and water security Master Plans that have been
                                  adopted by participating Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) utilities. These plans are designed to invest in new
Description
                                  WSS infrastructure and optimize the operation and management of WSS services within a circular economy
                                  framework.
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                       EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL Reports
                                  The indicator is calculated by counting the number of CE Master Plans and water security that have been
Methodology for Data              formally adopted by participating WSS utilities within a specified period. Each plan must be documented and
Collection                        verified to ensure it aligns with the CE principles and the National WSS Circular Economy Roadmap, including a
                                  water security approach.
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection
Increase in the share of decision-making positions held by women in SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO (from project baseline) (percentage)
                                  Technical assistance provided to the utilities will also support SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO will identify the
                                  barriers and root causes of women’s underrepresentation in managerial and technical positions and in the
                                  definition and implementation of an action plan to tackle identified barriers, with the objective to increase the
Description
                                  share of women in such positions. Decision-making roles (e.g., management, executive, or board positions)
                                  within the water utilities SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO. SEDAPAL’s workforce women representation in decision-
                                  making roles is 9.1%. In EMSAPUNO, 20% of managers being women. The increase will be 10% in each utility.
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                       EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Request to DGPPCS
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 DGPPCS
Collection
Technical assistance to SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO to improve its financial, managerial & technical capacity, empowering women in
management developed (Yes/No)
                                 Technical assistance and capacity-building activities for SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO to ensure sound governance
Description                      and effective financial, technical, administrative, and commercial management of the infrastructure to be
                                 financed through the project, thereby ensuring its sustainability
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  The indicator is binary (Yes/No).
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection
Increase in customer satisfaction indicator in EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL (Percentage points)
                                  This indicator measures the percentage point increase in customer satisfaction with water and sanitation
                                  services in EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL. EMSAPUNO will apply the SERVQUAL methodology, which evaluates gaps
                                  between expected and perceived service quality across five key dimensions. SEDAPAL will apply the ISUD
Description
                                  (Índice de Satisfacción del Usuario Doméstico), developed by SUNASS, which is a weighted index based on 23
                                  service attributes grouped in components such as water quality, service continuity, user attention, and
                                  institutional performance.
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                       EMSAPUNO and SEDAPAL Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Surveys by SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO compiled by SUNASS
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection




                                                                                                                                              Page 39


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


Screening of opportunities for private sector participation in wastewater treatment and reuse developed (Yes/No)
                                  Screening of potential subprojects for wastewater treatment, resource recovery wastewater reuse for
Description
                                  agricultural and industrial applications across the country (considering the 171 WWTPs existing in Peru)
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                       DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data           The indicator is binary (Yes/No). It is marked "Yes" if the CE criteria have been officially approved and included
Collection                     in Invierte.pe, and "No" if they have not.
Responsibility for Data
                               DGPPCS
Collection
Wastewater/Reuse PPP project bid out as result of project-supported technical assistance (Number)
                               This indicator tracks the number of PPP projects identified through technical assistance aimed at strengthening
                               the enabling environment for private sector participation in wastewater treatment and reuse, as part of the
                               one WBG’s implementation plan for Peru, one for each of the three pillars: (i) Public-Private Partnerships
Description                    (PPPs) for wastewater treatment, reuse, and desalination projects; (ii) Commercial financing for municipal WSS
                               utilities, focusing on circular economy and digital transformation; and (iii) Innovative private sector financing
                               mechanisms, including Works for Tasks mechanisms for O&M of WWTPs, RWSS multisector projects, and small
                               irrigation initiatives. This is PCE non-monetary indicator.
Frequency                       Annual
Data source                       DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Request to DGPPCS
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection
Working ratio reduced in SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO (from project baseline) (Percentage)
                                  The working ratio, calculated as the ratio between operational expenses (including personnel costs, energy,
                                  chemicals, goods and services), excluding depreciation, and operational income (comprising water and
Description
                                  sewerage revenues, other technical services revenues, and accounts receivable), is reduced. Target reflects the
                                  expected average improvement, with a 5 pp reduction for EMSAPUNO and 2 pp for SEDAPAL
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                       DGPPCS Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Request to DGPPCS
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection
Guidelines for cost-benefit analysis of the design and implementation of constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment (Yes/No)
                                  Existence of technical guidelines to assess the cost-effectiveness of using constructed wetlands for wastewater
Description                       treatment. The guidelines should support decision-making for planning and investment in nature-based
                                  solutions for sanitation.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       DGAA Reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Request to DGAA
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  DGPPCS
Collection




                                                                                                                                             Page 40


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
The World Bank
Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                      ANNEX 1: Maps




                                                                    Page 41


                                                             Official Use Only
