Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 05/07/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04243




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505546                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      GEF RE-MAP                  2025

                     Operation Name            Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Moldova                   Moldova                                 EUROPE AND CENTRAL          Environment, Natural
                                                                                       ASIA                        Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                   Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Moldova       Ministry of Environment                 07-Nov-2024                 30-Apr-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     23-Apr-2024               7,903,975.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to increase the area under sustainable landscape management practices in
                     targeted areas within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project intends to restore ecosystem processes directly, it will result in expanded areas of healthier ecosystems
                     (restored functionality) and broader range of generated ecosystem services (benefits). All this will ultimately improve
                     landscape/habitat conditions and water quality through reanimated synergies between upstream and downstream
                     ecosystems. Nature-based solutions (NBS) are defined as use of resources and processes already found in nature to
                     restore ecosystems, support communities, and contribute to healthy and resilient economies. NBS for nutrient pollution
                     management leverage, inter alia, the natural filtering and absorption capacities of ecosystems such as wetlands, forests

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                     to capture, retain, and remove nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus from runoff, surface water, or groundwater. The
                     project addresses pollution of freshwater environment through enhanced adaptive capacity for upstream ecosystem
                     restoration (at landscape level), all following the EU directives and the Dniester Commission. The proposed Project’s
                     design consists of three components: (i) Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community
                     Engagement; (ii) Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management and (iii) Component 3: Project
                     Management, Monitoring and Communication.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed project intends to manage nutrient pollution in the Dniester River Basin within Moldova. The Dniester
                     River runs along the border with Ukraine to the East and discharges to the Black Sea. The river serves as the primary
                     source of drinking water for Moldova and for a significant portion of Ukraine. It also plays a pivotal role in sustaining
                     Moldova's substantial agricultural sector, accounting for 10% of its GDP. However, the Dniester Basin faces pressing
                     environmental challenges that have far-reaching implications for both Moldova and Ukraine. Within this basin, 94
                     percent of water bodies have been assessed as at risk of "not achieving good ecological status" according to EU
                     standards, with none classified as "no risk." Agricultural land covers about 75 percent of Moldova’s total land area.
                     Poverty in Moldova is concentrated in rural areas where agriculture takes place. The impacts of agriculture on water
                     are considered substantial with industrial intensification of agriculture leading to increased pollution and treatment
                     costs. Restored ecosystems, including expansion of ecological agriculture as part of sustainable management, would
                     offset these costs and reduce pollution. Currently, protected areas cover 6 percent of the Moldova’s territory, including
                     protected forests and floodplains with a total area of almost 62,000 ha. Republic of Moldova also has 3 sites designated



Public Disclosure
                     as Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar Sites), with a surface area of 94,705 hectares, Lower Prut Lakes,
                     Unguri Holosnita, Lower Dniester (Nistru de Jos). The project will not have activities in or near protected areas or
                     existing Ramsar sites. The project addresses marine pollution through enhanced adaptive capacity for upstream river
                     basin ecosystem restoration (at landscape level), all following the EU directives and the Dniester Commission.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) is envisaged to be in the National Office for Environmental Project
                     Implementation (NOEPI), subordinated directly to the Ministry of Environment. While being intended exclusively for
                     financing projects in environmental protection and sustainable management of natural resources, NOEPI does not have
                     substantial experience in implementing WB-financed projects. To address these shortfall, the project will include
                     capacity building activities, providing respective in-time and on the job trainings during all stages of project preparation
                     (including through the Project Preparation Grant (PPG)) and throughout the implementation period, as well as will bring
                     in international experts to ensure effective knowledge transfer and strengthening of the institutional capacity. The PIU
                     is to be resourced with one Environmental specialist and one Social specialist, in addition to other regular PIU staff. The
                     PIU will coordinate screening of all project activities

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                     The environmental risks associated with the proposed project are assessed as Moderate. Expected long term impact
                     of the project is positive, as none of its activities is likely to generate loss of biodiversity or other damage to the
                     environment. Component one will have a positive environmental impact in long term as relates to policy
                     development, capacity building activities for reducing marine pollution through NbS, and community engagement in
                     implementing sustainable agricultural practices and restoration activities. Component 2.1 will have a positive impact
                     as it finances restoration of forest and wetlands leading to the substantial removal of various pollutants within 2,000
                     ha of Dniester river basin. However this activities could pose some moderate temporary environmental risks related
                     the nature of the activities in terms of civil works associated with revitalization of small rivers and wetlands and
                     temporary associated pollution and waste management aspects during implementation phase . The project's areas of
                     intervention will not interfere with the existing Ramsar sites. Component 2.2 will have a positive environmental
                     impact as it targets the improvement of nearly 25,000 ha of landscapes through sustainable agroforestry systems
                     (integrated tree/shrub with crops) and silvo-pastoral practices (combining trees/shrubs with grazing). These two
                     practices are believed to be important measures to reduce nutrient runoff and enhance erosion control, as well as to
                     lower local budget inputs for flood mitigation.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risks are considered Moderate. The project comprises small to medium scale physical works and activities to
                     restore 2,000 ha of degraded forest and wetland sites along the Dniester River as well as interventions at sub-project
                     sites to improve agroforestry and silvo-pastoral practices across 25,000 ha. These interventions are expected to take
                     place on public land and no additional land acquisition is expected to be required. However, this will be further
                     confirmed during preparation, and any impacts of the project on restrictions to land use will be further assessed.




Public Disclosure
                     Works will be completed by contracted workers as well as community workers. The project has a dedicated
                     component for community engagement and benefits, that will employ local communities in conservation activities
                     such as tree planting and clean up. The modality and arrangements as volunteer or paid community workers labor are
                     yet to be determined, and will be assessed during preparation in accordance with ESS2. The works are unlikely to
                     involve large-scale labor force and the risks of SEA/SH are assessed as low. Workers may be exposed to health and
                     safety risks from the works such as exposure to hazardous waste and risks of injuries. Child labor risks are prevalent in
                     the agricultural sector in Moldova but will be managed through LMP applicable to specific operations receiving
                     project support. Other social tensions and exclusion risks may arise from site selection processes and beneficiaries
                     accessing project benefits (including jobs and value chain development opportunities), if the criteria are not
                     sufficiently consulted and disseminated with a wide range of beneficiaries in rural areas that are more likely to be
                     poor, or with women and youth, and who are considered disadvantaged. The project design includes activities to
                     strengthen community capacity for conservation and offers opportunities for benefit sharing.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project is expected to have positive environmental and social effects from reduced pollution in the Dniester River
                      and Black Sea. Component 1 comprises soft interventions, whereas Component 2 entails small to medium scale
                      physical works to restore wetlands and forests . There are no significant environmental risks associated with project


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                      activities provided proper management of civil work associated with wetland restoration and small river
                      revitalization. Social impacts, especially for riparian communities, are expected to be positive, if activities are
                      designed with adequate engagement, inclusion of vulnerable groups, and labor management. An Environmental and
                      Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to assess E&S impacts, propose a menu of mitigation
                      measures, establish screening procedures for sub-projects and guide preparation of site-specific environmental and
                      social instruments. Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) will be developed for the project

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      Project-affected stakeholders include rural communities that will benefit from and contribute to social, health,
                      environmental and economic benefits from reduced pollution in the Dniester River Basin and improvements in
                      sustainable agriculture, various ministries, and workers engaged in physical works. The project design includes
                      activities to strengthen community capacity for conservation and offer opportunities for stakeholder engagement and
                      participatory planning. The project will prepare a robust stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) prior to Appraisal to
                      support engagement with civil society organizations, communities, especially rural agricultural communities that are
                      likely to be poor. Women and youth may be disadvantaged in terms of financial and other resources, and land
                      ownership, and effective and inclusive engagement mechanisms will be needed with these groups. The SEP will also
                      establish a transparent, accessible grievance mechanism, consistent with ESS10.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. Project workers comprise direct workers of the PIU and technical consultants. Works under




Public Disclosure
                      Component 2 will be provided by contracted workers as well as community workers. The project has a dedicated
                      component for community engagement and benefits, that will employ local communities in conservation activities
                      such as tree planting and cleanup. The modality and arrangements for the use of volunteer or paid community
                      workers labor are yet to be determined, and will be assessed during project preparation in accordance with ESS2. The
                      works are unlikely to involve large-scale labor force. Workers may be exposed to health and safety risks at worksites,
                      such as exposure to construction waste, heat, and animals/insects, and injuries from incidents. Child labor is present
                      in the agriculture sector in Moldova. Labor Management Procedures (LMP) consistent with ESS2 will be prepared
                      prior to appraisal addressing project labor risks.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Activities and civil works related to wetland restoration, small river revitalization,
                      shelterbelt restoration and others that require small civil works will be undertaken with efficient use of resources.
                      Pollution prevention and management measures will be applied throughout the project lifecycle consistent with WB
                      ESF and GIIP, to minimize environmental footprint of the project .

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      The standard is considered relevant and all activities will take in consideration the exposure of local community to
                      small civil works for clean-up and wetland restoration. The ESMF will include procedures to screen for the risks and
                      impacts on the health and safety of project-affected communities, including groups that might be vulnerable, and
                      relevant mitigation measures will be included in site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                      where necessary. These will include management and mitigation measures to secure community health and safety
                      during small civil works

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      Project works under component 2 will take place on public lands and are not expected to require land acquisition.
                      However, this will be further confirmed during preparation, and any impacts of the project on restrictions to land use
                      or natural resources or informal land users, and potential risks associated with voluntary land donation, will be
                      further assessed and mitigated with appropriate resettlement and/or process frameworks.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is relevant. The project may include activities near or inside existing Ramsar sites situated in the lower
                      meadows of Prut and Dniester in order to restore forest areas by planting trees or wetlands restoration.
                      Environmental screening of sub-projects will identify likelihood and nature of impacts on natural and critical habitats.
                      The project will not support any activities negatively affecting such habitats and/or leading to net loss of biodiversity.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      No indigenous people present in Moldova.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant

                      No activities are considered in areas with potential cultural heritage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      No financial intermediaries involved.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No
                       Borrower's framework is not intended to be used


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No
                       No financing partners are proposed at this time.



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan drafted, disclosed, and consulted with stakeholders by Appraisal
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan drafted, disclosed, and consulted with stakehodlers by Appraisal
                     Environmental and Social Management Framework drafted, disclosed, and consulted with stakeholders by Appraisal
                     Labor Management Procedures drafted and disclosed by Appraisal


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Fisseha Tessema Abissa             Title:          Senior Natural Resources Management
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  fabissa@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank



Public Disclosure
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                           Fisseha Tessema Abissa

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                  Adrian Laurentiu Mihailescu

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                         Aki Tsuda




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
