Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDDC00866




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Congo, Republic of             P505271                      Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            12-May-2025                  26-Aug-2025                   Agriculture and Food
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Planning,        Ministry of Agriculture
Financing (IPF)                Statistics and Regional      Livestock and Fisheries
                               Integration

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To sustainably increase domestic production in targeted poultry and aquaculture value chains in the Republic of
Congo.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        105.00

  Total Financing                                                                                             105.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                100.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                100.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                              100.00


                                                                                                                   Page 1
        The World Bank
        Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)



   Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                                          5.00
        Local Beneficiaries                                                                                                        5.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                            Concept Review Decision
Substantial




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

1.    The Republic of Congo (ROC) is a lower-middle-income country with high potential but rising levels of poverty
and food insecurity. Economic challenges characterized by a shrinking economy, led to a decline in Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) growth, entering negative territory after 2015.1 This, combined with a population growth rate averaging
3.2 percent per year,2 pushed up extreme poverty to 46.8 percent in 2023,3 increased unemployment of the total working
population from 9.6 percent in 2019 to 10.3 percent in 2020,4 and triggered a downward trend in Human Development
Index - slipping to 0.571 in 2021 from 0.590 in 2015. Rising food prices compound this problem, with 59 percent of the
population being severely food insecure. Despite the relative advantages of large tropical rainforests, a wealth of
untapped minerals, fertile land with one of the lowest population densities in Africa (14.8 inhabitants/km2), and a young
and urban population, the oil sector accounts for more than half of GDP, and 80 percent of exports. Unlocking ROC’s
potential thus demands a diversified growth model driven by private sector investment in key sectors, supplemented by
strategic public investment and a supportive enabling environment.
2.      The private sector must play a leading role in growing the economy, creating jobs, and reducing poverty.
However, it is largely fragmented and characterized by low productivity, medium, small and micro enterprises (MSMEs).
Up until the early 1990’s, the country’s economy operated under a socialist system, with the State playing a dominant role
in the economy. It is only in the early 1990s that it transitioned to a more market-oriented economy. This transition is
still relatively recent, and this context shapes current levels of investment and entrepreneurship. There are 27, 282 formal
MSMEs currently operating nationally; with a larger majority of firms operating informally. 5 This relatively recent
transition partly explains why private investment, excluding oil, contributes minimally to economic growth – about 5
percent of GDP. This is strikingly low, with Gabon’s non-oil private investment standing at approximate 14% of GDP, while
Cameroon and Angola, for example stand at around 15%. The non-oil private sector in ROC is primarily comprised of

1 According to International Monetary Fund’s Country Report No. 24/252, ROC's macroeconomic context is deteriorating amid mounting debt

challenges, with domestic arrears accounting for nearly 20% of GDP in 2023. These arrears have strained economic activity, heightened debt
vulnerabilities, and reduced access to financing.
2 Institut National Statistique (INS) – RGPH-5, 2023.
3 Using a poverty line of US$2.15 per person per day in 2023 purchasing power parity.
4 International Labor Office quoted by Programme National de Développement (PND) 2022-2026.
5 Congolese Agency for Company Registration, October 2024.



                                                                                                                                     Page 2
        The World Bank
        Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)


MSMEs, which constitute 80.3% of all employment, with the remaining being driven by large firms. Yet these smaller firms
have low levels of productivity, attract limited domestic or foreign investment, and are not integrated into competitive
domestic or international value chains. This is partly explained by a very challenging business environment, limited
entrepreneurial skills and know-how, and compounded by an undeveloped financial sector.
3.     The Government of the ROC has embarked on a path to increase private sector investment, but there is still an
enormous effort to be undertaken. For example, a new public-private-partnership (PPP) Law was enacted in 2023 to
cultivate private investment opportunities in strategic sectors including agriculture, tourism, special economic zones,
forestry and services through PPPs. Although progress has been made, the PPP regulatory framework implementation
remains partial with only four of the expected six crucial decrees in place. Moreover, private investment also continues to
be hindered by access to reliable electricity, transportation,6 mobile connectivity and finance. Slightly over 50 percent of
the population had access to electricity in 2022 undermining productivity, efficiency, and competitiveness while banking
penetration is low at around 13 percent (among the lowest in the CFA franc area), particularly affecting rural and poor
populations, and women.
4.    ROC is highly vulnerable to climate change (CC). It ranks 169th out of 182 countries on the Notre Dame Global
Adaptation Initiative signifying high levels of vulnerability and low levels of readiness to adapt to CC and other global
challenges. Agriculture and labor productivity bear most of the brunt of projected costs of CC - with agriculture losses
accounting for about one-third of costs, and labor productivity losses in other sectors making up nearly 60 percent (in
scenarios for 2030 and 2050). Already rising temperatures and erratic rainfall are resulting in a higher frequency of flooding
events, declining crop yields, and a rise in diseases associated with heat-related and vector-borne illnesses.
  Sectoral and Institutional Context
5.     Agriculture plays a vital role in the ROC's economy, offering significant opportunities for diversification, improved
livelihoods, jobs creation, enhanced income generation and poverty reduction. Smallholder’s farm enterprises,
cooperatives, and agribusinesses are responsible for most of the crop and livestock productions, and value-added
processing. Over the years, innovation and expansion in this sector has been largely led by private sector. The sector
supports the livelihoods of approximately 40 percent of the population7, satisfies 30 percent of national food requirements
and contributes 9 percent to GDP8 in 2023. It is also key to biodiversity conservation and CC mitigation.
6.     ROC, through its National Development Plan (NDP) 2022-2026, prioritizes enhancing production and productivity
in the aquaculture and poultry sub-sectors, among others9. Objectives 1 and 3 of the NDP’s pillar aim to: (i) meet national
demand for poultry and aquaculture products; (ii) increase national production of animal feeds; and (iii) establish and
manage aquaculture and poultry-based “Protected Agricultural Zones” (“Zone Agricole Protegee” - ZAP) across the country
as territorial enclaves dedicated to the production of poultry and aquaculture for food and nutrition security, jobs creation
and overall economic development. Under Objective 5.3, the NDP seeks to implement measures to attract private
investment and improve the business environment. Under Vision 2030, ROC seeks to increase local production, and reduce
imports of poultry products, targeting a total poultry population of 26.2 million by 2030. 10 The proposed project
contributes to these efforts by supporting increased production and competitiveness of the value chains. Despite having
a favorable climate, vast arable land and abundant water resources, ROC’s agricultural sector underperforms, failing to




6 ROC boasts of the region’s only deep seaport (Pointe Noire), but the opportunity to be a gateway to the Atlantic Ocean with a multimodal transport

system and a regional market is hampered by systemic weaknesses, exemplified by the poor condition of access roads to agriculture enclaves.
7 World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Republic of Congo for the Period FY20–FY24, Report No. 126962-CG.
8 Rapport d’évaluation du Programme National de Développement (PND) 2018-2022.
9 Other strategic pillars in the NDP are industry, SEZs, tourism, digital economy and real estate/construction.
10 DGE, Présentation Elevage, 2024.



                                                                                                                                               Page 3
         The World Bank
         Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)


realize its immense potential.11 The specific case of the poultry and fisheries sectors, which are the focus of this proposal
is sufficiently illuminating.
                                Annual Domestic Demand                  Annual Local Production                   Annual Local Production
                                         (Tons)                                 (Tons)                            (% of Domestic Demand)
    Eggs                                55,000                                   1,516                                      3%
    Poultry (meat)                         120,000                                  3,600                                       3%
    Fish                                   100,000                                 60,000                                       60%


The country is therefore highly dependent on imports12 to address deficits13 in these commodities as well as other food
commodities. Closing performance gaps and increasing local production of these commodities would not only contribute
to ROC’s food and nutrition security, but it would also: (i) generate jobs; (ii) increase farmer income; (iii) improve the
contribution of the agriculture sector to GDP; (iv) conserve foreign exchange reserves; (v) generate tax revenues; and (vi)
lower the carbon footprint because of reduced transportation emissions.
7.    Several factors constrain the emergence of competitive poultry and aquaculture sectors in ROC. Among others,
key constraints include:
      • Skills and capacity limitations: There is insufficient capacity to manage a wide range of factors at the production
      level as well as essential business and entrepreneurial skills. 14 A 2019 Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS)
      evaluation flagged serious gaps in veterinary services, limiting effective disease management critical to these sectors.
      Furthermore, advisory services are under-equipped to provide the specialized technical skills needed, and traditional
      subsistence models dominate, restricting a shift to more commercially viable operations.
      • Suboptimal Investment Environment for Private Sector Growth: Even when Government has introduced tax
      exemptions 15 to incentivize private investment in the agriculture sector, there are serious infrastructure gaps,
      including poor road conditions, access and connectivity, and limited access to reliable electricity sources which all
      conspire to increase production costs, reduce efficiency and productivity, increase postharvest losses, and reduce
      overall competitiveness of the sectors. Limited private investment also reflects institutional and policy weaknesses
      including those related to access to credit, import policy, and property rights - including guidelines for leasing and
      licensing out water resources for aquaculture.
      • Constrained access to quality and affordable inputs: Due to insufficient domestic production and supply of maize
      and soybean, essential components in feed formulations, the local feed industry relies heavily on costly imports,
      raising prices. Furthermore, while improved breeds could greatly boost productivity, they remain inaccessible due to
      import restrictions on broodstock and fingerlings, limited quarantine facilities, and unclear genetic resource policies.


11 Currently: (i) less than 10 percent of the country’s 10 million ha of arable land is under cultivation; (ii) even when its grazing lands could support 3-

4 million heads of livestock, the country's current herd is estimated to be less than 300,000; and (iii) the numerous rivers and lakes and the 60,000
km2 exclusive economic zone notwithstanding, less than 5 percent of this potential is exploited. The under-exploitation of the country’s potential
against a backdrop of a widening gap between demand and local production of most agriculture commodities as well as the recurrent episodes of
food and nutrition insecurity in the country points to the urgent need to close the sector performance gaps.
12 Banque Africaine de Développement : Compact Congo pour l’alimentation et l’agriculture.
13 In 2021, ROC imported US$2.1 billion worth of food, of which US$157 million was fish, and US$145 million was poultry. As observed elsewhere,

increasing population, urbanization, income growth and changing diets are expected to further increase the demand for these products.
14 Production level: nutrition, water quality and pond management, biosecurity and biocontainment, and food safety and quality assurance. Essential

business and entrepreneurial skills: business planning and management, financial management, supply chain management, and marketing and sales.
15These include: (i) tax-exemptions (ii) zero tax for agricultural companies in the first 5 years; (iii) low costs of renting public land (less than U$1/ha);

and (iv) a single tax on wages, customs duties and VAT on agricultural imports for agricultural companies.

                                                                                                                                                        Page 4
        The World Bank
        Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)


     High feed costs and limited genetic improvements keep producers in low-input, low-output systems, undermining
     profitability and competitiveness in the country.16
     • Weaknesses in accessing markets: Limited cold chain infrastructure, information gaps, and lack of quality
     standards hinder effective market integration. For example, maize and soybean farmers often perceive low demand,
     while feed manufacturers report shortages. Similarly, domestic poultry and fish producers hesitate to expand due to
     perceived market limitations, even as imports rise. Strategies like contract farming and cooperatives, which could
     strengthen commercial linkages, are underused and hampered by governance and business skill gaps.
 Relationship to CPF
8.    Proposed project activities are aligned with the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for FY2020-2024. Objective 1.3 under CPF Focus Area 1 (Strengthen Economic Management to Create an Improved
Climate for Private Sector-Led Growth) targets “improving agricultural productivity and commercialization” with a focus
on improving competitiveness of domestically produced food, by among others, promoting an improved business
environment, and strengthening the capacity of institutions that support commercial agriculture. The proposed support
also dovetails with Objective 1.4 (Improved business regulatory environment and MSME development) where the WBG
seeks to support improvements to the business environment and foster investment in priority sectors and value chains
and support MSMEs in identified value chains and key growth sectors, among others.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 9.   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to sustainably increase domestic production in targeted poultry and
 aquaculture value chains in the Republic of Congo. Project beneficiaries include smallholder farmers, farmer groups/
 producer organizations (POs), and MSMEs participating in any of the segments of the two value chains.

  Key Results (From PCN)
10. The project is expected to lead to higher levels of productivity in the two value chains, which could result in an
increase in the volume and value of domestically produced poultry and aquaculture products. Proposed key outcome level
indicators include: (i) people with strengthened food and nutrition security; (ii) new jobs created (including number for
women and youth); (iii) total private capital enabled (US$); (iv) beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks
(number); (v) increased volume of fish and poultry products locally produced through project support (ton/year); and (vi)
direct project beneficiaries (including number for women and youth).
  D. Concept Description
11. The ROC currently relies heavily on imports to satisfy its growing demand for poultry and fish products, despite
possessing significant domestic production potential. This project aims to reverse this trend by boosting domestic
production. A key hypothesis underpinning the proposed project’s conceptual design and equally supported by several
lines of evidence, is that continuing reliance on imports by ROC to meet poultry and fish demand is primarily a function of
the limited competitiveness of the domestic industry. Our preliminary findings, drawing on literature reviews, lessons
from Bank-financed projects in ROC and globally, and in-country stakeholder consultations, identify five primary
constraints hindering competitiveness 17 and private investment: inadequate infrastructure, insufficient business and
technical capacity, suboptimal policies and weaknesses in the business enabling environment, constrained access to
inputs, and limited farmer integration into commercial value chains. The conceptual framework underpinning the
proposed project design therefore links efforts to improve competitiveness of the domestic industry with improvements
in incentives for private investment by strengthening the business enabling environment. To help deal with the inherent

16 The two main production systems are commercial (with layer and broiler subsystems) and the indigenous/traditional.       The commercial system
constitutes 37 percent of total poultry production while the traditional production constitutes the remaining 63 percent.
17 Some practitioners ascribe the limited competitiveness to dumping by countries that export produce to ROC.



                                                                                                                                            Page 5
        The World Bank
        Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)


difficulty in accessing high quality and affordable inputs, the project design strengthens links between maize/soybean
producers and feed manufacturers and provides support for increased production of these inputs. The design also helps
support access to improved breeds (fish fingers and day-old chicks), by fostering linkages between public investment in
genetic resource management and private investment in commercial sale of improved breeds. Weaknesses in the business
enabling environment, suboptimal policies and limited business and technical skills are proposed to be dealt with through
reforms, training, and capacity building, while challenges related to limited farmer integration into commercial value
chains are addressed through strengthening POs as well providing support to different models of integration/productive
alliances (PAs), including Simple Contractual Partnerships (SCPs),18 Public-Private Producer Partnerships (4P),19 and PPPs.
12. Strategic Choices. Poultry production in ROC is based on two main production systems - commercial and traditional.
While the traditional systems currently contribute the largest share to national output, the proposal is to focus project
support on the commercial system as this offers the best prospects in terms higher productivity, increased efficiency and
job creation. Additionally, with respect to aquaculture, the focus will be on inland aquaculture and will target commercially
oriented producers or those seeking to intensify and commercialize production. With respect to intervention areas, while
the project will have a “national” coverage - potentially to be implemented in all 15 departments of the country, within
these departments, interventions will be clustered around the already identified ZAPs, to foster a spatial concentration of
support in a kind of special agro-industrial zone approach. The project will comprise three technical components:
Component 1: Strengthening the Agribusiness Ecosystem for Aquaculture and Poultry (US$40 million)
13. The component’s objective is to enhance the business environment for producers and private aquaculture and
poultry agribusiness through: (i) regulatory reforms to streamline processes and reduce barriers to entry in the sectors;
(ii) capacity-building/educational training for relevant private and public services; (iii) strategic investments in critical
public infrastructure at last miles; and (iv) improved access to finance. This component is organized around four mutually
reinforcing sub-components: (i) Enhancing the policy and regulatory framework for aquaculture and poultry agribusiness;
(ii) Strengthening business skills and technical capacity of value chain players; (iii) Support for critical infrastructure; and
(iv) Expanding access to finance.
Component 2: Enhancing Access to High-Quality and Affordable Inputs (US$20 million)
14. The component’s objective is to improve availability and access to high-quality and affordable feed, fingerlings, and
chicks in a timely manner. Financed activities will increase domestic capacity to produce and day-old chicks and fingerlings
and reduce the reliance on imports, especially for day-old chicks. This component comprises two sub-components: (i)
Support to increased feed production: and (ii) Support to fingerlings and day-old chicks production.
Component 3: Support to Production and Marketing (US$40 million: US$35 million IDA, US$5 million Beneficiaries)
15. The component’s objective is to finance selected sub-projects of eligible producers to intensify and sustainably
increase production and marketing of aquaculture and poultry products. The project will support zoning for aquaculture
and poultry production, organizing and strengthening producers20 for production, technology transfer, capacity building,
and marketing purposes, and linking them to sources of finance. Training and technology transfer and farm-infrastructure
will focus on practices and technologies that foster adaptation to climate change (CC) as well as those that reduce
emissions.21 As a deliberate strategy to create more jobs, especially for the women and youth, the project will support
producers or other entrepreneurs seeking to pursue opportunities in direct retail e.g., business to consumer marketing,

18 SCPs involve a PO/cooperative and a private buyer or an institutional buyer. In SPCs, the project will support only POs investment.
19 4Ps are led by one or more POs/cooperatives and a buyer. Within a cluster, the buyer aggregates the production of POs and can facilitate their

access to credit and provides technical assistance. 4Ps combine simple contracting with service provision and co-investment by the private sector.
20 Especially the small-scale producers whose current scale of production precludes the possibility to break even.
21 Fishpond designs that are better adopted to flooding because of CC, and recirculatory systems for adaptation to CC, Improved feed and manure

management, and use of solar power as an energy source for emissions reduction.

                                                                                                                                             Page 6
       The World Bank
       Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)


especially for project locations that would be proximate to population centers. The project will also finance investments
in waste/manure management and production of organic fertilizers if they are included in the sub-projects of producers.
These investments have potential to create new jobs.
Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million)
16. This component provides a mechanism within the project to finance a response to a natural disaster, disease, or
other eligible emergency, should one occur.
Component 5: Project Management (US$5 million)
17. This component will strengthen capacities for project management, monitoring and evaluation (including, inter alia,
the areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant services, training, and
financing of incremental operating costs.
Overall Risk and Explanation
18. The overall risk rating for the proposed operation at concept stage is considered Substantial. The main risks rated
substantial include: (i) Political and Governance, due to transparency and accountability challenges; (ii) Macro-economic,
due to macro-economic imbalances, high dependency on oil, and high debt levels; (iii) Institutional capacity for
implementation and Sustainability, owing to the limited technical skills which are key to aquaculture and poultry sector
competitiveness; (iv) Fiduciary, due to weaknesses in public financial management; and (v) Environmental and Social,
given the potential for disease and environmental pollution related to poultry and aquaculture intensification.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


19.      Potential environmental risks include risks to community health and safety, such as potential infectious diseases
with zoonotic potential, pollution of air, water, and land, traffic road safety risks, occupational health and safety risks,
inefficient energy and water use, and hazardous waste generation (e.g., biomedical waste from animal vaccinations). The
most significant social risks include involuntary resettlement following permanent or temporary, physical or economic
displacement due to proposed Project investments. The risk rating is also enhanced because the Implementing Agency
has limited capacity to manage Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs), labor issues, potential gender-based violence
(GBV) risks and/or sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), stakeholder engagement, potential challenges in supervision, the
exclusion of vulnerable social groups (including indigenous peoples in remote areas), and the diversity of activities and
subprojects. CSA practices will be pursued throughout the Project to mitigate against these risks, and all requisite
safeguard instruments will be developed outlining mechanisms to mitigate these risks, costed through the Project’s
budget, and closely monitored to ensure their effective implementation.




                                                                                                                        Page 7
     The World Bank
     Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project(P505271)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Manievel Sene
 Senior Agriculture Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Planning, Statistics and Regional Integration

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries
 Valery Valery BABACKAS
 Director of cabinet
 vbabackas@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Manievel Sene

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                 Abel Lufafa              18-Nov-2024

Country Director:                         Cheick Fantamady Kante   02-Dec-2024




                                                                                 Page 8
