Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2025 | Report No: PIDIA00837




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                       Moldova: Restoring
                               EUROPE AND CENTRAL
Moldova                                                   P505546                      Ecosystems for Marine
                               ASIA
                                                                                       Pollution Prevention
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                       Environment, Natural
Investment Project
                               07-Nov-2024                30-Apr-2025                  Resources & the Blue
Financing (IPF)
                                                                                       Economy
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency        GEF Focal Area
Republic of Moldova            Ministry of Environment    Multi-focal areas

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to increase the area under sustainable landscape management practices in
targeted areas within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova.

Components
Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community Engagement
Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management
Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring and Communication

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          7.90

  Total Financing                                                                                               7.90

  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

DETAILS

                                                                                                                 Page 1
        The World Bank
        Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Trust Funds                                                                                                                                             7.90
        Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                                                    7.90




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Moderate


 Decision




 Other Decision (as needed)
 B. Introduction and Context
 Project Strategic Context
1. Moldova is vulnerable to and currently grappling with the effects of climate change, including two recent droughts
   that severely affected agricultural production at national scale in 2020 and 20221. The country has witnessed at least
   one major natural disaster every three years over the last 20 years, including floods and droughts (being inextricably
   linked), which are disastrous for Moldova’s primarily rain-fed agriculture. This is being exacerbated by climate change
   that lists Moldova among the most climate-vulnerable countries in Europe, and the ND-GAIN2 vulnerability assessment
   ranks it 91st on a global vulnerability rank (lower middle). The country also ranks 85th on the NG-GAIN readiness
   indicator (lower middle), showcasing a lack of ability to leverage investments and convert them into adaptation
   actions. The cost of inaction on climate adaptation is estimated to be around US$600 million, and it is projected to
   more than double to US$1.3 billion by 20503. Changes in precipitation patterns caused by climate change is particularly
   affecting agriculture, water resources, forestry, human health, energy, and infrastructure, leading to a significant
   decrease in agricultural productivity and diminishing of Moldova’s forests.
2. Following EU open negotiations (November 2023) and started accession talks with Moldova (June 2024), strong
   reform momentum and growth-enhancing, climate-resilient investments are needed to foster long-term,
   sustainable development and convergence toward EU income levels. Granted in 2022 the European Union (EU)
   Candidate Status and freshly started accession negotiations with Moldova represent a significant milestone that will
   serve as a catalyst for aligning all sectors, including environment and natural resources, with EU requirements, building
   on the present framework of harmonization through the EU-Moldova Association Agreement4. The Agreement
   recognizes the importance of the EU integration process as a framework for the country’s modernization through
   alignment to the EU norms and standards in all fields, as these are considered amongst best international practices.

    1Moldova’s agriculture sector vulnerability to climate change is not highly regionalized, but the Southern and South-Eastern regions are the most prone to drought

    and heat stress (World Bank, 2014)
    2Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative, 2020. Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative // University of Notre Dame (nd.edu)
    3
     World Bank. 2016. Republic of Moldova – Moldova Climate Adaptation Investment Planning Technical Assistance. Report No: ACS18562.
    4The Association Agreement was signed on May 14, 2017.




                                                                                                                                                                Page 2
         The World Bank
         Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    While pre-accession support will offer Moldova outstanding opportunities for aligning these and all other sectors
    development processes and institutional organization, the country must undergo profound legislative and institutional
    changes to adapt legislation, implementation, and enforcement to EU requirements.
3. The project is part of the of the GEF – 8 Clean and Healthy Ocean Integrated Program (CHOIP). The GEF-8 CHOIP
   targets nitrogen, phosphorus, and organic matter released by agri-food (crops, livestock, poultry and aquaculture) and
   industrial and municipal systems, as nutrient pollutants generated by these sectors are the primary agents causing
   harmful algal blooms (HAB) and eutrophication that leads to hypoxia. The overall goal of the CHO-IP, to which the RE-
   MAP project contributes, is to address marine hypoxic zones by curbing coastal pollution from agriculture, industrial
   and municipal sources through policy and regulatory measures and infrastructure investments combined with nature-
   based solutions. The CHOIP consists of 15 Child Projects, 1 Global Coordination Project (GCP) and 14 Country Projects
   (CP) spanning Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Middle East (Maldives, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Venezuela,
   Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Panama, St. Kitts and Nevis, Grenada, Jordan, Moldova, Peru, Madagascar), which
   altogether are included within 9 LMEs5.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. The Black Sea is vulnerable to pressure from land-based pollution influencing its catchment area that causes the
   degradation of marine and estuary ecosystems through eutrophication. The Dniester River flows to the Black Sea, it
   pollutes the Sea with nutrient pollutants and these nutrients are the main contributor to the eutrophication of the
   sea. Nutrients from agriculture drainage to the water body are estimated to be 80 percent of total nutrients
   discharged. Annual economic losses for the Black Sea due to environmental problems, particularly in the fisheries and
   tourism industries, were estimated to be approximately US$500 million11.
5. Moldova’s landscapes influence its hydrographic network of more than 3,000 rivers and small rivulets, with two
   main high transboundary rivers (Dniester and Prut), while smaller rivulets are gradually dying. Dniester River Basin
   covers more than 70,000 km2 with an area of the basin within Moldova of 19,070 km², which constitutes 57 percent
   of its territory. Its waters are affected by pollution and altered hydrologic regime, including environmental and
   economic challenges posed by the Dniester Hydroenergetic Complex (DHC) in Ukraine. Although agriculture
   dominates, wetland remnants (concentrated mainly along Dniester’s mouth section and within its tributaries) and
   riverbank forests represent an important feature of the river basin landscapes. Due to a combined complex-factors
   over the last decades, the Dniester River basin has encountered a dramatical decrease in wetland areas and in natural
   forest composition, all associated with sharp reduction in the quality and quantity of fish stock and changes in
   ecosystem patterns6.
6. The Dniester River Basin faces pressing environmental challenges. The Dniester River basin is crucial for Moldova
   and its economic development but only 30 percent of its waters originating within Moldova's network of tributaries,
   including contributions from the Transnistrian region. The river serves as the primary source of drinking water for
   Moldova and for a significant portion of Ukraine. It also plays a pivotal role in sustaining Moldova's substantial
   agricultural sector, accounting for 10 percent of its GDP. However, the Dniester Basin faces pressing environmental
   challenges that have far-reaching implications for both Moldova and Ukraine7. Within this basin, a staggering 94
   percent of water bodies are polluted and have been assessed being at risk of "not achieving good ecological status"



    5 Ibid.
    6 Dniester Hydro Power Complex Social and Environmental Impact Study: Non-technical summary / Petru Bacal, Daniela Burduja, Olga Cazanteva [et al.]; project

    coordinator: Nadejda Chilaru; Ministry of Environment, United Nations Development Program in Moldova (PNUD). – Chişinău: S. n., 2022 (Bons Offices). – 34 p.
    7 World Bank. Blueing the Black Sea: Turning the Tide of Pollution Volume 2: Country Marine Pollution Diagnostics. 02BackgroundPaperBBSEAUAMarch6.pdf

    (worldbank.org)


                                                                                                                                                          Page 3
        The World Bank
        Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    according to EU standards, with none classified as "no risk" 8. The most severely impacted are the inland Dniester's
    network of streams, including the many tributaries on the brink of drying up and requiring urgent revitalization efforts.
    Without immediate actions, Moldova will face increased costs to maintaining safe water quality, thus hindering
    development.
7. Nutrient pollution coming into Dniester River represents one of the most critical environmental issues, leading to
   eutrophication, hypoxia, acidification, and toxicity in the Black Sea. This problem has complex root causes, primarily
   arising from: (a) the discharge of household and urban wastewater and stormwater directly into natural waterways,
   ponds, and, eventually, the Dniester River and Black Sea; (b) disturbances in upstream ecosystems that permit
   discharges from the agricultural sector, resulting in downstream nutrient pollution from the use of mineral fertilizers
   and animal waste; and (c) inadequate treatment or the complete lack thereof in the discharge of industrial and power
   sector effluents into the river. The whole area segment from Soroca district in the middle sector of the Dniester River
   up to its mouth, as well as its inner system of smaller streams (e.g., Răut, Botna, Ichel, Bâc, etc.), are considered highly
   vulnerable to nitrogen pollution.
8. One of significant sources of nitrogen emissions in the north-west part of the Black Sea represents the discharged
   waters from the Dniester River basin. It is recognized that addressing nutrient pollution from point and diffuse
   sources will help mitigate eutrophication, which in turn has the potential to create huge impacts on GHG emissions.
   The Dniester River has an average downstream flow rate of 310 m³/s with the volume of annual runoff being at 10.2
   km³. Overall, it is recognized that nutrient run-off in the river basin is caused mainly by: (i) very low coverage and poor
   status of forest vegetation; (ii) environmentally unsustainable crop and soil management practices; and (iii) water
   discharges from wastewater treatment facilities9; (iv) degradation and over-grazing of pastureland which contribute
   to soil degradation and erosion; (v) inappropriate management, storage and disposal of animal manure, including
   dumping of manure in household backyards and riverbanks along with the poor solid waste management and
   existence of many non-licensed dumpsites in rural areas; and (vi) conversion and mismanagement of wetlands10.
9. Water quality and sources of nutrient pollution of Dniester River remain dim. Overall, the water of the Dniester River
   belongs to the II and III quality classes. At the same time, almost all its tributaries have quality class V, which indicates
   that they are very polluted11. Although there was an improvement in water quality over the last decades, mainly due
   to the decrease in economic activities, the water quality remains a serious problem and further deterioration is
   expected, which is related to nitrogen and phosphorus compounds and the microbiological and chemical status12.
10. Moldova’s agriculture contributes significantly to nutrient emissions, accounting for about 90 percent of its
    total discharge into Dniester River Basin13. Agricultural lands of the Dniester River Basin occupy 76 percent of the
    total area and half of them are used as arable land (51 percent), mainly for cereals and technical crops. Only 9 percent
    of the Dniester River Basin’s territory is covered by forests, but there is an advancement of forest-type vegetation
    over abandoned lands, including active penetration of exotics and weeds. Due to this and because agriculture is often
    undertaken on hilly land with poor soil conservation techniques, erosion is significant resulting in some of the


    8
      OECD. (2020). Developing a Water Policy Outlook for Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine. Developing a Water Policy Outlook for Georgia, the Republic
    of Moldova and Ukraine | OECD Studies on Water | OECD iLibrary (oecd-ilibrary.org)
    9 The existing wastewater treatment plants in cities continue to decrease efficiency or are out of order. Secondly, discharges of insufficiently purified or

    untreated water have a greater weight in rural areas, where sewage networks are practically absent, animal farms and households constituting numerous
    sources of pollution
    10 Impacts of the rivers on the Black Sea ecosystem. Bucuresti, CD Press. 2021. BSB319_ANEMONE_-_Impact-of-the-rivers-on-Black-Sea-ecosystem_EN.pdf

    (blacksea-cbc.net)
    11 Republic of Moldova: State of the Environment report 2015-2018.
    12 Impacts of the rivers on the Black Sea ecosystem. Bucuresti, CD Press. 2021. BSB319_ANEMONE_-_Impact-of-the-rivers-on-Black-Sea-ecosystem_EN.pdf

    (blacksea-cbc.net)
    13 World Bank. Agriculture Pollution Control Project. 2004. 277460MD.pdf (worldbank.org)




                                                                                                                                                             Page 4
        The World Bank
        Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    topsoil being carried by the river system into the estuary. Such land use and intensive agriculture practice
    generate an increased diffuse nutrient river pollution.
11. Unsustainable land management practices in the country contribute to increased nitrogen emissions. It is estimated
    that about 43 percent of Moldova’s agricultural land is affected to some degree by soil erosion, of which 6.4 percent
    is considered highly eroded. The area of the eroded soil has increased over the last 40 years by 283.4 thousand ha,
    advancing by 7086 ha annually, causing a damage to the national economy estimated at about 3.1 billion lei (about
    US$155 million)14. Annual soil loss rates vary from 5 - 10 t/ha to over 30 t/ha for slightly eroded and severely eroded
    lands, respectively15. At national level, humus losses in agricultural soils annually generate circa 1.8-2.0 million tons
    of CO2 emissions16.
12. Forest ecosystems have been negatively affected by poor management (coppicing or intensive treatments) and
    abusive practices (including selective illegal logging and unauthorized grazing), currently affected more and more
    by climate changes17. The country has an insignificant forest vegetation cover (13.8 percent of its territory) and forest
    ecosystems (nearly 11 percent of its territory), while the necessary cover to meet livelihood needs and cope with
    climate change is several times higher (25-30 percent of its territory). At least 60 percent of Moldova’s forests are of
    coppice origin (meaning higher vulnerability to climate change). More than 120 thousand ha of state-owned forests
    (40 percent of Moldsilva’s forests18) are at some level degraded, and their compositional/structural shape is
    inappropriate to site conditions. Community-owned forests are even in worse condition, requiring urgent
    reconstruction/improvement, while many communities intend to create even more forest plantations. All this reduces
    their role in biodiversity and soil conservation, affecting their resilience to climate change, thus requiring urgent
    reconstruction/rehabilitation measures. In addition, about 1/3 of forestlands are covered by exotic species (mainly
    black locust, almost naturalized) introduced to meet communities’ livelihoods and protect soils/lands; however, their
    management faces challenges, thus requiring site adjustment and innovative approach. The current low levels of
    forest coverage, advanced status of forest degradation and poor forest management contribute to increased nutrient
    run-off in the river basin.
13. Pastureland degradation has dramatically increased over the last 2-3 decades, mostly because of very poor
    management (non-environmentally friendly and abusive grazing), leading to a stable decrease in their productivity.
    The total area of pastures in the country is nearly 10 percent of its territory, while in the Diester River basin it
    constitutes about 12-14 percent of its total area19. Generally, pastures (former steppes and meadows or wetlands)
    are mostly degraded, with poor grass cover and low biological productivity (estimated only at 20-50 percent of its
    potential) and cannot meet the growing demands of the developing livestock sector. Almost all pastures in the country
    are public property (owned and managed by local public authorities). Pastures are subject to unauthorized and, most
    often, uncontrolled grazing that has an increased negative impact on their quality and biodiversity, though there is
    dedicated legal frame clearly regulating grazing and mowing20 but largely unenforced. Taking into account that a
    diversified forest vegetation is naturally present in pastures and their continued existence is desired to a certain level,
    a silvopastoral approach to improve their management is urgently needed.


    14 State Environmental Protection Inspectorate. Annual Report. 2023
    15 Sutton, W. et al. 2008. Integrating Environment into Agriculture and Forestry: Progress and Prospects in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The World Bank,

    Washington DC.
    16
      Ibid.
    17 World Bank. Republic of Moldova: Forestry Policy Note. 2015
    18 Majority of and best forests in the country are managed by Agency Moldsilva (84 percent of all forest lands), which is the central authority for forestry and

    hunting, a subdivision of the Ministry of Environment.
    19 Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Moldova, editions 2002-2023 (https://statistica.gov.md/en/statistical-yearbook-of-the-republic-of-moldova-2023-

    9877_59482.html).
    20 Regulations on grazing and mowing (GD 667 from 23.07.2010)




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 5
        The World Bank
        Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


14. During the last century most of the wetland areas in the country, including in Dniester River Basin, have been dried
    out for agriculture, now they are highly fragmented, and their current condition is only worsening due to multiple
    factors. In the past, Moldova boasted with large areas of land covered with various types of interconnected wetlands
    (rivers, lakes, marshes), especially in the lower part of its two main rivers, all very rich in species and habitat diversity.
    During the Soviet era, many areas of wetlands became subject to extensive agriculture, being destroyed by human
    activity and converted to agriculture. Nowadays, Dniester River harbors two out of three wetlands of international
    importance, being included in the list of Ramsar Convention: (a) “The Lower Dniester” with an area of about 60,638
    ha and located downstream; and (b) „Unguri–Holoşniţa” covering an area of 15,553 ha and located in the middle
    portion of the river21. Wetland remnants outside Ramsar sites are small and scattered all over the basin, persisted
    mainly along rivers or other water bodies (lakes, ponds), most of them are abusively used for grazing and, are on the
    brink to extinction as wetland-type ecosystems. Generally, wetlands are highly underestimated in the country’s
    conservation agenda, which implies a special wetland conservation program to save the last remnants of once-large
    delta type wetlands22. Local people have traditionally gained significant benefits from wetlands (especially water, fish,
    fodder, leisure), but due to continuous degradation and loss in wetlands these benefits are shrinking.
15. Landscape restoration as a response to ecosystem degradation (including of forest, pasture and water/wetland
    ecosystems) is on the European Union (EU) agenda and Moldova must take immediate steps to maximize its
    nutrient removals in the Dniester River and the Black Sea. The EU Nature restoration law requires member states to
    restore 20 percent of degraded EU land and sea ecosystems by 2030 and restore all ecosystems by 2050. Moldova, in
    accession negotiation, should respond to this law. The country is now shaping up its eco-restoration vision to remove
    excess nutrients and restore the agricultural ecosystem balance in the Dniester River basin. This is also in line with the
    UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration26 that aims to prevent, halt, and reverse the degradation of ecosystems on every
    continent and in every ocean.
16. The current institutional capacity at national and local levels to address land degradation and environmental
    pollution issues remains limited. The MoE and its main bodies (e.g., Environmental Agency, Environmental Protection
    Inspectorate, AAM, Moldsilva, and State Hydrometeorological Service) are currently undergoing reforms. These
    institutions face challenges due to weak institutional frameworks and limited human capacities. I The MOE lack
    specialized bodies/structures or dedicated personnel. Wetlands are one of the examples that have largely been
    underestimated and neglected, which contributed to their gradual degradation.
17. While authorities continue to invest in harmonizing the national legislation to the EU legislation, implementation
    and law enforcement remain challenging and require due attention. Ongoing transformation processes seem to lack
    desired implementation effectiveness and need to pay more attention to the groundwork. Sub-governmental level
    institutions need careful transformations by considering existing relationships with community-level audiences and
    established social-economic traditions at local level. Given the availability of more financial inputs (loans and grants)
    from the EU under current negotiation process, Moldova can face additional challenges of institutional incapacity to
    absorb and efficiently use such financial resources. Putting in place sectoral reform is more than just building policy.
    An example is the forestry sector, where the recently adopted Forest Law23 will have to be followed by an ample
    implementation requiring both optimized institutional structure and sustainable ecosystem management in place. All
    that will necessitate a balanced approach toward applying NBS and ensuing benefits for stakeholders, especially local
    communities.


    21A. Tarita, s.a. Zonele umede (naturale si construite) importante pentru Republica Moldova (Wetland areas of the Republic of Moldova). 279-284_12.pdf

    (idsi.md)
    22 A. Lozan (2021). Report: current state and gaps implementation of the legislation on protected areas in the Republic of Moldova, including recommendations

    for improving the legal framework and conservation practices. Chisinau.
    23 https://mediu.gov.md/ro/content/4727




                                                                                                                                                             Page 6
        The World Bank
        Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
18. The Project Development Objective is to increase the area under sustainable landscape management practices24 in
    targeted areas within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova.
  Key Results
19. The following are the indicators to measure the achievement of the PDO and the project’s key results.
    (a) Area of land under sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin focused on nutrient
        pollution prevention (Hectare)
    (b) People benefitting from selected restoration and/or sustainable management practices within the Dniester River
        Basin (sex disaggregated) (Number)

  D. Project Description
20. The proposed project follows the basic principles and requirements specified in the GEF CHOIP and seeks to
    confront the issue of land-based nutrient pollution by enhancing adaptive capacity for upstream ecosystem
    restoration. Employing an integrated approach, the project will focus on restoring and sustainably managing natural
    resources through NBS. It will enhance capacity through institutional strengthening, address policy gaps in pollution
    management, forest, and watershed management, provide training and equipment, and invest in landscape
    restoration in selected areas, involving local communities and private sector, to fostering healthier freshwater
    ecosystems.
21. The target project area includes only the right side of the Dniester River. All administrative districts in the western
    Moldova bordering Dniester’s hydrological network are considered for project activities as the selected sites for both
    forest/wetland improvement and agroforestry/silvopasture promotion are scattered across the whole basin ranging
    from the northern districts (Ocnita, Donduseni, Drochia, Soroca) and central districts (Floresti, Soldanesti, Rezina,
    Telenesti, Orhei, Criuleni, Ialoveni, Anenii-Noi, Dubasari) to southern districts (Causeni and Stefan Voda).
22. The project activities will aid to prevent marine pollution through enhanced adaptive capacity for river basin
    ecosystem restoration (at landscape level), all following the EU directives and the Dniester River Agreement
    between Moldova and Ukraine. The project’s design consists of three components: (i) Component 1: Institutional
    Capacity Development and Community Engagement; (ii) Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed
    Management; and (iii) Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Communication.
23. As a member of the CHO IP, the Moldova RE-MAP will also contribute to a set of standard activities (e.g., inter alia,
    research and analytical studies/ assessments, capacity building, etc.) that will link with activities at the regional and
    global levels, via the Global Coordination Project (GCP), providing greater connectivity and networking between the
    Program’s Child Projects, and enhanced opportunities for awareness raising and knowledge exchange (particularly
    technical knowledge), stakeholder dialogue and innovation at scale. Furthermore, participation in the Program offers
    Moldova RE-MAP the opportunity to access additional targeted technical capacity not available to the project alone,
    to enhance achievement of project results, such as support through the GCP to guidance on improving financing for
    investments that include measures to address nutrient pollution and marine hypoxia and technical capacity on


    24 Landscape management practices refer to nature-based solutions (NBS) with a focus on nutrient pollution prevention, promoted or introduced by the project.

    NBS are effective and adaptive interventions to protect, manage, and/or restore natural or modified systems, including coastlines, cities, watersheds, and rivers.
    NBS can address multiple sustainable development goals, such as climate and disaster-risk resilience; economic and social prosperity; water security; and health
    and food security in a cost-effective manner.


                                                                                                                                                                 Page 7
       The World Bank
       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    monitoring and tracking of nutrient pollution, hypoxia, and coastal health to promote science-based strategic and
    adaptive management.
    Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community Engagement
24. This component aims at improving the enabling conditions for strengthening community resilience, increasing the size
    of restored ecosystems and strengthening pollution management in the Dniester River basin. The component will
    focus on the following core interventions: improving policy environment, institutional capacity development, system
    modernization, spurring communities’ economic benefits and supporting government’s reform of the forest
    governance including the effective implementation of the new Forest Law.
    Subcomponent 1.1: Policy Harmonization and Capacity Development. This component will focus on developing and
    harmonizing policy framework and enforcement mechanisms for effective nutrient pollution prevention in Dniester
    River Basin through NBS. The project will finance analysis and revisions of existing policy, legal, frameworks for marine
    pollution management, forest and wetland restoration, afforestation/reforestation, ecological reconstruction, and
    watershed management to help align these with EU and international obligations including NDC commitments. This
    sub-component will also finance improving institutional capacity with better technology, system development and
    staff skills related to Marine Pollution Management, NBS, Landscape Restoration, Watershed Management,
    Forest/Wetland Conservation, etc. This could include purchasing of equipment, developing training materials,
    organizing study tours (for mayors and other government officials), hiring of experts for system development,
    feasibility studies for modernization etc.
25. Subcomponent 1.2: Community Benefits and Engagement. It supports local communities (in particular women and
    under privileged communities) in implementing restoration activities that aim at improving marine pollution
    management through NBS in the Dniester River Basin. Community engagement includes involvement in the design of
    the project through multi-stakeholder engagement and implementation of specific river restoration activities as paid
    seasonal workers or volunteers, including tree planting, wetland revitalization, habitat restoration, disturbance
    control, and clean-up efforts. Selected communities will be also provided material support to change their agricultural
    practices, such as reducing the use of chemical fertilizers. The communities will benefit economically from increased
    agroforestry products, and resilient and sustainable food production. The project will also improve the livelihoods of
    the communities by increasing the supply of food, water, timber, and biomedicines. They will also benefit from paid
    labor work in the restoration activities of the project. The target communities will be selected based on the set of
    criteria that will be developed. The set of criteria development and the procedures of selection will be elaborated in
    the Project Operations Manual (POM). The implementation of the Community Engagement will be handled by service
    providers to support the communities with the sylvopastoral planning activities and agricultural practices, who will be
    recruited based on competitive procurement process.
26. Subcomponent 1.3: Supporting the establishment of the Centre of Excellence for Climate Resilience and NBS. A
    Climate Resilience Center of Excellence (CiRCE) will be established in the State University of Moldova to serve as a hub
    for start-ups and national expertise, and to bring together top talent and specialized knowledge in nature restoration,
    wetland management, climate resilience, and green economy in general. The services of CiRCE could include the
    followings: (i) Startup Acceleration: the Centre will have intensive mentorship and training program to support early-
    stage startups in the development of successful high-growth climate smart businesses through mentorship, education,
    networking, and partnerships, (ii) Capacity and Workforce Development: providing training and credit schemes for
    individuals involved in nature restoration, climate resilience activities or interested in pursuing careers in the green
    industry, (iii) Technical Guidance and Standards Development: this includes the development and application of
    standards in nature restoration, and climate smart products. (iv) Technical and Research-based support for Innovation
    and Sustainability.


                                                                                                                        Page 8
       The World Bank
       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


27. The establishment of CiRCE may require: (i) preparation of a business plan which would envision financial sustainability
    of the center in two years of its operation and include clear and measurable goals and metrics, governance structure,
    leveraging partnership and collaboration, revenue schemes, financial flows, talent management, identified services
    and delivery modalities, etc.; (ii) provision of equipment and machinery needed for business development for start-
    ups, training program and extension services of CiRCE; (iv) preparation of training materials and mentorship programs;
    and (v) technical support for the first two years of operations.
28. The establishment of CiRCE will be supported by both RE-MAP project and Moldova Higher Education Project
    (P167990) and will be led by the MoE together with the Ministry of Education. However, the support of RE-MAP
    project in the CiRCE will be limited to providing technical assistance once the center is established, including through
    development of qualifying training materials, support to the setup of the governance structure and management
    system, and support for the selection of the first two batches of trainees.

    Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management
29. This component aims at enhancing water quality through healthier and functionally restored ecosystems that will
    contribute to creating more resilient communities. It has three interconnected subcomponents. The first
    subcomponent focuses on improving conditions of forest ecosystems, involving restoring degraded forest landscapes
    to a healthier state using different approaches. The second subcomponent aims at enhancing river/rivulet networks
    that link different habitats, primarily wetland remnants and smaller rivers. The third subcomponent will support
    silvopastoral forest planning (SPMP) process by involving three livelihood-sensitive natural resources for local
    communities (pasture, forest, water), thus raising it to the level of Landscape Restoration Planning. Proposed NBS
    methods will range from rehabilitation and revegetation to disturbance control techniques or ecological
    reconstruction that envisage the interlinked key natural components (forests, wetlands, meadows/pastures, and
    water bodies) at macro-ecosystemic level.
30. Subcomponent 2.1: Improved forest ecosystem condition. The expected outcome from this subcomponent is the
    removal of different pollutants (nutrients, sediment, coliforms, pesticides, heavy metals) from agricultural landscapes
    through restored forest ecosystems’ functionality within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova. The proposed activities
    will be conducted on publicly owned land managed either by the state (Moldsilva’s entities) or non-state owners
    (LPAs), and none of them should be in a protected area (PA). They have forest management plans (active or under re-
    management cycle) and are fully aligned with provisions set in the Land Code and Forest Code. All landowners must
    ensure the sustainability of the investment undertaken with assistance from the project by taking a range of
    appropriate measures for a successful implementation. The project will engage the private sector, especially the wine
    industry, on the implementation of restoring their degraded agroforestry areas. In the process of the project
    preparation a couple of wine industries have committed to be part of these activities. In addition, a cement factory
    has committed to participate in restoring degraded community owned land.
31. For this subcomponent, the project will support only silvicultural interventions that respect NBS principles, such as (i)
    reforestation by filling operations especially in torrent protection forests along water/wetland bodies, (ii) forest
    rehabilitation in forests or shelterbelts (hygienic/sanitary operations for improved functionality), (iii) ecological
    reconstruction through species substitution (stands/sites that lost viability because of invaded exotic or inappropriate
    species, thus promoting suitable native species/stands), and (iv) afforestation of newly forests or shelterbelts
    (especially in critically areas).
32. Subcomponent 2.2: Riverbed and Wetland Protection. This sub-component aims at protecting riverbed landscapes
    that harbor aquatic and wetland habitats (permanent or temporarily flooded) in selected tributaries along Dniester
    River. All lands under this subcomponent are public-owned properties either managed by communities


                                                                                                                         Page 9
       The World Bank
       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    (village/commune or district levels) or by the state (AAM or Moldsilva). The lands for the project will be selected based
    on their (i) significance for reducing nutrient pollution from nearby agricultural fields, (ii) role in landscape functionality
    and connectivity, and (iii) sustainability of investments.
33. Specific project activities to restore degraded wetlands include: (a) Identification of project sites; (b) delineation of
    boundaries of ‘wetland-type’ habitats through consultations (to ensure future conservation measures including
    establishing protection vegetation buffer zones along or around wetlands through planting/replanting, enhancing
    ecological corridors); (c) design of the wetland to be restored or revegetated, considering the habitat requirements of
    the targeted biodiversity; (d) revision of the water supply and sources of pollution; (e) ecological reconstruction,
    including cleaning-up works and species repopulation; (f) monitoring of the biodiversity recovery in the restored
    ecosystems, and (g) measuring of the wetlands’ restoration, including carbon sequestration.
34. Subcomponent 2.3: Promoting silvopastoral agroforestry systems. This sub-component targets the improvement of
    community-owned lands through sustainable agroforestry systems (integrated tree/shrub with crops) and
    silvopastoral practices (combining trees/shrubs with grazing). The sub-component includes demonstration of
    integrated nutrient management and implementation of landscape restoration strategies focusing on
    agroforestry/silvopastoral practices and other innovative NBS for nutrient pollution prevention. Communities for
    SPMP process will be selected based on criteria that meet specific conditions such as (i) close location to river/rivulet
    landscape (districts that are part of the Dniester River basin), (ii) at least 10-15 percent of pastureland is covered by
    natural or spontaneous forest vegetation, (iii) the property has at least 50 ha in size, (iv) participation through decision-
    taking process (proved by the decision of LPA’s local councils), and (v) ensuring subsequent actions for the
    implementation of produced planning documents.
35. Silvopastoral Management Planning (SPMP) will be undertaken with a stakeholder engagement in areas where there
    is not any management plan. The project will also support the implementation of selected SPMP in certain areas as a
    pilot program focusing on restoring degraded ecosystems. The pilot ecological reconstruction could include
    revegetation, planting trees, wetland restoration, enhancing riverbeds and supporting the communities depending on
    the nature of the SPMP and the interest of the communities.
    Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring and Communication
36. This component will finance the operating costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under the National Office
    for Environmental Project Implementation (NOEPI), subordinated directly to the MoE, to carry out project
    management functions. Support will be provided for procurement, financial management (FM), management of
    environmental and social risks, coordination, and communication activities. It will also support the reporting and
    monitoring and evaluation (M&E) functions. The communication activities will also focus on promoting interactions
    through policy consultation, dissemination of information, and outreach activities on marine pollution management
    through applying NBS in the Dniester River Basin. This component will also cover surveys and evaluations at the mid-
    term review (MTR) to assess the project's progress and effectiveness and at project closure to assess the efficiency
    and effectiveness of the project's implementation process and to provide valuable insights by sharing experiences,
    best practices, and lessons learned.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                             Page 10
       The World Bank
       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


 Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


37. The World Bank OP 7.50 is applicable because project interventions involve tributaries of the Dniester River shared
    by Moldova and Ukraine. Project financed activities are limited to the rehabilitation of wetlands and will not adversely
    affect the quantity or quality of water flows to other riparian area s. Accordingly, the Regional Vice President approved
    an exception to the notification requirement according to paragraph 7 (a) of the Policy on November 13, 2024.

38. The project will generate significantly positive environmetal effects on the watershed level, with various measures
    intended upstream in order to reduce marine pollution carried downstream by the Dniester River. No significant
    environmental risks are expected neither at the construction or operation stages of the project. The envisaged
    environmental and social risks are considered moderate, which are related to minor civil works for wetland
    restoration, rehabilitation of small rivers beds and afforestation/ reforestation activities. While the proposed project
    will take the NBS approach, no significant civil works are anticipated. The areas of intervention will not interfere with
    special conservation zones as the Ramsar sites. Mitigation measures will be implemented to address environmental
    risks associated with small civil works as described above. Social risks are also considered moderate. Project
    interventions are expected to take place on public land (state or community) and no land acquisition and physical and
    economic resettlement are anticipared. Any involuntary restrictions to land use or natural resources (for example,
    site-specific temporary access restrictions at reforestation sites or civil work site) will be appropriately avoided,
    minimized and managed through close engagement with key stakeholders. Labor and working conditions and OHS
    and community health and safety risks will be managed through appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures,
    including appropriate use of PPE (such as for forest/wetland restoration activities and silvopastoral planning).
39. Social tensions and exclusion risks may arise from site or beneficiaries selection processes, if the criteria are not
    sufficiently consulted and disseminated with a wide range of stakeholders and beneficiaries in local areas, including
    those who are more likely to be poor, women and youth who are considered disadvantaged in terms of engagement
    and access to economic opportunities in the agricultural sector. To address such risks, the project design includes
    activities to strengthen community capacity for conservation and offer opportunities for stakeholder engagement and
    employment. The PIU will prepare appropriare E&S instruments, which will guide risk screening and application of
    mitigation measures at the sub-project level under the project. Once the areas of intervention are identified, a
    thorough screening of potential risks will be undertaken and relevant mitigation measures will be put in place and
    monitored for all project interventions.
40. Key stakeholders are being consulted since the concept stage of the proposed project in an inclusive manner, which
    include local community representatives, NGOs, research institutes and central and local government entities
    resonsible for environment, forest, water resource management. Their input has informed the project design, which
    includes the type of intervention, site selection, identification of potential E&S risks and impacts and their mitigations
    and implementation arrangements. From September 2 to 13, the client, together with the Bank team, met with
    representatives of Moldsilva (both headquarter and local units), AAM, districts and villages within the Dniester River
    Basin (in the north, central and southern Moldova), NGOs (Biotica, Arboretum.md, 100 Frontiers), and ICAS. A broader


                                                                                                                        Page 11
       The World Bank
       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    public consultations with local community representatives have been conducted by the client by appraisal (November
    2024).
41. The draft SEP has been prepared by the client and will be disclosed before appraisal. The draft ESCP prepared by the
    client and the Bank team will be also disclosed before appraisal. Considering the moderate E&S risks of the proposed
    project, a simplified ESMF proportionate to such risks will be prepared and implemented during the project
    implementation, which include a section on the Labour Management Procedures (LMP).

 E. Implementation
 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
42. The Project will be implemented by the National Office for Environmental Projects Implementation (NOEPI),
    subordinated directly to the MoE. The NOEPI is a public institution under the MoE that was created by a government
    decision in 2018 and is managed and supervised by the Supervisory Committee chaired by the Minister of
    Environment. The institution has several permanent and coopted staff covering a vast range of areas of interest for
    the MoE and is dedicated to the protection and improvement of the environment, with a mission to safeguard natural
    ecosystems, mitigate the impacts of climate change, and ensure the sustainable management of natural resources. It
    also administers the National Environmental Fund (NEF), a financial body established within the state budget line and
    intended exclusively for financing projects in environmental protection, climate change and sustainable management
    of natural resources.
43. The overall responsibility for project management and coordination will rest with the NOEPI under the MoE, where
    the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be housed. The PIU will handle fiduciary management, environmental and
    social risk management, contract management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and the supervision of project
    activities under Components 1 and 2. It will manage the project's Designated Account and will be responsible for
    reporting to the World Bank. The PIU will include a Project Coordinator as well as specialists in procurement, financial
    management (FM), M&E, and technical areas such as forestry, wetland, and silvopastoral practices, as well as
    environmental and social/gender specialists. The PIU will be set up within three months of the project effectiveness.
    The project will also deploy Service Providers (contractors) in the project target areas to support the implementation
    of activities under both components. The NOEPI will be entrusted with responsibilities for ensuring that GoM and
    World Bank procedures are followed in project implementation and report on project activities. The NOEPI will report
    directly to the Minister of Environment (or a designated representative).
44. Other key project partners. NOEPI will be supported by and work closely with three key partners: (i) Moldsilva, (ii)
    AMM, and (iii) ICAS, and will collaborate with other agencies during the implementation of certain specialized activities
    such as forest maintenance, SPMP, watershed management, etc. The project key technical partners (Moldsilva, ICAS,
    and AMM) will support the quality control and supervision of works/ services by the State Forest Enterprises and
    Service Providers contracted by the PIU. The State Forest Enterprises and Service Providers will work very closely with
    the local administration and communities. The technical monitoring of the impact on nutrient load will be supported
    by the SHS and SPI.
45. The project will also collaborate with local institutions (private/individual or farmer/peasant organizations) and civil
    society organizations (CSOs) or non-governmental organizations (NGOs). For instance, several key NGOs (Biotica,
    Arboretum platform, Moldova 100 Frontieres) have been already involved in small-scale restoration activities and
    their experience could be important for wetland and community-owned forestland restoration activities.
46. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to coordinate activities across ministries and agencies. Project
    oversight and accountability will be provided by the PSC which will include representatives from the following
    agencies: MOE, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture, Moldsilvia, and AAM. The PSC will also invite

                                                                                                                        Page 12
       The World Bank
       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    representatives from the local communities, NGOs, and other experts when/if needed for planning and
    communication of project activities. Chaired by the Minister (or a designated representative), the PSC is expected to
    (a) provide strategic guidance and oversight, (b) suggest improvements and recommendations in project operations
    and coordination, and (c) endorse the progress reports and annual work programs prepared by the PIU before
    submission to the World Bank, among other issues. The PSC will be set up during the first six months of project
    implementation and will meet at least once a year. Details of these arrangements will be provided in the Project
    Operations Manual.
47. Project Operations Manual (POM) will be developed to explain details of the processes and procedures, as well as
    roles and responsibilities of the institutions. The POM will include details on institutional and implementation
    arrangements, technical aspects of all components and activities, guidance related to M&E of the Results Framework,
    management of environmental and social risks, disbursements and FM aspects, internal arrangements relating to
    procurement and contract administration, supervision and reporting provisions related to the project between the
    PIU and other project partners. The POM will be approved by the Ministry of Environment and the World Bank.
48. As the project is part of the CHO IP, while having its own governance arrangements, the project will appoint a country
    focal point to represent the country on the Program Coordination Committee (CHO PCC), help with annual Program
    reporting, ensure coherence and support coordination between the GCP and the national country projects, as well as
    with the overall CHO IP.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Fisseha Tessema Abissa
   Senior Natural Resources Management Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Republic of Moldova
  Elena Matveeva
  Head, General Directorate for Public Sector Debt and External Assistance, Ministry of Finance
  elena.matveeva@mf.gov.md

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                     Page 13
     The World Bank
     Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


 Ministry of Environment
 Aliona Rusnac
 Secretary General
 aliona.rusnac@mediu.gov.md
 Petru Tataru
 Secretary General, GEF OFP
 petru.tataru@mediu.gov.md
 Elena Boboc
 Head of the Cabinet
 elena.boboc@mediu.gov.md

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Fisseha Tessema Abissa

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                      Inguna Dobraja                          13-Mar-2025




                                                                                             Page 14
