Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 09/15/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04467




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                 Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505562                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       Yemen I-WISE                2026

                     Operation Name            Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Yemen, Republic of        Yemen, Republic of                       MID EAST,NORTH              Water
                                                                                        AFRICA,AFG,PAK

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Food and Agriculture      Food and Agriculture Organization of     03-Nov-2025                 15-Jan-2026
                     Organization, United      the United Nation, United Nations
                     Nations                   Office for Project Services, United
                     Development               Nations Development Program
                     Programme, United



Public Disclosure
                     Nations Office for
                     Project Services,
                     United Nations
                     Development
                     Program

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     23-Oct-2025               150,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to is to strengthen climate resilient irrigation services and enhance access to
                     water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No



                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project Development Objective is to strengthen climate and water information management, improving irrigation
                     services delivery, and enhancing access to climate resilient water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.
                     Project Components and estimated Costs: Project components are designed to start achieving some results within the
                     available seed financing, while also being sufficiently flexible to easily absorb additional financing as these resources
                     become available to cover the full scope of the proposed Yemen Project. Depending on the availability of additional
                     resources for Project activities would mean doing more of the same, while introducing innovations on a pilot basis (Area
                     Based Approach) to maximize the project’s impact and improve sustainability. Project’s Components: Component 1:
                     Implementation and Scale-up of Climate and Water Information Management System (USD 20 Million equivalent). This
                     component aims to further strengthen the Climate and Water Information Management System, which will be
                     developed under SoP1. This includes investments in monitoring equipment and strengthening capacities for managing
                     the system in the two prioritized basins, Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajer, as well building capacities of relevant institutions
                     to scale up the system to additional basins. Component 2: Climate Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation
                     Services (USD 50 Million equivalent). This component will finance the planning and implementation of watershed
                     management plans and activities to strengthen irrigation services. This includes investments, as well as training and
                     capacity building for local institutions and beneficiaries. The watershed management planning, as well as the selection
                     and design of infrastructure investments, will build on the results of SoP1 and Component 1 of SoP2. Investments will be
                     realized in the two prioritized basins, the Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajer basins. Component 2 consists of two sub-
                     components: (i) watershed management, and (ii) irrigation improvement. Activities under both sub-components will be
                     accompanied by capacity building and training for local institutions and beneficiaries. This includes capacity building for
                     managing water resources (e.g. strengthening of basin committees), and for operating and maintaining new




Public Disclosure
                     infrastructure. It will also include technical assistance in soil and land management and in irrigation agriculture.
                     Component 3: Resilient Water Supply & Sanitation Systems (US$ 70 million equivalent): This component aims to
                     improve the access to resilient water supply and sanitation services in the selected basins with the following three sub-
                     components: Sub-component 3.1: Restoring Access to and Improving Quality of WSS Services; Sub-component 3.2:
                     Capacity building for urban water utilities; Sub-component 3.3: Improving hygiene and quality of water supply of critical
                     water and sanitation systems: Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project
                     Management (USD 10 million equivalent) This component aims to: (i) strengthen the institutional capacity of local
                     institutions to address climate challenges; (ii) support UN agencies and local partners in project implementation; and
                     (iii) oversee project administration, management, and monitoring and evaluation activities to ensure satisfactory project
                     implementation through the set-up of dedicated PMUs and the hiring of a third-party monitoring agency. The capacity-
                     building will focus on: (i) strengthening local water and irrigation institutions; (ii) training beneficiaries in land and water
                     management for climate-resilient irrigation; (iii) enhancing technical and managerial skills of management staff; and (iv)
                     developing the capacity of Water Basin Committees (WBCs), Water User Associations (WUAs), Agriculture Cooperatives
                     and service providers to ensure sustainability of investment and services. Opportunities for female participation in these
                     activities will be prioritized ` Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (USD 0) This
                     component is a zero-dollar Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) whereby the Bank could authorize the
                     reallocation of funds from other project components in case of unforeseen events such as a natural disaster, epidemic
                     or other emergency. This measure will be applied according to the procedures outlined in paragraph 12, Section III of
                     the IPF Policy. Disbursements under this component will be subject to the declaration of emergency or equivalent by
                     the Government, the international community, or the UN; submission of a request to the Bank for support for an
                     eligible emergency through the CERC, the preparation by the Recipient of an acceptable Emergency Action Plan for the



                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                          Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     use of CERC funds, and the Bank’s approval of such a Plan. The Bank would determine how to reallocate funds from
                     other components to address the emergency, in consultation with its implementing partners.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Yemen is characterized by a predominantly semi-arid climate with limited rainfall and high temperatures, especially in
                     its coastal and desert regions. Despite these challenging conditions, Yemen has rich biodiversity, shaped by its varied
                     topography, ranging from coastal plains and highlands to plateaus and deserts. The arable land constituting less than 3%
                     of the total area and forest cover below 2%. This project which will be implemented in several governorates in the FCV
                     Yemen, covers both urban and rural areas. Yemen’s location within an arid to semi-arid zone has made water scarcity a
                     persistent and critical constraint on the country’s social and economic development. Climate change is further
                     exacerbating these longstanding challenges, intensifying water scarcity and compounding the impacts of ongoing
                     conflict. Yemen is considered the most vulnerable country in the MENA region to climate change and ranks 27th globally
                     in terms of vulnerability. It is also the least prepared country in MENA to address and manage climate-related impacts.
                     Global climate models project a future for Yemen marked by rising temperatures and increased annual average
                     precipitation, with more frequent and intense rainfall events leading to flash floods, as well as prolonged dry periods.
                     The proposed project will be implemented over four years, from 2025 to 2029. Targeted water basins will be selected
                     using a prioritization framework that takes into account security, accessibility, local needs, institutional capacity, the
                     nature of proposed interventions, and cost-benefit considerations.

                     Given the significant needs in the water sector, the project will concentrate on essential water and food security



Public Disclosure
                     interventions within selected basins (Wadi Tuban Basin in Aden and Wadi Hajer Basin in Hadramout). These
                     interventions will be identified through extensive consultations with relevant stakeholders including line ministries and
                     local authorities. The final list of priority interventions will be determined during the project preparation phase, in close
                     collaboration with implementing agencies (UNDP, FAO and UNOPS), government technical counterparts, academic
                     water research institutions, local community organizations, private water providers, and other donors. This inclusive
                     and collaborative approach is designed to ensure effective coordination and the efficient, timely use of project
                     resources.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Under the proposed project, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nation Development Program (UNDP)
                     and United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) will be the grant recipients as well as the managing and
                     implementing entities on an exceptional basis. During the project preparation, the World Bank procurement and ESF
                     team will work together with the three UN agencies to discuss the lessons learnt from the previous and ongoing
                     operations and reflect them in the new design to avoid any fiduciary challenges and constraints.

                     The UN agencies have set up robust implementation arrangements and proved successful under the past and ongoing
                     operations funded by the World Bank (YFSRRP, YEHCP, and YIUSEP-I and II). For the implementation of activities, FAO,
                     UNDP and UNOPS will sign relevant partnership agreements with local partners: SFD / PWP, and UWS-PMUs, Research
                     Centers, LWSCs, the branches of NWRA and Agriculture Governorate Offices, Water Basin Committees, Water User
                     Association, Agriculture Cooperatives etc, based on terms and conditions acceptable to the World Bank. For this
                     proposed project, the UN agencies will further strengthen the capacity and provide a more implementation role for the
                     national and local implementing partners to deliver results on the ground. Since UN agencies will be relying on their

                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     existing PMUs that are already in place, the level of readiness for implementation is very high. it is mentionable that As
                     part of the ongoing YFSRRP, YIUSEP and YEHCP projects, a comprehensive capacity-building program has delivered 152
                     courses, totaling 579 training days for 2,870 trainees for the national and local implementing partners. Currently, a local
                     firm has been recruited to assess the capacity of key national and local institutions in Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajer
                     basins, with the final report expected during project preparation. This assessment will evaluate the institutions’
                     technical and institutional capacity to manage additional projects.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The environmental risk is assessed as substantial due to the project's support for several interventions that may
                     involve environmental risks. While the anticipated risks and impacts are generally site-specific, reversible, and of low
                     magnitude, they require appropriate mitigation measures to address them effectively. Notably, interventions under
                     Sub-component 3.1, "Restoring Access to and Improving Quality of Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) Services," will
                     involve restoring and expanding access to WSS services. These activities include the rehabilitation and construction of
                     medium- to large-scale WSS infrastructure, such as pipelines, networks, water treatment plants, wastewater
                     treatment plants (WWTPs), decentralized desalination plants, water wells, pumping and booster stations, and related
                     civil works. The environmental impacts of these activities, whether on new or existing sites, are expected to be site-
                     specific, limited, and manageable. Common environmental concerns include construction waste, wastewater, dust,



Public Disclosure
                     noise, traffic deviations, and occupational health and safety risks. Although no large-scale, significant, or irreversible
                     impacts are anticipated, some interventions may pose substantial risks, such as exposure to sewer gases during the
                     rehabilitation of sewer networks or WWTPs. Importantly, these interventions are expected to yield significant positive
                     outcomes for both people and the environment. They will play a crucial role in improving basic living conditions,
                     stimulating local economic activity, and enhancing Yemeni cities' resilience to climate change.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risks associated with the project are substantial. Key concerns include the potential exclusion of vulnerable
                     groups—such as women and persons with disabilities—and the elite capture of benefits, which could lead to social
                     tensions and conflict among beneficiaries or communities, particularly if selection criteria are not clearly understood
                     or implemented in a fair and transparent manner. Labor and working condition risks are also present, including the
                     possibility of poor working conditions for laborers involved in construction and maintenance, as well as the risk of
                     child labor. Occupational health and safety (OHS) issues may arise during project activities. There is an additional risk
                     of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), especially by external workers operating near
                     residential areas. Security risks may be heightened in areas with existing conflict or instability. Other significant risks
                     include challenges in stakeholder engagement, threats to community health and safety, and the potential loss of
                     productive land during terrace rehabilitation. The project may also require land acquisition for reservoirs, water
                     networks, dams, and related facilities, which could further impact local communities. Construction activities may
                     generate nuisances such as noise and vibration, affecting nearby residents. Competition over project benefits,
                     including employment opportunities, may induce social tensions and conflicts. Finally, weak implementation capacity
                     at the national and district levels could hinder effective management of these social risks. To address these risks, the


                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     project will develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines procedures for
                     managing environmental and social risks and impacts. Labor-related risks will be addressed through Labor
                     Management Procedures (LMP), while a Resettlement Framework (RF) may be prepared to guide potential land
                     acquisition, which will be managed primarily through government-owned lands. Specific risks related to Sexual
                     Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) and security will be managed through a SEA/SH Action Plan and
                     a Security Management Plan (SMP), respectively. Site-specific instruments will be developed prior to any subproject
                     intervention. All subprojects, including those under the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC), will be
                     screened using ESMF criteria, with site-specific assessments conducted as needed before activities commence. The
                     ESMF, RF, SEA/SH Action Plan, SMP, and LMP will be prepared and disclosed prior to the project’s effective date. The
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), ESMF, RF, and LMP will be consulted in an inclusive manner, in accordance with
                     the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant, as the proposed project will involve the construction and rehabilitation of small-medium
                      infrastructure . The interventions which will be supported might result in environmental and social risks and impacts
                      as they will involve physical interventions to be implemented in urban cities and rural areas. Although no significant
                      risks and adverse environmental impacts are anticipated; potential minor adverse impacts from works related to



Public Disclosure
                      earthworks, dust and air emissions, debris, and other solid waste generation and management, social inconveniences,
                      and community health and safety due to traffic increase, blocked streets, noise, dust, as well as workers health and
                      safety are expected. To address these risks, the project will develop an Environmental and Social Management
                      Framework (ESMF) that outlines procedures for managing environmental and social risks and impacts. Labor-related
                      risks will be addressed through Labor Management Procedures (LMP), while a Resettlement Framework (RF) may be
                      prepared to guide potential land acquisition, which will be managed primarily through government-owned lands.
                      Specific risks related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) and security will be managed
                      through a SEA/SH Action Plan and a Security Management Plan (SMP), respectively. Site-specific instruments will be
                      developed prior to any subproject intervention. All subprojects, including those under the Contingent Emergency
                      Response Component (CERC), will be screened using ESMF criteria, with site-specific assessments conducted as
                      needed before activities commence. The ESMF, RF, SEA/SH Action Plan, SMP, and LMP will be prepared and disclosed
                      prior to the implementation of project’s activities. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), ESMF, RF, and LMP will be
                      consulted in an inclusive manner, in accordance with the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The implementing partners—FAO, UNDP, and UNOPS—have prepared a joint Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP),
                      aligned with ESS10, to ensure meaningful, inclusive, and continuous engagement with stakeholders throughout the
                      project life cycle. During project preparation, the partners held stakeholder consultations from July 14 to August 13,
                      2025, engaging approximately 273 participants across Aden, Hadramout, Lahj, Abyan, Taiz, and other governorates.
                      Engagements included joint and agency-specific meetings with government institutions; implementing partners (SFD,
                      PWP, UWS-PMU); local authorities; technical experts; community-based organizations; Water User Associations

                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                      (WUAs); Irrigation Councils (ICs); Agricultural Cooperatives (ACs); and directly affected communities, including
                      women’s groups. The consultations introduced the project; gathered feedback on design and implementation;
                      identified potential risks; and promoted inclusive participation. The partners also delivered a detailed session on the
                      Grievance Mechanism (GM), covering its principles and commitments—such as zero tolerance for SEA/SH, ethical
                      conduct, and protection for all project participants—and outlining proactive SEA/SH risk-reduction measures,
                      including awareness campaigns, staff training, and risk assessments. Key takeaways emphasized the need for:
                      stronger water governance; inclusive beneficiary targeting (particularly for vulnerable households and women);
                      transparent and accessible grievance mechanisms; SEA/SH risk mitigation; enhanced environmental and social risk
                      management (including OHS and child labor); greater gender inclusion; capacity building for local institutions and
                      WUAs; and improved stakeholder coordination. Feedback has been incorporated into project design and the
                      preparation of Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) instruments.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      Based on the project’s activities and interventions, potential labor risks and working conditions are rated Substantial.
                      Anticipated risks include: inadequate working conditions for laborers engaged in construction and rehabilitation; child
                      labor; occupational health and safety (OHS) risks to workers and nearby communities; social tensions or conflict over
                      project benefits; and risks of sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH), particularly where there is
                      significant worker–community interaction. These risks will be addressed prior to commencement through the
                      development of Labor Management Procedures (LMP). The implementing partners—FAO, UNDP, and UNOPS—will
                      prepare LMPs, either jointly or separately, aligned with their respective interventions and activities. The measures
                      and actions in the ESCP will be reflected in the LMP(s), with clear timelines and assigned responsibilities. The LMP(s)



Public Disclosure
                      will be adopted before the start of project activities and implemented throughout implementation. All project
                      workers will sign a Code of Conduct (CoC) prior to undertaking any project-related activities.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The construction and rehabilitation interventions works might lead to increased use of raw materials and resources as
                      well as increased use of water and energy after the services are restored. Risks and impacts related to sourcing,
                      transporting, and using resources and materials. On the other hand, different activities under the project will result in
                      the release of non-hazardous and hazardous wastes and pollutants. The ES instruments will identify measures that
                      will be required to ensure proper collection, transportation, and disposal of wastes in a manner that will reduce GHG
                      emissions. It will also identify measures to reduce emissions from the use of fossil fuels for energy generation.
                      Furthermore, adequate measures will be identified as part of the site-specific instruments, including the provisions
                      for environmental and social risk mitigations in the procurement documents for contractors. The Bank’s
                      Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) will be used as well.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      Potential risks under ESS4 (Community Health and Safety) for the project include the possibility of Sexual Exploitation
                      and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) arising from the presence of laborers from outside the area and their
                      potential interactions with local communities, as well as broader risks to the health and safety of communities within
                      the project area. These risks will be addressed through the preparation and implementation of Environmental and
                      Social (E&S) instruments, such as Labor Management Procedures (LMP), SEA/SH action plans, an Environmental and


                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                      Social Management Framework (ESMF), and site-specific instruments like Contractor Environmental and Social
                      Management Plans (C-ESMPs). In addition, implementing partners will develop their own Security Management Plan
                      (SMP) to further mitigate these risks.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                               Relevant

                      Project activities may require land for small water tanks/dams or for installing water and sewage networks. In Yemen,
                      land is typically secured through government allocation or voluntary donation. To provide additional safeguards, a
                      Resettlement Framework (RF) will be prepared to guide any potential land acquisition. The RF will be adopted before
                      project activities commence and implemented throughout the project implementation period.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                   Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is not relevant at this stage of the project.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is not relevant at this stage of the project.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                        Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 is not relevant at this stage of the project.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant at this stage of the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                              TBD

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           No
                       Use of Borrower’s ES policy, legal and institutional framework is not considered under this project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       Use of Common Approach is not considered under this project.




                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                   Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     To manage the potential E&S risks under the project, the following instruments are considered to be prepared:

                     1- Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) which will include specific assessments and instruments required
                     to address the identified risks and impacts, with a timeframe ensuring that appropriate instruments are prepared prior
                     to any project activities and include mitigation measures and recommendations to maximize the benefits and
                     emphasize an inclusive approach.
                     2- Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared, disclosed, consulted upon, and cleared by the WB prior to
                     appraisal, as appropriate and proportionate to project-associated risks.
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared by the implementing partners, cleared and disclosed prior to
                     appraisal and/or before start of activities.
                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to outline the screening, categorization, assessment,
                     monitoring and reporting requirements as well as the capacity building requirements under the project.
                     - Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) action plan will be prepared by each implementing
                     partner and shall be approved prior to effectiveness date.
                     - Security Management Plan (SMP) will be prepared by each implementing partner and shall be approved prior to
                     effectiveness date.




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom               Title:         Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                 nabulohom@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed               Job Title:     Agriculture Specialist

                      Email:                 fahmed6@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Chris Fischer                         Job Title:     Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                 cfischer1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                 Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom, Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed, Chris Fischer

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:        Amer Abdulwahab Ali Al-Ghorbany

                     ADM Social Specialist:               Ibrahim Ismail Mohammed Basalamah




Public Disclosure




                    Sep 16, 2025                                                                                              Page 10 of 10
