Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project(P505562)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01130




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project(P505562)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Yemen, Republic of             P505562                      Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for
                                                            Sustainability and Efficiency Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH          01-Jul-2025                  08-Dec-2025                   Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Food and Agriculture         United Nations Office for
Financing (IPF)                Organization                 Project Services, United
                                                            Nations Development
                                                            Program

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen climate and water information management, improving irrigation
services delivery, and enhancing access to climate resilient water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           0.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                0.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   0.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   0.00


                                                                                                                  Page 1
       The World Bank
       Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project(P505562)


       IDA Grant                                                                                                    0.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                    Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                     The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

Yemen, the poorest country in the Middle East and North Africa, is experiencing a severe humanitarian crisis due to a
decade-long conflict that has devastated its economy and infrastructure. The conflict, compounded by economic shocks
and climate hazards, has led to severe food insecurity, with 80 percent of households needing humanitarian assistance
and 74 percent of the population living below the poverty line. Public revenues have plummeted, and the fiscal stress is
exacerbated by the impacts of the Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the COVID-19 pandemic. Living conditions are dire,
especially for the 4.5 million internally displaced people, with fragmented institutions struggling to deliver services.
Climate change further exacerbates Yemen's vulnerabilities, necessitating immediate and decisive action on climate
resilience for sustainable recovery.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

Yemen's geographical location in an arid to semi-arid zone has made water resources management a critical constraint
on its social and economic development. The country faces absolute water scarcity, with water use exceeding renewable
resources, leading to intense competition and local conflicts. Major cities like Ta’iz and Sana’a experience extreme water
stress, and coastal cities like Aden and Al-Hodeida lack safe drinking water. The limited freshwater resources are at risk
of contamination, and groundwater aquifers are depleting rapidly. Population growth, inefficient water use for
agriculture, and climate change exacerbate water and food security issues. Women and girls, primarily responsible for
fetching water, face increased distances and security risks. The conflict has fragmented water governance, weakening
service delivery and increasing reliance on humanitarian aid.

 Relationship to CPF

The proposed project is aligned with the Yemen Country Engagement Note (CEN) 2022-2023 (Report No 169022-YE), the
FCV Strategy 2020-2025, and the IDA 20 and IDA 21 programs.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)



                                                                                                                       Page 2
       The World Bank
       Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project(P505562)


 The Project Development Objective is to strengthen climate and water information management, improving irrigation
 services delivery, and enhancing access to climate resilient water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.


  Key Results (From PCN)

 D. Concept Description

I-WISE is the second project of a SoP (SoP2: 2025-2030) that offers a comprehensive and strategic approach to address
Yemen's water sector challenges. Spanning five years (2025-2030) with an anticipated budget of USD 150 million, the
project will use an area-based approach for prioritizing interventions, considering factors like security, accessibility, and
local capacity. The project includes components for implementing climate and water information systems, climate-
resilient catchment management, irrigation services, and resilient water supply and sanitation systems. It will also focus
on institutional strengthening, capacity development, project management, and a contingent emergency response
component. The project builds on previous World Bank-funded projects and recent analytical work to guide intervention
prioritization.

Project’s Components:

Component 1: Implementation and Scale-up of Climate and Water Information Management System (US$20 Million
equivalent). This component aims to further strengthen the Climate and Water Information Management System, which
will be developed under SoP1. This includes investments in monitoring equipment and strengthening capacities for
managing the system in the two prioritized basins, Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajer, as well building capacities of relevant
institutions to scale up the system to additional basins.

Component 2: Climate Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation Services (US$50 Million equivalent). This
component will finance the planning and implementation of watershed management plans and activities to strengthen
irrigation services. This includes investments, as well as training and capacity building for local institutions and
beneficiaries. The watershed management planning, as well as the selection and design of infrastructure investments, will
build on the results of SoP1 and Component 1 of SoP2. Investments will be realized in the two prioritized basins, the Aden-
Tuban and Wadi Hajer basins. Component 2 consists of two subcomponents: (i) watershed management, and (ii) irrigation
improvement. Activities under both sub-components will be accompanied by capacity building and training for local
institutions and beneficiaries. This includes capacity building for managing water resources (e.g. strengthening of basin
committees), and for operating and maintaining new infrastructure. It will also include technical assistance in soil and land
management and in irrigation agriculture.

Component 3: Resilient Water Supply & Sanitation Systems (US$70 million equivalent): This component aims to improve
the access to resilient water supply and sanitation services in the selected basins with the following three subcomponents:
Sub-component 3.1: Restoring Access to and Improving Quality of WSS Services; Sub-component 3.2: Capacity building
for urban water utilities; Sub-component 3.3: Improving hygiene and quality of water supply of critical water and
sanitation systems.




                                                                                                                         Page 3
       The World Bank
       Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project(P505562)


Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project Management (US$10 million equivalent).
This component aims to: (i) strengthen the institutional capacity of local institutions to address climate challenges; (ii)
support UN agencies and local partners in project implementation; and (iii) oversee project administration, management,
and monitoring and evaluation activities to ensure satisfactory project implementation through the set-up of dedicated
PMUs and the hiring of a third-party monitoring agency. The capacity building will focus on: (i) strengthening local water
and irrigation institutions; (ii) training beneficiaries in land and water management for climate-resilient irrigation; (iii)
enhancing technical and managerial skills of management staff; and (iv) developing the capacity of Water Basin
Committees (WBCs), Water User Associations (WUAs), Agriculture Cooperatives and service providers to ensure
sustainability of investment and services. Opportunities for female participation in these activities will be prioritized.

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0 million).This component is a zero-dollar
Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) whereby the Bank could authorize the reallocation of funds from
other project components in case of unforeseen events such as a natural disaster, epidemic or other emergency. This
measure will be applied according to the procedures outlined in paragraph 12, Section III of the IPF Policy. Disbursements
under this component will be subject to the declaration of emergency or equivalent by the Government, the international
community, or the UN; submission of a request to the Bank for support for an eligible emergency through the CERC, the
preparation by the Recipient of an acceptable Emergency Action Plan for the use of CERC funds, and the Bank’s approval
of such a Plan. The Bank would determine how to reallocate funds from other components to address the emergency, in
consultation with its implementing partners.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     TBD



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




The environmental risk is assessed as substantial due to the project's support for several interventions that may involve
environmental risks. While the anticipated risks and impacts are generally site-specific, reversible, and of low
magnitude, they require appropriate mitigation measures to address them effectively. Notably, interventions under Sub-
component 3.1, "Restoring Access to and Improving Quality of Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) Services," will involve
restoring and expanding access to WSS services. These activities include the rehabilitation and construction of medium-
to large-scale WSS infrastructure, such as pipelines, networks, water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants
(WWTPs), decentralized desalination plants, water wells, pumping and booster stations, and related civil works. The

                                                                                                                        Page 4
       The World Bank
       Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project(P505562)


environmental impacts of these activities, whether on new or existing sites, are expected to be sitespecific, limited, and
manageable. Common environmental concerns include construction waste, wastewater, dust, noise, traffic deviations,
and occupational health and safety risks. Although no large-scale, significant, or irreversible impacts are anticipated,
some interventions may pose substantial risks, such as exposure to sewer gases during the rehabilitation of sewer
networks or WWTPs. Importantly, these interventions are expected to yield significant positive outcomes for both
people and the environment. They will play a crucial role in improving basic living conditions, stimulating local economic
activity, and enhancing Yemeni cities' resilience to climate change.

The social risks and impacts associated with the project are rated as substantial which can be summarized as follows: 1.
Exclusion of Vulnerable Groups: There is a potential risk of elite capture and the exclusion of vulnerable groups and
individuals, such as women, persons with disabilities, from the benefits of the project. This exclusion could lead to social
tensions within the communities if the selection criteria are not fully understood or implemented fairly and
transparently. 2. Potential of land acquisition: The project may require the need for a land due to the construction and
rehabilitation of infrastructure. 3. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH): There are risks of
SEA/SH associated with the project activities, particularly in areas where there is a significant presence of workers and
community interactions. 4. Poor Working Conditions: The project may result in poor working conditions for laborers
involved in the construction and maintenance of the infrastructure. 5. Child Labor: There is a risk of child labor being
used in the project activities. 6. Security Risks: The project may face security risks, especially in areas with existing
conflicts or instability. 7. Occupational and Community Health and Safety Risks: The project activities may pose health
and safety risks to both workers and the surrounding communities, including the transmission of Cholera, diphtheria and
other communicable diseases. 8. Nuisances Related to Noise and Vibration: Construction activities may cause nuisances
related to noise and vibration, affecting the local communities. 9. Social Tensions and Conflicts: The project may induce
social tensions and conflicts due to competition over project benefits, including employment opportunities. 10. Weak
Implementation Capacity: There may be challenges related to the weak implementation capacity at the national and
district levels, which could affect the effective management of social risks.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom
   Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

   Chris Philip Fischer
   Senior Water Specialist

   Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta
   Senior Water Specialist



                                                                                                                        Page 5
     The World Bank
     Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project(P505562)


Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Food and Agriculture Organization
 Hussein Gadain
 Country Representative
 Hussein.gadain@fao.org

Implementing Agencies
 United Nations Office for Project Services
 Bana Kaloti
 Regional Director for Middle East
 banak@unops.org

 United Nations Development Program
 Zena Ali Ahmed
 Resident Representative
 zena.ali-ahmad@undp.org

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL

                                         Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom, Chris Philip Fischer, Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks
Task Team Leader(s):
                                         Motta

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Michael Haney                         21-Jan-2025

Country Director:                        Stephane Guimbert                     06-Feb-2025




Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
finalizing the document.



                                                                                                               Page 6
