Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 11/22/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03823




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 25, 2024                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505546                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      GEF RE-MAP                  2025

                     Operation Name            Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Moldova                   Moldova                                 EUROPE AND CENTRAL          Environment, Natural
                                                                                       ASIA                        Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                   Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Moldova       Ministry of Environment                 07-Nov-2024                 30-Apr-2025


                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                                               7,903,975.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to increase the area under sustainable landscape management practices within
                     the Dniester River Basin in Moldova.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project intends to restore ecosystem processes directly, it will result in expanded areas of healthier ecosystems
                     (restored functionality) and broader range of generated ecosystem services (benefits). All this will ultimately improve
                     landscape/habitat conditions and water quality through reanimated synergies between upstream and downstream
                     ecosystems. Nature-based solutions (NBS) are defined as use of resources and processes already found in nature to
                     restore ecosystems, support communities, and contribute to healthy and resilient economies. NBS for nutrient pollution
                     management leverage, inter alia, the natural filtering and absorption capacities of ecosystems such as wetlands, forests

                    Nov 25, 2024                                                                                                    Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                     to capture, retain, and remove nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus from runoff, surface water, or groundwater. The
                     project addresses pollution of freshwater environment through enhanced adaptive capacity for upstream ecosystem
                     restoration (at landscape level), all following the EU directives and the Dniester Commission. The proposed Project’s
                     design consists of three components: (i) Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community
                     Engagement; (ii) Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management and (iii) Component 3: Project
                     Management, Monitoring and Communication.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase area under sustainable landscape management practices within
                     the Dniester River Basin in Moldova. The Dniester River runs along the border with Ukraine to the East and discharges to
                     the Black Sea. The river serves as the primary source of drinking water for Moldova and for a significant portion of
                     Ukraine. It also plays a pivotal role in sustaining Moldova's substantial agricultural sector, accounting for 10% of its GDP.
                     However, the Dniester Basin faces pressing environmental challenges that have far-reaching implications for both
                     Moldova and Ukraine. Within this basin, most of water bodies have been assessed as at risk of "not achieving good
                     ecological status" according to EU standards, with none classified as "no risk." Agricultural land covers about 75 percent
                     of Moldova’s total land area. Poverty in Moldova is concentrated in rural areas where agriculture takes place. The
                     impacts of agriculture on water are considered substantial with industrial intensification of agriculture leading to
                     increased pollution and treatment costs. Restored ecosystems, including expansion of ecological agriculture as part of
                     sustainable management, would offset these costs and reduce pollution. Currently, protected areas cover 6 percent of
                     the Moldova’s territory, including protected forests and floodplains with a total area of almost 62,000 ha. Republic of



Public Disclosure
                     Moldova also has 3 sites designated as Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar Sites), with a surface area of
                     94,705 hectares, Lower Prut Lakes, Unguri Holosnita, Lower Dniester (Nistru de Jos). The project will not have activities
                     in or near protected areas or existing Ramsar sites. The project addresses marine pollution through enhanced adaptive
                     capacity for upstream river basin ecosystem restoration (at landscape level), all following the EU directives and the
                     Dniester Commission. As the project is located in the Dniester River basin, which is an international water body, the
                     project received VP approval on exception from notification requirement as per paragraph 7(a) of the OP 7.50 “Projects
                     on International Waterways”.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established in the National Office for Environmental Project
                     Implementation (NOEPI), subordinated directly to the Ministry of Environment. While being intended exclusively for
                     financing projects in environmental protection and sustainable management of natural resources, NOEPI does not have
                     substantial experience in implementing WB-financed projects. To address these shortfall, the project will include
                     capacity building activities, providing respective in-time and on the job trainings during all stages of project preparation
                     and throughout the implementation period, as well as will bring in international experts to ensure effective knowledge
                     transfer and strengthening of the institutional capacity. The PIU will be staffed with one Environmental specialist and
                     one Social specialist, in addition to other regular PIU staff. The PIU will support the management of all project activities.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Moderate



                    Nov 25, 2024                                                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)




                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Moderate
                     The environmental risks associated with the proposed project are assessed as Moderate. Expected long term impact
                     of the project is positive, as none of its activities is likely to generate loss of biodiversity or other damage to the
                     environment. Component one will have a positive environmental impact in long term as relates to policy
                     development, capacity building activities for reducing marine pollution through NbS, and community engagement in
                     implementing sustainable agricultural practices and restoration activities. Component 2.1 will have a positive impact
                     as it finances restoration of forest and wetlands leading to the substantial removal of various pollutants within 2,000
                     ha of Dniester river basin. However this activities could pose some moderate temporary environmental risks related
                     the nature of the activities in terms of small-scale civil works associated with revitalization of small rivers and
                     wetlands and temporary associated pollution and waste management aspects during implementation phase. The
                     project's areas of intervention will not interfere with the existing Ramsar sites. Component 2.2 will have a positive
                     environmental impact as it targets the improvement of nearly 25,000 ha of landscapes through sustainable
                     agroforestry systems (integrated tree/shrub with crops) and silvo-pastoral practices (combining trees/shrubs with
                     grazing). These two practices are important measures to reduce nutrient runoff and enhance erosion control, as well
                     as to lower local budget inputs for flood mitigation.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risks are considered Moderate. The project comprises small scale physical works and activities to restore 2,000
                     ha of degraded forest and wetland sites along the Dniester River as well as interventions at sub-project sites to
                     improve agroforestry and silvo-pastoral practices across 25,000 ha. Project interventions will take place only on public



Public Disclosure
                     land (state or community) and no land acquisition and physical and economic resettlement are anticipated. Any
                     involuntary restrictions to land use or natural resources (for example, site-specific temporary access restrictions at
                     reforestation sites) will be appropriately avoided, minimized and mitigated through close engagement with key
                     stakeholders. While the project will engage different types of workers (including civil servant, contracted workers and
                     local community volunteers), labor and working conditions and OHS risks will be managed through appropriate
                     mitigation and monitoring measures, including appropriate use of PPE. Social tensions and exclusion risks could
                     potentially arise from selection processes of project sites and beneficiaries (including jobs opportunities and access to
                     forests and pastures), if the selection criteria are not sufficiently consulted and disseminated with a wide range of
                     stakeholders and beneficiaries, including vulnerable groups (such as women, elderly and persons with disabilities and
                     in remote areas). To address such risks, the project design includes activities/components to strengthen community
                     engagement and provide opportunities for stakeholder participation.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project is expected to have positive environmental and social effects from reduced pollution in the Dniester River
                      and Black Sea. Component 1 comprises soft interventions for institutional capacity development and community
                      engagement (such as policy development and harmonization; capacity building and establishment of center of
                      excellence). These TA activities and their outputs will be designed, implemented and finalized in accordance with

                    Nov 25, 2024                                                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                      terms of reference (TOR) consistent with relevant ESSs and acceptable to the Bank. Component 2 entails small scale
                      physical works to restore wetlands and forests, through reforestation and afforestation. There are no significant
                      environmental risks associated with project activities provided proper management of civil work associated with
                      wetland restoration and small river revitalization. Social impacts, especially for riparian communities, are expected to
                      be positive, if activities are designed with adequate engagement, inclusion of vulnerable groups and appropriate
                      labor management. Considering the moderate E&S risks of the proposed project, a simplified Environmental and
                      Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to assess E&S impacts, propose a menu of mitigation
                      measures, establish screening procedures for sub-projects. The ESMF will adopt a simplified/streamlined approach,
                      so that the preparation of site-specific E&S instruments are minimized. The Environmental and Social Commitment
                      Plan (ESCP) will include the summary of the above E&S measures with clear timelines and responsibilities and
                      disclosed before appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      Project-affected stakeholders include rural communities that will benefit from and contribute to social, health,
                      environmental and economic benefits from reduced pollution in the Dniester River Basin and improvements in
                      sustainable agriculture, various ministries, and workers engaged in physical works. The project design includes
                      activities to strengthen community capacity for conservation and offer opportunities for stakeholder engagement and
                      participatory planning. The project will prepare and disclose a robust stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) prior to
                      Appraisal to support engagement with civil society organizations, communities, especially rural agricultural
                      communities that are likely to be poor and vulnerable. The SEP will also establish a transparent, accessible grievance
                      mechanism, consistent with ESS10. During September 2-13, the implementing agencies, together with the Bank team,



Public Disclosure
                      conducted site visits and met with key stakeholders, including Local Public Administration officials (mayors and
                      officers in potential project sites), State Forestry Enterprises, local business representatives (winery owners), Forest
                      Research and Management Institute (ICAS Chisinau), non-governmental organizations (NGOs), as well as local
                      community members (local forest rangers, farmers, shepherds and other villagers). Stakeholders expressed broader
                      support to the project. Key feedback relevant to E&S issues from stakeholders are summarized as follows, which will
                      be incorporated and considered in the project design and implementation. Broader public consultations will be
                      conducted by the client in early October before appraisal. a) Capacity of Moldsilva and relevant agencies:
                      Stakeholders see the strong need for capacity building of Moldsilva, Moldovan Waters and other relevant agencies
                      (including their local branches) to fill the gaps in their budgetary and human resources and technical expertise in
                      restoration of degraded ecosystems that are exacerbated by climate change. b) Coordination with local
                      administration, local pastoral and agricultural activities: While a significant percentage of forests, pastoral areas and
                      wetlands are under the control/ownership of local administration, stakeholders, stakeholders highlighted the
                      importance of close collaboration with local administration. Also, mayors requested close coordination with local
                      farmers to minimize potential conflict with their pastoral and agricultural activities. c) Community awareness and
                      engagement: One of the Mayors informed that her local communities understand the long-term value of
                      reforestation for future generations, which is one of the key local development strategies. She said that the local
                      communities and businesses will fully support such activities through providing workforce, volunteer works (cleaning,
                      maintenance, monitoring, etc) and awareness raising. d) Equipment and OHS: Mayors highlighted the need for
                      equipment to facilitate such activities (such as tractors, trimmers for weeds and branches), which would also require
                      PPE and relevant risk mitigations. e) Local GRM: Mayors informed the Bank team that the local administration offices
                      have functional grievance mechanisms with different uptake channels to address grievances of the local


                    Nov 25, 2024                                                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                      communities, including electronic platform, website, email and facebook account. f) Private sector participation: A
                      Mayor promised to discuss with the local cement company (as a shareholder) regarding their support and financial
                      and in-kind contribution to the project's execution (such as workforce, community volunteer, provision of food/tea
                      services, awareness-raising). While a local winery owner highlighted the significant adverse impact of climate change
                      on wine harvest (reduction of 50% in 2024 compared to 2023), he expressed strong support to the project. He
                      recommended that the timing of project activities should take into consideration busy seasons for winery workers. g)
                      Engagement of NGOs: While NGOs are playing key role in community engagement (including tree planting, wetland
                      revitalization, support to school education/tree planting by children, knowledge-sharing/study tours, and other
                      community awareness/engagement), their budgetary/human resources are limited. They see strong needs for buy-in
                      and commitment of local mayors and robust awareness raising of community members to make the project more
                      sustainable and inclusive (their forestation activities are not always supported/participated by local leaders and
                      communities). They also highlighted the need for promoting a free market for the forest regenerative material
                      (seedlings, seeds), which is currently monopolized by Moldsilva.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. Project workers comprise direct workers of the PIU and technical consultants. Works under
                      Component 2 will be provided by contracted workers as well as community workers/volunteers. The project has a
                      dedicated component for community engagement and benefits, that will promote the participation of local
                      communities in conservation activities such as tree planting and cleanup. The modality and arrangements for the use
                      of volunteer or paid community workers labor will be determined in close coordination with local communities and in
                      accordance with ESS2. While the scale of civil work is expected to be limited, workers may be exposed to health and



Public Disclosure
                      safety risks at worksites, such as exposure to construction waste, heat, and animals/insects, and injuries from
                      incidents. The Labor Management Procedures (LMP) consistent with ESS2 will be prepared and integrated as part of
                      the ESMF.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Activities and civil works related to wetland restoration, small river revitalization,
                      shelterbelt restoration and others that require small civil works will be undertaken with efficient use of resources.
                      Pollution prevention and management measures will be applied throughout the project lifecycle consistent with WB
                      ESF and GIIP, to minimize environmental footprint of the project.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      The standard is considered relevant and all activities will take in consideration the exposure of local community to
                      small civil works for clean-up and wetland restoration. The ESMF will include procedures to screen for the risks and
                      impacts on the health and safety of project-affected communities, including groups that might be vulnerable, and
                      relevant mitigation measures will be included in site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)
                      where necessary. These will include management and mitigation measures to secure community health and safety
                      during small civil works

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant




                    Nov 25, 2024                                                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                      Project interventions will take place only on public land (state or community) and no land acquisition and physical and
                      economic resettlement are anticipated. While a significant percentage of forests, pastoral areas and wetlands are
                      under the control/ownership of local administration, the project will closely collaborate with local administration and
                      communities to minimize potential conflict with local pastoral and agricultural activities. Any involuntary restrictions
                      to land use or natural resources (for example, site-specific temporary access restrictions at reforestation sites) will be
                      appropriately avoided, minimized and mitigated through close engagement with local key stakeholders. The ESMF
                      will include relevant measures to avoid and manage such risks, as per ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is relevant. The project will not include activities near or inside existing Ramsar sites situated in the
                      lower meadows of Prut and Dniester. Environmental screening of sub-projects will carefully identify likelihood and
                      nature of impacts on natural and critical habitats, so that the project will not inadvertently support any activities
                      negatively affecting such habitats and/or leading to net loss of biodiversity.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      No indigenous people are present in Moldova.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      No activities are considered in areas with potential cultural heritage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      No financial intermediaries will be involved.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No
                       Borrower's E&S framework is not considered to be used


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                   No
                       While some financing partners are supporting the forestation of the country, this project do not have partners and
                       therefore no common approach is proposed at this stage.



                    Nov 25, 2024                                                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems For Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     1. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) drafted, consulted and disclosed with stakeholders by Appraisal.
                     2. Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) drafted, consulted and disclosed with stakeholders by Appraisal.
                     3. Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including a section on Labor Management Procedures
                     (LMP) drafted, consulted and disclosed with stakeholders by one month after project effectiveness.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Fisseha Tessema Abissa             Title:          Senior Natural Resources Management
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  fabissa@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank



Public Disclosure
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                           Fisseha Tessema Abissa

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                  Adrian Laurentiu Mihailescu

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                         Aki Tsuda




                    Nov 25, 2024                                                                                                 Page 8 of 8
