Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01414




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                       Yemen Improved Water
                                                         MID EAST,NORTH                                                Management and Irrigation
                          Yemen, Republic of                                            P505562
                                                         AFRICA,AFG,PAK                                                for Sustainability and
                                                                                                                       Efficiency Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         02-Feb-2026                    30-Apr-2026                    Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          United Nations                 United Nations Office for
                          Development Program,           Project Services, United




_For Official Use Only_
                          United Nations Office for      Nations Development
                          Project Services               Program

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the climate and water information management system, and
                          enhance climate-resilient irrigation services and access to water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.

                          Components
                          Component 1: Climate and Water Information Management Systems (CWIMS)
                          Component 2: Improved Integrated Watershed Management and Irrigation
                          Component 3: Resilient Water Supply & Sanitation Systems and WASH Services in selected areas
                          Component 4: Project Support, Management, Evaluation and Administration

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                              154.55

                            Total Financing                                                                                                   154.55


                                                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    150.00
                             Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   150.00
                                 IDA Grant                                                                                                   150.00
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Trust Funds                                                                                                      4.55
                                 Trust Funds                                                                                                    3.65
                                 MNA Region Umbrella 2.0 MDTF                                                                                   0.90




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                          Procurement

                          Procurement risks are high due to the security situation in the country coupled with ongoing supply chain disruptions
                          arising from the conflict in the Yemen and escalations in the Red Sea region. These external factors may significantly
                          affect the timely delivery of goods and services critical to project implementation. To mitigate these risks, UN Agencies
                          will adopt a proactive procurement planning approach, including the identification of alternative shipping routes and the
                          advance procurement of critical project inputs. Furthermore, limited availability of goods, suppliers, and service providers
                          may result in procurement delays and reduced market competition. In response, UN Agencies will undertake targeted
                          market outreach to identify and engage alternative suppliers, diversify the supplier base, and, where operationally
                          feasible, pre-position essential goods.

                           Other Decision (as needed)
                           B. Introduction and Context
                           Country Context
                          1.    The proposed Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) will strengthen climate resilience in Yemen through an
                          area-based, water-basin approach. Yemen is among the world’s most water-stressed countries, with rapidly declining


                                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                          groundwater and limited safe drinking water. As of 2024, about 74 percent of its 40 million people are poor; roughly 17
                          million lack sufficient water and face acute food insecurity, with famine risk persisting. One in two children suffer severe
                          malnutrition; stunting is 46 percent and wasting affects 17 percent of children under the age of 5. Since the conflict
                          escalated in 2015, extensive damage to roads, bridges, schools, hospitals, and WASH systems has collapsed public services
                          and hindered recovery. The Yemen Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) projects average annual GDP losses
                          of 3.9 percent by 2040 under pessimistic climate scenarios, driven by reduced agricultural productivity and infrastructure
                          damage, including in water. Sea water intrusion, groundwater depletion, land degradation, and regional disparities, along
                          with emerging localized, bottom-up climate actions, highlight the need for a flexible, area-based approach that adapts to
                          a changing operational environment.

                          2.      This Project is the first phase in the MPA and focuses on improving climate and water information management,
                          enhancing water security, irrigation services, and water supply and sanitation in two basins, Aden-Tuban and Wadi
                          Hajir. It advances the MPA’s long-term vision for sustainable services and climate adaptation in Yemen by building local
                          capacity to maintain infrastructure and ending the build–neglect–rehabilitate cycle. Phase 1 is designed as a scalable,
                          basin-based investment program. Phases 2 and 3 will build on Phase 1, expanding water supply through investments in
                          supply to Aden of desalinated water, reducing non-revenue water, improving utility performance, and reusing treated
                          wastewater as well as scaling up water and irrigation interventions to additional basins. The aspiration is for
                          implementation of the MPA to progressively transition from UN agencies to local partners, strengthening national
                          institutions (including technical entities under the IRG where feasible). The launch of Phase 2 will depend on the availability




_For Official Use Only_
                          of financing and an enabling operating environment.

                          3.      The Project aligns with the World Bank’s Yemen strategy and the FY22–23 Country Engagement Note (CEN),
                          supporting two priority pillars: (a) basic service delivery and (b) resilience and livelihoods. It is consistent with the FCV
                          Strategy (2020–2025) and Gender Strategy (2024–2030) and contributes to the Global Challenge Programs on Water
                          Security and Climate Adaptation, and Food and Nutrition Security. The design aligns with the WBG Water Strategy (FY25–
                          30)— “Water for People,” “Water for Food,” and “Water for Planet”. It builds on the 2015 NWSSIP and 2008 NIP, ensuring
                          coherence with Yemen’s sector goals, and is included in the Yemen CPF for 2026–2030 (to be presented for Board
                          discussion on the same day as the proposed Project).

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          4.        Yemen is one of only four countries with both low per capita income and absolute water scarcity and faces
                          extreme water scarcity amid fragility and climate change. Water use rose by 76 percent from 1990–2020 due to
                          population growth, unsustainable agricultural, technological shifts, and expansion of water-intensive qat, reaching 5.1
                          billion cubic meters (BCM) with a 2.6 BCM annual deficit. Per capita availability was 65 m³ in 2020—far below the threshold
                          of absolute water scarcity which is conventionally defined as 500 m³/per capita—and is projected to fall to 54 m³ by 2050.
                          Agriculture consumes over 90 percent of water but remains low-productivity; only 2–3 percent of land is arable and
                          threatened by desertification and degradation. Freshwater is contaminated by untreated wastewater, and withdrawals
                          from key urban aquifers exceed sustainable limits. Yemen’s FCV context—protracted conflict, institutional fragmentation,
                          resource competition, and recurrent shocks—drives overlapping crises. In 2024, Yemen ranked sixth most fragile on the
                          Fragile States Index and in the lowest 10 percent of the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) index (high
                          vulnerability, low readiness). Still, projected precipitation increases in some areas present opportunities to narrow (not
                          eliminate) the supply–demand gap. Targeted, FCV-responsive investments in water management, soil conservation, and
                          climate-smart agriculture could raise yields by up to 13.5 percent, strengthening food security and nutrition for vulnerable
                          populations.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 3



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)




                          5.     Sustaining safe, climate-resilient WSS requires major infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction, alongside
                          strengthened institutional capacity. Since 2015, Yemen’s WASH sector has incurred US$283–346 million in losses, with
                          38 percent of major-city assets damaged and 10 percent destroyed. Short- and medium-term recovery needs total about
                          US$932 million to support residents and 4.8 million forcibly displaced people. Poor sanitation in urban areas and Internally
                          Displaced People (IDP) camps triggered Yemen’s largest recent cholera outbreak—over 2.5 million suspected cases and
                          18,675 reported in June 2025. Climate-exacerbated health burdens are projected to exceed US$5 billion in excess
                          mortality and morbidity costs.

                          6.      Given the country’s uncertain and resource-constrained future, ensuring adequate data and information is vital
                          for effective decision-making on investments to building resilience in Yemen’s water sector. Hydro-meteorological data
                          and services are essential for safeguarding lives and property during extreme weather, managing scarce water resources,
                          and supporting climate action. However, Yemen’s monitoring network is severely limited: over 70 percent of hydro-
                          meteorological, surface and groundwater stations are nonfunctional due to conflict, lack of funds for O&M, and
                          insufficient personnel. Before the conflict, efforts were initiated to establish the National Water Resources Management
                          Information System (NWRMIS) but its impact was cut short. Recent efforts by UN agencies in Yemen have restored some
                          capacity, but only about 75 stations are currently operational which is far from sufficient. Addressing these gaps and
                          improving data systems are central to planning, risk management, infrastructure development, and making timely




_For Official Use Only_
                          decisions during crises such as droughts and floods.

                          7.        The conflict has fragmented Yemen’s water and agriculture institutions, weakening capacity and increasing
                          reliance on decentralized bodies. Two main authorities are competing for control of Yemen: (i) the Houthi movement
                          (also known as ‘Ansar Allah’) based in Sana’a and (ii) the Internationally Recognized Government (IRG) based in Aden.
                          Before the conflict, governance was centralized under the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) and the Ministry of
                          Agriculture, and Irrigation (MAI), supported by the National Water Resources Authority NWRA (the Integrated Water
                          Resources Management IWRM), the Local Water and Sanitation Corporations (LWSCs) (urban Water Supply and Sanitation
                          WSS), and the General Authority for Rural Water Supply Projects - GARWSP (rural WSS). This governance collapsed amid
                          fuel shortages, blackouts, looting, and years of unpaid salaries. Despite this, local institutions—Water User Associations
                          (WUAs), Water Basin Committees (WBCs), Agriculture Cooperatives (ACs), Irrigation Council (ICs), and decentralized
                          MWE/MAI offices in IRG-supported areas—retain some functionality and have assumed management roles with partner
                          support. The Urban Water Supply and Sanitation–Project Management Unit (UWSS-PMU), established in 2002, Social Fund
                          for Development (SDF), and Public Works Project (PWP) remain credible implementers, though operational capacity gaps
                          persist and require strengthening.

                          8.        Phase 1 adopts a scalable, area-based basin framework, initially targeting priority investments in the Aden–
                          Tuban and Wadi Hajir basins, selected using objective technical criteria (enabling environment, local institutional
                          capacity, and long-term development impact). Both basins lie largely in IRG-governed areas and are high priorities due
                          to their natural endowments, population pressures, and climate vulnerabilities. Aden–Tuban (≈7,770 km²) includes
                          Aden—Yemen’s second-largest city and a key economic/administrative hub—plus high-density Taiz, Ibb, Lahj, and the
                          fertile Tuban Delta. Urban and agricultural users rely on groundwater declining by ~1 m/year, and the Tuban–Abyan
                          coastal plain and upper basin face rising flash-flood risks. Wadi Hajir (≈9,283 km², Shabwah–Hadramout) is Yemen’s only
                          perennial wadi and vital for agriculture, with a long tradition of spate irrigation using temporary earthen embankments
                          (ogmas) that must be rebuilt after each flood—an effort growing with more frequent floods. Decentralized and community


                                                                                                                                                  Page 4



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                          institutions in both basins remain functional and influential under customary rules and can be strengthened through
                          capacity building.


                          Rationale for Using MPA
                          9.      The scale of the water challenges in Yemen goes well beyond the scope of a single project and the programmatic
                          structure addresses structural fragility drivers and leverages resilience sources. Support for the essential services in the
                          water sector through the conflict has highlighted the cross-cutting nature of the impact of water security for sustainable
                          development in Yemen. In the last decade, the water sector components of engagements in the urban and health sectors
                          have yielded effective outcomes for the population. They have also highlighted the complexity of the sector which
                          required dedicated investments and capacity support. The phased implementation and adaptive course correction, in
                          conjunction with the area-based approach, allows investments to be reprioritized as Yemen’s dynamic context evolves
                          and allows operations in more water basins (in Phase-3). This flexibility ensures responsiveness to shifting needs while
                          maintaining predictable support from the WBG and development partners. Through the Program, governance structures
                          at local levels will be reinforced to enhance transparency, accountability, and effective decision-making, thus increasing
                          their capacity for increased responsibility take-up in subsequent phases. The MPA’s long-term horizon, and joint efforts
                          of the IFC and MIGA for the Program, create conditions for private sector engagement in a traditionally donor-led domain.
                          This gradual integration will aim to mobilize additional resources, drive innovation, and improve service delivery for Phase




_For Official Use Only_
                          2, which will target private partners to reduce water losses in the system using private tankers for desalinated water supply
                          in Aden.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           10. The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the climate and water information management system, and
                           enhance climate-resilient irrigation services and access to water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.

                            Key Results
                          The Project will measure progress towards the PDO via the following proposed indicators:
                             I.   Climate and Water Information Management System developed and operational (Yes/No)
                            II.   Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Number)1
                           III.   Landscapes under enhanced conservation and/or sustainable management (Hectare)2
                           IV.    Agricultural land area provided with climate-resilient irrigation and/or drainage services (Hectare)
                            V.    Number of people provided with water, sanitation, and/or hygiene services (Number), of which (%) is safely
                                  managed (number) 3

                            D. Project Description

                          11. The Project includes four components designed around a robust systems approach that responds to the complex,
                          FCV context in Yemen. These are informed by deep analysis and contextual awareness of the key issues in the water and
                          agricultural sectors and include a high degree of flexibility built around a combination of top-down and bottom-up
                          interventions. This includes explicit provisions to enable adaptive management through strong partnerships with proven

                          1 Linked to World Bank Group Scorecard Indicator.
                          2 Linked to World Bank Group Scorecard Indicator.
                          3 Linked to World Bank Group Scorecard and IDA GROW Window Indicator.



                                                                                                                                                   Page 5



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                          track record of implementation and robust risk management, with a commitment to inclusion and learning in line with
                          the World Bank’s FCV Strategy.

                          12.       Component 1. Climate and Water Information Management Systems (US$ 3.5 million, UNDP implemented).
                          This component is financed through a grant from the World Bank Administered Multi-Donor “Yemen Resilience, Recovery4
                          and Reconstruction Umbrella Trust Fund” and will provide the data and information needed to inform climate-resilient
                          decision-making and address the longer-term challenges facing water scarcity and food security in Yemen through the
                          following two subcomponents.

                          13.        Subcomponent 1.1 – Developing a Climate and Water Information Management System (CWIMS) (US$ 2.0
                          million TF, UNDP implemented). This subcomponent will establish a scalable, countrywide CWIMS hosted by UNDP,
                          reactivating the earlier National Water Resources Management Information System (NWRMIS) and planning transfer to
                          MWE by project end. CWIMS is designed for sustainability via institutional ownership, capacity building, and scalable
                          financing, enabling future integration of basins, Early Warning System (EWS) modules, and decision-support tools.
                          Activities include a national inventory and digitization of water and climate data, monitoring network assessments, and a
                          conceptual design for a nationwide observation network. Beyond a technical system, CWIMS will be a collaborative
                          platform engaging The Civil Aviation and Meteorological Authority (CAMA), MWE, NWRA, the Geological Survey and
                          Mineral Resources Borad (GSMRB), and academic partners to ensure mandates and expertise are reflected—supporting
                          joint ownership, data sharing, and cross-sector integration. Modern, interoperable tools will ensure broad access and data




_For Official Use Only_
                          security. A System Management Unit within MWE will oversee operations and stakeholder coordination.

                          14.      Subcomponent 1.2 – Developing Climate-Resilient Decision-Making and Monitoring Networks in Prioritized
                          Basins (US$ 1.5 million TF, UNDP implemented). This subcomponent will deploy CWIMS-based decision support tools
                          and coordination mechanisms to enable climate-resilient decision-making in the Aden–Tuban and Wadi Hajir basins,
                          including developing tools and products (e.g., multi-criteria frameworks and simulation models) to guide investments and
                          daily operations on water and food security, flood and drought risk, and weather forecasting—integrating climate
                          considerations; strengthening coordination and consultation among WUAs, WBCs, ACs, and ICs; updating IWRM and
                          investment plans for both basins; and delivering tailored capacity building (based on a needs assessment) on CWIMS use,
                          tool development and application, operation and maintenance of monitoring stations, and coordination and consultation
                          skills.

                           15.     Component 2 - Improved Integrated Watershed Management and Irrigation (US$ 64.147 million IDA equivalent,
                          UNDP implemented). This component will enhance water and food security, improve disaster risk management, and
                          strengthen community resilience, with a focus on climate adaptation investments in areas with critical water stress, severe
                          food insecurity, and vulnerability to extreme weather events. It will leverage the parallel output of the information
                          management system and IWRM plans financed under Component 1. Community-led organizations and farmers will be
                          trained in operations, maintenance, and use of infrastructure to foster ownership. The implementation partner has pre-
                          existing engagements in the Aden-Tuban basin to scale the activities under this component. The component will finance
                          geographically targeted activities across four core areas: (a) rehabilitation and reconstruction of water resources
                          infrastructure; (b) irrigation modernization to increase water-use efficiency; (c) soil conservation and land protection; (d)
                          institutional support and capacity building. Activities to be financed are outlined by basins, and include:

                          16.        Sub-Component 2.1 – Integrated Management of Water and Agriculture in the Aden-Tuban Basin (US$ 45
                          million IDA equivalent). This subcomponent will, based on technical criteria and community consultations, rebuild,

                          4 Currently funded by the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and Switzerland.



                                                                                                                                                   Page 6



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                          construct, and rehabilitate climate-resilient water infrastructure for harvesting, storage, flood protection, irrigation canals,
                          diversion barriers, and solar-powered systems integrated with modern well irrigation. It will finance roughly 50 structures
                          (check/diversion dams, ponds, cisterns, embankments) with about 1.863 million m³ of combined storage and rehabilitate
                          30–40 km of irrigation canals. Farming communities will benefit from terrace rehabilitation, on-farm upgrades (drip,
                          sprinklers, solar pumps), improved distribution networks, and drainage. It will also reinforce 20–30 km of wadi banks using
                          nature-based solutions (vegetative cover, retention walls), install sedimentation barriers, and rehabilitate about 5,500 ha
                          through terracing and soil conservation. The historic Aden Cisterns (Cisterns of Tawila) will be rehabilitated and
                          modernized as part of a comprehensive urban catchment strategy to reduce flood risk and enhance rainwater harvesting.

                           17.     Sub-Component 2.2 – Integrated Management of Water and Agriculture in the Wadi Hajir Basin (US$ 17 million
                          IDA equivalent). This subcomponent will finance hydrogeology-tailored infrastructure to support climate adaptation in
                          the Wadi Hajir Basin, including rehabilitation and upgrading of critical water assets: canal improvements, small storage
                          and recharge structures, flood protection, reinforcement of canal walls, retaining walls and floors, gabions, rainwater
                          harvesting barriers and reservoirs, diversion dams, springs, earthen reservoirs, and related distribution systems. Over
                          2,000 hectares of agricultural land will be protected from flooding and upgraded with improved irrigation or drainage to
                          boost productivity and resilience. It will also enhance on-farm water-saving and solar-powered irrigation technologies
                          (pumps, greenhouses, drip and floppy sprinklers) and improved scheduling tools to increase efficiency. Activities will
                          engage local communities, build on traditional practices, and finance land conservation and erosion-control packages
                          (terraces, check dams, embankments, and related measures).




_For Official Use Only_
                           18.    Sub-Component 2.3 – Institutional Support and Capacity Building (US$ 2.147 million IDA equivalent). This
                          subcomponent will strengthen community-based institutions in both basins—WUAs, WBCs, ACs, ICs, MWE and the
                          ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Fisheries (MAIF) field offices—so they can train farmers in Good Agricultural
                          Practices, provide advisory services, support technology adoption, and supervise operations. Activities include training in
                          integrated water resources management; instruction on irrigation technologies and O&M; coordination of collective
                          maintenance, water use, and allocation; peer learning; and performance monitoring. The Project will finance community
                          employment through cash-for-work and community contracting for rehabilitation and construction, prioritizing
                          unemployed youth and women. Prepared manual guides implementation via Cash for Work, Community Contracting, and
                          National Competitive Bidding, detailing eligible activities, targeting and selection criteria, step-by-step processes for
                          preparation through closeout, and provisions for training, capacity building, and Management Information System MIS-
                          based oversight.
                          19.      Component 3 - Resilient Water Supply and Sanitation Systems and WASH Services in selected areas (US$ 63.9
                          million IDA equivalent, UNOPS implemented). This component will finance design, supervision, restoration, and
                          expansion of WSS systems and establishment of WASH services across the two selected basins. In both basins, the Project
                          will finance the following activities: (a) restoring access to and improving quality of WSS services; (b) improving WASH
                          services for IDP, refugee and marginalized communities; (c) capacity building for water utilities and community
                          organizations. The interventions of this component will be distributed across rural, peri-urban, and urban areas and will
                          involve local community participation to carry out works. Given the concentration of settlements, the Project-financed
                          activities fall largely in the urban and peri-urban regions of the Aden-Tuban basin and support rural communities in the
                          Wadi Hajir Basin. This component includes the following three sub-components:

                          20. Sub-Component 3.1 - Restoring access to and improving quality of WSS services (US$ 57 million IDA equivalent).
                          This subcomponent will finance climate-resilient rehabilitation and construction of medium- to large-scale water supply
                          and sanitation facilities, emphasizing water savings and reliable service. Activities include rehabilitating, expanding, and
                          building polyethylene pipe networks, water tanks, rainwater harvesting systems, water treatment plants, wells,


                                                                                                                                                     Page 7



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                          pumping/booster stations, and small decentralized desalination plants for brackish and seawater—piloting private-sector
                          O&M for sustainability and cost-effectiveness. Sanitation investments will rehabilitate and expand wastewater treatment
                          plants and networks with associated civil works to strengthen delivery and reliability. The subcomponent will supply, install,
                          and operate solar energy systems for wells and pumps, replacing deteriorated assets with energy-efficient solutions (e.g., solar
                          pumping, step-down transformers). To reduce women’s time burden collecting water, community water points in targeted
                          neighborhoods and rural villages will be rehabilitated and expanded, shortening travel distances. It will also finance rehabilitation of
                          networks, wells, and pumping/booster stations, plus electrical materials and alternative energy (solar) to sustain services in
                          disadvantaged areas. Reducing non-revenue water will be prioritized to cut losses and bolster climate resilience. Investments in
                          conventional supply and desalination will help beneficiaries adapt to drought, heat, and floods, while sanitation investments protect
                          water resources from contamination and ensure continuity during climate shocks.

                           21. Sub-Component 3.2 - Improving WASH services for IDP, refugee, and marginalized communities (US$ 4.9 million
                          IDA equivalent). This subcomponent will fund WASH interventions to sustain essential services and prevent/respond to
                          communicable diseases. It will rehabilitate damaged water and sanitation mains and networks; establish water treatment
                          units in priority areas; provide water trucking and fuel for IDP camps, marginalized communities, and key WASH facilities;
                          implement fluoride treatment and other water quality improvements; and supply spare parts, equipment, and supplies
                          (portable testing kits, lab equipment) for proper operation and maintenance. It will support rapid responses to flash floods
                          and disease outbreaks. These activities will explicitly benefit women and girls—especially in refugee and IDP camps—by
                          improving safe, reliable, dignified WASH access, reducing protection risks, and supporting menstrual hygiene




_For Official Use Only_
                          management. WASH investments will help beneficiaries adapt to drought, heat, and floods, protect vulnerable water
                          resources from contamination during climate events, and ensure service continuity during climate shocks.

                          22.     Sub-Component 3.3 - Capacity building for water utilities and community organizations (US$ 2.0 million IDA
                          equivalent). This subcomponent will build capacity for water utilities (four LWSCs, five GARWSP branches) and community
                          organizations (WUAs, WBCs) through training on O&M of WSS infrastructure; metering, billing, and financial management;
                          NRW reduction; MIS installation; and door-to-door subscriber surveys for better data. Priority will be given to youth and
                          women. It will promote water conservation, energy-efficient practices, strategic planning for sustainability, risk
                          management, performance monitoring, and empower WUAs in local system management, equitable resource
                          distribution, and dispute mediation. Women’s participation in WASH and irrigation will be expanded via localized roles
                          (female operators, hygiene promoters, WASH mobilizers, meter readers, community contractors), reducing travel and
                          enabling safer engagement in conservative, remote, or displacement-affected areas. The Project will also fund training
                          and wellfield sustainability plans for selected LWSCs to minimize groundwater abstraction, control salinity intrusion, and
                          enhance recharge. Capacity building will prioritize climate readiness to help beneficiaries adapt to climate shocks.

                          23. Component 4 - Project Support, Management, Evaluation and Administration (US$ 21.953 million IDA equivalent
                          and US$ 1.047 million Yemen Fund, UNDP and UNOPS implemented). This component will finance implementation,
                          administration, management, monitoring and evaluation, and environmental and social aspects of the Project, including:
                          (a) direct and indirect costs of the United Nations (UN) IAs; (c) provision of consultancy services required for Project
                          monitoring, evaluation and coordination; (d) conducting independent audits of Project activities; (e); third-party
                          monitoring; and (f) supporting the provision of technical assistance on system strengthening and service delivery
                          improvement.



                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                                                             Page 8



                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                           Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          24.      Environmental risks (substantial) mainly arise from activities under Component 2 (such as hydraulic structures
                          and expanded irrigation infrastructure) and Component 3 (e.g. the rehabilitation and construction of pipelines and
                          treatment plants). While the Project is expected to deliver positive environmental benefits, adverse risks may occur during
                          construction (e.g., improper waste disposal, noise, dust, soil erosion, loss of vegetation) and operation (e.g., effluent and
                          sludge discharge, water quality impacts, waste generation). Occupational health and safety (OHS) risks may also arise from
                          inadequate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) use, poor housekeeping, and debris management. These risks are
                          expected to be site-specific, reversible, and of low magnitude, and can be mitigated through engineering designs, site-
                          specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), contractor ESMPs, and adherence to World Bank
                          Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs).




_For Official Use Only_
                          25. Social risks (substantial) This Project faces significant social risks, including potential exclusion of vulnerable groups
                          (women, female-headed households), elite capture, OHS and labor issues (poor conditions, child labor), SEA/SH risks near
                          residential areas and among workers, heightened security risks in conflict zones, weak institutional capacity, data privacy
                          concerns, limited participation of women and marginalized groups, threats to community health and safety, and possible
                          loss of productive land during terrace rehabilitation. Land acquisition for water networks, dams, and related facilities may
                          further affect communities, and weak national/district implementation capacity could hinder risk management. To
                          mitigate these risks, the Project will adopt an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Labor
                          Management Procedures (LMP), and—if needed—a Resettlement Framework (RF); implement inclusive stakeholder
                          engagement, transparent governance, robust data security, targeted capacity building, gender-sensitive approaches, and
                          grievance mechanisms; and address SEA/SH and security risks through an SEA/SH Action Plan and Security Management
                          Plan (SMP). All subprojects will be screened under the ESMF, with specific assessments conducted as required before
                          activities begin. The ESMF, RF, and LMP will be prepared, consulted inclusively, and disclosed prior to implementation. A
                          Grievance Mechanism will provide channels for concerns and redressing any complaints.

                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          26.       The Project will be implemented by UN agencies with the support of local partners, capitalizing on their capacities and
                          implementation experiences and capabilities. The Project will be implemented through UN agencies that exhibit technical
                          understanding and readiness for implementation in specified basins. Financial Management Framework Agreement
                          (FMFA) and Alternative Procurement Plan (APA), allowing UN agencies to use their own Financial Regulations and
                          procurement procedures as APA under the Procurement Framework Policy Section III.F.

                          27.      Under the Project, the recipient UN agencies will serve as both grant recipients and implementing entities.
                          These agencies have robust and adaptable implementation arrangements tailored to local needs and will strengthen the



                                                                                                                                                      Page 9



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                          capacity of local partners5, whose past commitment demonstrates strong potential. The two UN IAs will provide technical
                          assistance and training to local institutions, progressively transferring implementation technical authority to them while
                          retaining overall fiduciary responsibility and accountability, and keeping the Government of Yemen (IRG) informed
                          through regular meetings with relevant ministries to ensure transparency and alignment. Local partners, high-performing
                          private contractors, and community groups will be engaged for implementation. The Third-Party Monitoring Agents
                          (TPMAs) will be engaged in monitoring and verification of all Project interventions, conducting quarterly supervision visits
                          to Project sites for technical, safeguards, and fiduciary verifications.

                          28.     Components 1 and 2 will be implemented by UNDP, and Component 3 by UNOPS. Components 1 and 2 will be
                          implemented by UNDP through a Joint Project Implementation Unit (JPIU)6, working in coordination with CAMA, GSMRB
                          and research centers. A SMU, to be hosted by MWE’s and supported by the Climate Change Unit (CCU) will be established
                          to operate CWIMS. A Steering Committee (SC) and a Technical Reference Group (TRG) outside the main implementation
                          structure will provide advice and strategic oversight. Details on the role and responsibilities will be reflected in the Project
                          Operational Manual (POM). Component 2 will support climate-resilient catchment and irrigation services in Aden-Tuban
                          Basin and Wadi Hajir Basin using Community Contracting (CC), Cash for Work (CFW), and National Competitive Bidding
                          (NCB) based on task complexity. UNDP will partner with SFD, PWP, and UWSS-PMU, to ensure sustainability and local
                          ownership. UWSS-PMU will coordinate institutional support and capacity building for key water institutions. Component
                          3 will be implemented by UNOPS, through a Joint Project Implementation Unit (JPIU) and will focus on WSS interventions
                          in partnership with national and local institutions (e.g., UWSS-PMU, PWP, LWSCs, GARWSP). UNOPS will oversee




_For Official Use Only_
                          implementation, safeguards, and coordination, while UWSS-PMU and PWP will manage technical designs, monitoring, and
                          emergency responses. LWSCs will support implementation and receive capacity building to manage water resources
                          effectively.

                          29.      The Project will establish a Technical Coordination Committee (TCC) to ensure and guide implementation for
                          phase-1. The TCC will be set up to serve and facilitate investment planning process and technical coordination, ensuring
                          that activities are well aligned across partners. Leadership mechanisms and chairs for the TCC will be outlined in the POM,
                          in consultation with WNG Legal Team. TCC will play an advisory role and will meet at least twice a year and more often if
                          needed. The TCC main tasks will include (i) conducting a periodic review of Project implementation progress and providing
                          recommendations for improvement, as necessary; (ii) reviewing proposed subprojects for the AWPs and recommending
                          a shortlist; and (iii) strategically communicating the Project and its investments to other donors and stakeholders. The
                          World Bank will join TCC whenever needed to provide technical guidance.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank




                          5 SFD, PWP, UWSS-PMUs, LWSCs, Agriculture and Water Governorate Offices, academic centers, etc.
                          6 In collaboration with UWSS-PMU, UNDP will establish a Joint Project Implementation Unit (JPIU) to provide leadership, technical oversight, and

                          quality assurance for Project activities. The JPIU will be supported by more than multidisciplinary UNDP experts from country, regional, and
                          headquarters offices, covering irrigation, water resources, environment, and social sectors. UNDP’s internal services, including human resources,
                          procurement, logistics, finance, monitoring, evaluation, and accountability—will provide additional support to the JPIU.



                                                                                                                                                                     Page 10



                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (P505562)


                           Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom
                           Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

                           Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed
                           Senior Agriculture Specialist

                           Chris Fischer
                           Senior Water Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           United Nations Development Program

                           United Nations Office for Project Services

                          Implementing Agencies
                           United Nations Office for Project Services




_For Official Use Only_
                           United Nations Development Program

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom, Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed, Chris Fischer

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                Michael Haney                        10-Dec-2025

                          Country Director:                        Dina N. Abu-Ghaida                   27-Feb-2026




                                                                                                                                           Page 11



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
