Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 03/17/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04840




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                  Page 1 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505562                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         Yemen I-WISE                 2026

                     Operation Name            Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Yemen, Republic of        Yemen, Republic of                        MID EAST,NORTH                Water
                                                                                         AFRICA,AFG,PAK

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     United Nations            United Nations Office for Project         03-Nov-2025                   15-Jan-2026
                     Development               Services, United Nations Development
                     Programme, United         Program
                     Nations Office for
                     Project Services,



Public Disclosure
                     United Nations
                     Development
                     Program

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     28-Jan-2025               154,550,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to strengthen climate and water information management system, climate
                     resilient irrigation services, and access to water supply and sanitation services in selected basins. The Project includes
                     four components designed around a robust systems approach that responds to the complex, FCV context in Yemen.
                     These are informed by deep analysis and contextual awareness of the key issues in the water and agricultural sectors
                     and include a high degree of flexibility built around a combination of top-down and bottom-up interventions. This
                     includes explicit provisions to enable adaptive management through strong partnerships with proven track record of
                     implementation and robust risk management, with a commitment to inclusion and learning in line with the World
                     Bank’s FCV Strategy. Component 1. Climate and Water Information Management Systems (US$ 3.5 million, UNDP
                     implemented). This component is financed through a grant from the World Bank Administered Multi-Donor “Yemen
                     Resilience, Recovery and Reconstruction Umbrella Trust Fund” and will provide the data and information needed to


                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     inform climate resilient decision making and address the longer-term challenges facing water scarcity and food security
                     in Yemen through the following two subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1 – Developing a Climate and Water Information
                     Management System (CWIMS) (US$ 2.0 million Yemen Fund, UNDP implemented). This subcomponent will develop and
                     operationalize a scalable national CWIMS hosted by MWE, building on and reactivating the earlier system (NWRMIS).
                     The CWIMS will be designed for long-term sustainability through institutional ownership, capacity building, and scalable
                     financing, enabling future integration of additional water basins, Early Warning System (EWS) modules, and decision
                     support tools (see Annex 3 for details). Activities include a national inventory and digitization of water and climate data,
                     assessment of monitoring networks, and conceptual design of a sustainable nationwide observation network. More
                     than a technical system, CWIMS will serve as a collaborative platform, fostering coordinated engagement among
                     Yemen’s key water and climate stakeholders—including CAMA, MWE, NWRA, GSMRB, and academic institutions—to
                     ensure diverse technical expertise and institutional mandates are reflected. This collaborative foundation will support
                     sustained joint ownership, data sharing, and operational integration across sectors. The system will be equipped with
                     modern tools and interoperable platforms for broad access and data security. A dedicated System Management Unit
                     (SMU) within MWE will oversee CWIMS operations and stakeholder coordination. Subcomponent 1.2 – Developing
                     Climate Resilient Decision Making and Monitoring Networks in Prioritized Basins (US$ 1.5 million Yemen Fund, UNDP
                     implemented). This subcomponent will develop and apply decision support tools and coordination mechanisms to
                     facilitate climate-resilient decision-making in the two selected basins. It will include: (i) the development of decision
                     support tools and products, using the CWIMS, to inform both investments and day-to-day decisions focused on water
                     and food security, flood and drought risk management and improved weather forecasting, among others. Tools—such
                     as, multi-criteria analysis frameworks and simulation models—will integrate climate change considerations, enabling
                     stakeholders to prioritize projects and make climate-resilient choices; (ii) the strengthening of coordination and



Public Disclosure
                     consultation mechanisms to ensure effective coordination and consultation among all relevant stakeholders such as
                     WUAs, WBCs, ACs, and ICs; (iii) the update of IWRM and investment plans in the Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajir basins; and
                     (iv) the capacity building to be designed based on an assessment of the capacity of key government and community
                     organizations, to deliver a comprehensive capacity building program for local stakeholders, including training on
                     CWIMS, development and use of decision support tools, operation and maintenance of monitoring stations, and
                     strengthening coordination and consultation skills. ` Component 2 - Improved Integrated Watershed Management and
                     Irrigation (US$ 67 million IDA equivalent, UNDP implemented). This component will enhance water and food security,
                     improve disaster risk management, and strengthen community resilience, with a focus on climate adaptation
                     investments in areas with critical water stress, severe food insecurity, and vulnerability to extreme weather events. It
                     will leverage the parallel outputs of the information management system and IWRM plans financed under Component
                     1. Community-led organizations and farmers will be trained in operations, maintenance, and use of infrastructure to
                     foster ownership. The implementation partner has pre-existing engagements in the Aden-Tuban basin to scale the
                     activities under this component. The component will finance geographically targeted activities across four core areas:
                     (a) rehabilitation and reconstruction of water resources infrastructure; (b) irrigation modernization to increase water-
                     use efficiency; (c) soil conservation and land protection; (d) institutional support and capacity building. Activities to be
                     financed are outlined by basins, and include: Sub-Component 2.1 – Integrated Management of Water and Agriculture in
                     the Aden-Tuban Basin (US$ 50 million IDA equivalent). Based on technical selection criteria and consultations with the
                     local communities, this sub-component will rebuild and construct climate-resilient infrastructure for water harvesting,
                     storage, and flood protection. Types of infrastructure to be financed include approximately 50 structures, such as check
                     and diversion dams, ponds, cisterns, embankments with combined storage capacity of about 1.863 million cubic meters
                     and rehabilitation of 30–40 km of irrigation canals. Farming communities will benefit from the rehabilitation of



                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     traditional terrace systems, on-farm improvements, including modern irrigation (drip, sprinklers, solar pumps),
                     upgraded distribution networks, and improved drainage. This sub-component will also finance reinforcement of 20–30
                     km of wadi banks using nature-based solutions, vegetative cover and retention walls, installation of sedimentation
                     barriers to reduce accumulation, and rehabilitation of about 5,500 hectares through terracing and soil conservation
                     practices. Sub-Component 2.2 – Integrated Management of Water and Agriculture in the Wadi Hajir Basin (US$ 17
                     million IDA equivalent). This sub-component will finance infrastructure tailored to the hydrogeological specification of
                     the catchment that help towards climate adaptation. Under this sub-component the Project will finance the
                     rehabilitation and upgrading of critical water infrastructure in the Wadi Hajir Basin, including canals, small storage and
                     recharge structures, as well as flood protection works. More than 2,000 hectares of agricultural land will be protected
                     from flooding and upgraded with improved irrigation or drainage to increase productivity and resilience. This sub-
                     component will also enhance on-farm technologies that enable water-saving and solar-powered irrigation (pumps,
                     greenhouses, drip and floppy sprinklers) and improved scheduling tools to enhance water use efficiency. These activities
                     will actively engage local communities building-on traditional practices, and will finance packages of land conservation
                     and erosion-control measures that include terraces, check dams, embankments and other relevant tools, etc.
                     Subcomponent 2.3 - Institutional Support and Capacity Building. This sub-component will provide institutional support
                     to community-based organizations across the two basins, including WUAs, WBCs, ACs, ICs, and field offices of MWE and
                     MAIF. These organizations will be guided to then work with farmers and deliver Good Agricultural Practices (GAP)
                     training, provide advisory services, and conduct follow-ups to support technology adoption and supervise operations.
                     Key activities include training in integrated water resources management. Farmers will be trained in specialized
                     practices for irrigation technology and operational maintenance of infrastructure, coordinate collective maintenance,
                     water use and allocation, enable peer learning, and monitor local system performance. The Project will also finance



Public Disclosure
                     community employment through cash-for-work model and community contracting (CC) for rehabilitation and
                     construction work to foster community ownership. Priority will be given to unemployed youth and women. Component
                     3 - Resilient Water Supply and Sanitation Systems and WASH Services in selected areas (US$ 70 million IDA equivalent,
                     UNOPS implemented). This component will finance design, supervision, restoration, and expansion of WSS systems and
                     establishment of WASH services across the two selected basins. In both the basins, the Project will finance the following
                     broad activities: (a) restoring access to and improving quality of WSS services; (b) improving WASH services for IDP,
                     refugee, and marginalized communities; (c) Capacity building for water utilities and community organizations. The
                     interventions of this component will be distributed across rural, peri-urban, and urban areas and will involve local
                     community participation to carry out works. Given the concentration of settlements, the Project financed activities fall
                     largely in the urban and peri-urban regions of the Aden-Tuban basin and support rural communities in the Wadi Hajir
                     Basin. This component includes the following three sub-components: Sub-Component 3.1 - Restoring access to and
                     improving quality of WSS services (US$ 59.5 million IDA equivalent). This subcomponent will finance rehabilitation and
                     construction of medium to large-scale water supply and sanitation facilities, accounting for climate-resilient
                     construction and water saving. The activities will include the rehabilitation and expansion of pipelines and networks for
                     efficient distribution, water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, and small-scale decentralized desalination
                     plants for brackish groundwater and seawater. In addition, the Project will also finance rehabilitation of water and
                     sanitation networks, wells, pumping and booster stations, and related civil works. To support the operation of main
                     water and wastewater facilities, the Project will finance electrical materials and alternative energy solutions, such as
                     solar panels, to ensure reliable and sustainable service provision in disadvantaged areas. NRW reduction will be
                     prioritized in the targeted areas to reduce water losses and improve climate resilience capacity. Investments in
                     conventional water supply and desalination will be essential for ensuring that the beneficiaries will have capacity to



                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                    Page 4 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     adapt to climate shocks like drought, high heat, and flooding, while also building flexibility into the system to adapt to
                     climate shocks. Investments in sanitation are needed to protect vulnerable water resources from contamination during
                     climate events, as well as to ensure services continue during climate shocks. Sub-Component 3.2 - Improving WASH
                     services for IDP, refugee, and marginalized communities (US$ 7 million IDA equivalent). This sub-component will fund
                     emergency WASH interventions aimed at preventing and responding to communicable diseases within these critical
                     systems. It will support rehabilitation of WASH facilities, provide necessary spare parts, equipment, and supplies to
                     ensure their proper functioning and maintenance, as well as the testing of water quality. These activities will explicitly
                     benefit women and girls particularly those in refugee and IDP camps by improving safe, reliable, and dignified access to
                     WASH services, reducing protection risks, and supporting menstrual hygiene management. The WASH will be essential
                     for ensuring that the beneficiaries will have capacity to adapt to climate shocks like drought, high heat, and flooding, as
                     well as protect vulnerable water resources from contamination during climate events, in addition to ensure services
                     continue during climate shocks. Sub-Component 3.3 - Capacity building for water utilities and community organizations
                     (US$ 3.5 million IDA equivalent). This subcomponent will finance capacity building for water utilities (Four LWSCsFive
                     GARWSP branches) and community organizations (WUAs, WBCs) through training in O&M of WSS infrastructure, for
                     metering and billing, financial management via efficient billing, collection, and Non-Revenue Water (NRW) reduction
                     methods, and conducting door-to-door surveys of subscribers for better data management. Priority will be given to
                     youth and women. The capacity building financed under this Project will also promote water conservation and energy-
                     efficient practices, support strategic plans for sustainability, risk management, and performance monitoring, and
                     empower WUAs for local system management, equitable resource distribution, and dispute mediation. In addition, the
                     Project will finance trainings and plans for wellfield sustainability for selected LWSCs by establishing management plans
                     to minimize groundwater abstraction, control salinity intrusion, and increase recharge. Such capacity building activities



Public Disclosure
                     will both prioritize climate readiness and be essential for ensuring the client can adapt to climate shocks. Component 4 -
                     Project Support, Management, Evaluation and Administration (US$13.0 million IDA equivalent and US$ 1.05 million
                     Yemen Fund, UNDP and UNOPS implemented). This component will finance implementation, administration,
                     management, monitoring and evaluation, and environmental and social aspects of the Project, including: (a) direct and
                     indirect costs of the United Nations (UN) IAs; (c) provision of consultancy services required for Project monitoring,
                     evaluation and coordination; (d) conducting independent audits of Project activities; (e); third-party monitoring; and (f)
                     supporting the provision of technical assistance on system strengthening and service delivery improvement.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project Development Objective is to strengthen climate and water information management system, climate
                     resilient irrigation services, and access to water supply and sanitation services in selected basins. The Project includes
                     four components designed around a robust systems approach that responds to the complex, FCV context in Yemen.
                     Component 1. Climate and Water Information Management Systems (US$ 3.5 million, UNDP implemented). This
                     component is financed through a grant from the World Bank Administered Multi-Donor “Yemen Resilience, Recovery
                     and Reconstruction Umbrella Trust Fund” and will provide the data and information needed to inform climate resilient
                     decision making and address the longer-term challenges facing water scarcity and food security in Yemen through the


                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     following two subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1 Developing a Climate and Water Information Management System
                     (CWIMS) (US$ 2.0 million Yemen Fund, UNDP implemented). Subcomponent 1.2 – Developing Climate Resilient Decision
                     Making and Monitoring Networks in Prioritized Basins (US$ 1.5 million Yemen Fund, UNDP implemented). ` Component
                     2 - Improved Integrated Watershed Management and Irrigation (US$ 67 million IDA equivalent, UNDP implemented).
                     This component aims to boost water and food security, disaster risk management, and community resilience through
                     climate adaptation investments in high-risk areas. It builds on outputs from the information management system and
                     IWRM plans (Component 1). Community organizations and farmers will be trained to operate and maintain
                     infrastructure, promoting local ownership. Leveraging existing work in the Aden-Tuban basin, the component will fund
                     targeted activities in four areas: (a) water infrastructure rehabilitation; (b) irrigation modernization; (c) soil and land
                     protection; and (d) institutional support and capacity building. Activities are basin-specific. This component includes
                     three subcomponents: Sub-Component 2.1 – Integrated Management of Water and Agriculture in the Aden-Tuban
                     Basin (US$ 50 million IDA equivalent). Sub-Component 2.2 – Integrated Management of Water and Agriculture in the
                     Wadi Hajir Basin (US$ 17 million IDA equivalent) and Subcomponent 2.3 - Institutional Support and Capacity Building.
                     Component 3 - Resilient Water Supply and Sanitation Systems and WASH Services in selected areas (US$ 70 million IDA
                     equivalent, UNOPS implemented). This component will finance design, supervision, restoration, and expansion of WSS
                     systems and establishment of WASH services across the two selected basins. In both the basins, the Project will finance
                     the following broad activities: (a) restoring access to and improving quality of WSS services; (b) improving WASH
                     services for IDP, refugee, and marginalized communities; (c) Capacity building for water utilities and community
                     organizations. The interventions of this component will be distributed across rural, peri-urban, and urban areas and will
                     involve local community participation to carry out works. Given the concentration of settlements, the Project financed
                     activities fall largely in the urban and peri-urban regions of the Aden-Tuban basin and support rural communities in the




Public Disclosure
                     Wadi Hajir Basin. This component includes the following three sub-components: Sub-Component 3.1 - Restoring access
                     to and improving quality of WSS services (US$ 59.5 million IDA equivalent). Sub-Component 3.2 - Improving WASH
                     services for IDP, refugee, and marginalized communities (US$ 7 million IDA equivalent). contamination during climate
                     events, in addition to ensure services continue during climate shocks. Sub-Component 3.3 - Capacity building for water
                     utilities and community organizations (US$ 3.5 million IDA equivalent). Component 4 - Project Support, Management,
                     Evaluation and Administration (US$13.0 million IDA equivalent and US$ 1.05 million Yemen Fund, UNDP and UNOPS
                     implemented). This component will finance implementation, administration, management, monitoring and evaluation,
                     and environmental and social aspects of the Project, including: (a) direct and indirect costs of the United Nations (UN)
                     IAs; (c) provision of consultancy services required for Project monitoring, evaluation and coordination; (d) conducting
                     independent audits of Project activities; (e); third-party monitoring; and (f) supporting the provision of technical
                     assistance on system strengthening and service delivery improvement.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Yemen's geographical location in an arid to semi-arid zone has made water a longstanding and critical constraint on the
                     country's social and economic development. In addition, Climate change is compounding persistent development
                     challenges related to water scarcity and the impacts of the conflict. Yemen is the most vulnerable country in the MENA
                     region to the impacts of climate change and is ranked 27th globally. It is also the least prepared country in MENA to
                     manage the impacts associated with climate change. Global climate models forecast a future for Yemen which is
                     characterized by warmer temperatures and higher annual average precipitation, with more frequent, intense rainfall
                     events resulting in flash floods and longer dry periods. The proposed project will span four years, from 2025 to 2029.
                     The selection of targeted water basins will follow a prioritization framework that considers factors such as security,

                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     accessibility, needs, local institutional capacity, the nature of the interventions, and cost-benefit trade-offs. Given the
                     substantial needs within the water sector, the project will focus on key water and food security interventions in selected
                     basins, developed through intensive consultations with relevant stakeholders. The final list of priority interventions for
                     these basins will be determined during the project preparation phase, in collaboration with the implementing agencies,
                     government technical counterparts, academic water research institutions, local community organizations, private water
                     providers, and other donors. This collaborative approach will ensure effective coordination and the efficient, timely use
                     of funds.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Under the proposed project, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nation Development Program (UNDP)
                     and United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) will be the grant recipients as well as the managing and
                     implementing entities on an exceptional basis. During the project preparation, the World Bank procurement and
                     safeguard team will work together with the three UN agencies to discuss the lessons learnt from the previous and
                     ongoing operations and reflect them in the new design to avoid any fiduciary challenges and constraints.
                     The UN agencies have set up robust implementation arrangements and proved successful under the past and ongoing
                     operations funded by the World Bank (YFSRRP, YEHCP, and YIUSEP-I and II). For the implementation of activities, FAO,
                     UNDP and UNOPS will sign relevant partnership agreements with local partners: SFD / PWP, and UWS-PMUs, Research
                     Centers, LWSCs, the branches of NWRA and Agriculture Governorate Offices, Water Basin Committees, Water User
                     Association, Agriculture Cooperatives etc, based on terms and conditions acceptable to the World Bank. For this
                     proposed project, the UN agencies will further strengthen the capacity and provide a more implementation role for the
                     national and local implementing partners to deliver results on the ground. Since UN agencies will be relying on their




Public Disclosure
                     existing PMUs that are already in place, the level of readiness for implementation is very high. it is mentionable that As
                     part of the ongoing YIUSEP and YEHCP projects, a comprehensive capacity-building program has delivered 152 courses,
                     totaling 579 training days for 2,870 trainees for the national and local implementing partners. Currently, a local firm has
                     been recruited to assess the capacity of key national and local institutions in Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajer basins, with
                     the final report expected during project preparation. This assessment will evaluate the institutions’ technical and
                     institutional capacity to manage additional projects.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental risk is assessed as substantial due to the project's support for several interventions that may
                     involve environmental risks. While the anticipated risks and impacts are generally site-specific, reversible, and of low
                     magnitude, they require appropriate mitigation measures to address them effectively. Notably, interventions under
                     Sub-component 3.1, "Restoring Access to and Improving Quality of Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) Services," will
                     involve restoring and expanding access to WSS services. These activities include the rehabilitation and construction of
                     medium- to large-scale WSS infrastructure, such as pipelines, networks, water treatment plants, wastewater
                     treatment plants (WWTPs), decentralized desalination plants, water wells, pumping and booster stations, and related
                     civil works. The environmental impacts of these activities, whether on new or existing sites, are expected to be site-
                     specific, limited, and manageable. Common environmental concerns include construction waste, wastewater, dust,


                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                     noise, traffic deviations, and occupational health and safety risks. Although no large-scale, significant, or irreversible
                     impacts are anticipated, some interventions may pose substantial risks, such as exposure to sewer gases during the
                     rehabilitation of sewer networks or WWTPs. Importantly, these interventions are expected to yield significant positive
                     outcomes for both people and the environment. They will play a crucial role in improving basic living conditions,
                     stimulating local economic activity, and enhancing Yemeni cities' resilience to climate change.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risks and impacts associated with the project are rated as substantial and can be summarized as follows:
                     There is a potential risk of elite capture and the exclusion of vulnerable groups and individuals, such as women and
                     persons with disabilities, from the benefits of the project, which could lead to social tensions within the communities
                     if the selection criteria are not fully understood or implemented fairly and transparently. The project may require land
                     acquisition due to the construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure. There are risks of Sexual Exploitation and
                     Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH) associated with the project activities, particularly in areas with a significant
                     presence of workers and community interactions. The project may result in poor working conditions for laborers
                     involved in the construction and maintenance of the infrastructure, and there is a risk of child labor being used in the
                     project activities. The project may face security risks, especially in areas with existing conflicts or instability. Project
                     activities may pose health and safety risks to both workers and the surrounding communities, including the
                     transmission of Cholera, diphtheria, and other communicable diseases. Construction activities may cause nuisances
                     related to noise and vibration, affecting the local communities. The project may induce social tensions and conflicts
                     due to competition over project benefits, including employment opportunities. Lastly, there may be challenges
                     related to the weak implementation capacity at the national and district levels, which could affect the effective




Public Disclosure
                     management of social risks.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant, as the proposed project will involve the construction and rehabilitation of small-medium
                      infrastructure . The interventions which will be supported might result in environmental and social risks and impacts
                      as they will involve physical interventions to be implemented in urban cities and rural areas. Although no significant
                      risks and adverse environmental impacts are anticipated; potential minor adverse impacts from works related to
                      earthworks, dust and air emissions, debris, and other solid waste generation and management, social inconveniences,
                      and community health and safety due to traffic increase, blocked streets, noise, dust, as well as workers health and
                      safety are expected. To ensure adequate management of potential environmental and social risks and impacts, the
                      project will implement environmental and social management guidelines that are included in the environmental and
                      social management instruments which will be prepared to include ESF requirements.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      The project implementing partners, FAO, UNDP, and UNOPS, will develop a joint Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
                      The proposed SEP will clearly identify all relevant stakeholders, including local communities, government agencies,
                      non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and other interested parties. It will outline the methods and tools for

                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                        Page 8 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                      engaging with stakeholders, such as public meetings, focus group discussions, surveys, and information dissemination
                      through various media. The SEP will include details on the grievance mechanism to address concerns and complaints
                      from workers and communities. Additionally, the SEP will identify potential risks related to stakeholder engagement
                      and develop mitigation measures to address them. These elements will help ensure that the SEP is comprehensive,
                      inclusive, and effective. The project team will assist the implementing partners by providing a template for the SEP to
                      ensure it is reviewed and cleared prior to the appraisal stage.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                Relevant

                      Based on the type of activities and interventions in the project, the potential labor risks and working conditions are
                      rated as moderate. These risks may include poor working conditions for laborers involved in the construction and
                      rehabilitation of infrastructure, child labor, health and safety risks to both workers and surrounding communities,
                      social tensions and conflict over project benefits, and SEA/SH risks, particularly in areas with significant worker and
                      community interaction. All these risks can be addressed prior to commencement through the development of the
                      Labor Management Procedures (LMP). The project implementing partners, FAO, UNDP, and UNOPS, will develop a
                      joint LMP according to their interventions and activities. The LMP measures and actions will be clearly indicated in the
                      project Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), including the timeframe and responsibilities. The joint
                      LMP will be reviewed and cleared prior to the appraisal stage.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                 Relevant

                      The construction and rehabilitation interventions works might lead to increased use of raw materials and resources as




Public Disclosure
                      well as increased use of water and energy after the services are restored. Risks and impacts related to sourcing,
                      transporting, and using resources and materials. On the other hand, different activities under the project will result in
                      the release of non-hazardous and hazardous wastes and pollutants. The ES instruments will identify measures that
                      will be required to ensure proper collection, transportation, and disposal of wastes in a manner that will reduce GHG
                      emissions. It will also identify measures to reduce emissions from the use of fossil fuels for energy generation.
                      Furthermore, adequate measures will be identified as part of the site-specific instruments, including the provisions
                      for environmental and social risk mitigations in the procurement documents for contractors. The Bank’s
                      Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) will be used as well.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                 Relevant

                      The potential risks under ESS4 (Community Health and Safety) for the project may include SEA/SH due to labor influx
                      and interaction between workers and local communities, as well as general risks to the health and safety of the
                      communities within the project area. These risks will be managed through the development and implementation of
                      Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments, including Labor Management Procedures (LMP), SEA/SH action plans,
                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and site-specific instruments like Contractor
                      Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMPs). Additionally, the implementing partners will develop their
                      own Security Management Plan (SMP).

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                             TBD

                      ESS5 is not clearly relevant at this concept stage. If the project activities require land for the construction of small
                      water tanks, the normal practice in Yemen is to obtain land through government allocation or voluntary land


                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                         Page 9 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)



                      donation. The project team will assess this standard after the completion of the concept stage and prior to the
                      appraisal stage.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                   Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                        Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                              TBD

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           No



Public Disclosure
                       Use of Borrower’s ES policy, legal and institutional framework is not considered under this project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       Use of Common Approach is not considered under this project.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     To manage the potential E&S risks under the project, the following instruments are considered to be prepared:
                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) which will include specific assessments and instruments required
                     to address the identified risks and impacts, with a timeframe ensuring that appropriate instruments are prepared prior
                     to any project activities and include mitigation measures and recommendations to maximize the benefits and
                     emphasize an inclusive approach.
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared, disclosed, consulted upon, and cleared by the WB prior to
                     appraisal, as appropriate and proportionate to project-associated risks.
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared as a joint document by the implementing partners, cleared and
                     disclosed prior to appraisal and/or before start of activities.
                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to outline the screening, categorization, assessment,
                     monitoring and reporting requirements as well as the capacity building requirements under the project.


                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                  Page 10 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Yemen Improved Water Management And Irrigation For Sustainability And Efficiency Project (P505562)




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom               Title:        Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                  nabulohom@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed               Job Title:    Agriculture Specialist

                      Email:                  fahmed6@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Chris Fischer                         Job Title:    Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  cfischer1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW



Public Disclosure
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                     Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom, Faiza Hesham Hael Ahmed, Chris Fischer

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:            Amer Abdulwahab Ali Al-Ghorbany

                     ADM Social Specialist:                   Ibrahim Ismail Mohammed Basalamah




                    Oct 10, 2025                                                                                                Page 11 of 11
