Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2024 | Report No: PIDPC00123




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                               EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                       South Africa Metro Trading
South Africa                                                P505813
                               AFRICA                                                     Services Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               09-Dec-2024                  26-Feb-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
National Treasury              City of Tshwane

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to to improve the performance of water and sanitation, electricity, and solid waste
services in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                   2,900.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      1,002.50
    Total Program Cost                                                                                      1,000.00
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                               2.50
  Total Financing                                                                                           1,000.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                    2.50

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                          1,000.00



                                                                                                                    Page 1
           The World Bank
           South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


         World Bank Lending                                                                                                                1,000.00

    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

       1. The eight Metropolitan Municipalities (Metros)1 are the key to South Africa’s social and economic future as they
          hold 40% of the country's population. These metros represent the largest municipalities in the country, with a
          total population of 22 million, covering nearly 30,000 square kilometers. Approximately 25% of the country’s
          population, and nearly half of the urban population in the country, reside in the Gauteng City Region, which houses
          over 15 million inhabitants (2020) and contributes to one-third of national GDP growth; only two metros, Buffalo
          City and Mangaung have a population smaller than one million. Metros provide electricity to the majority of the
          industrial customers, powering the country’s economy.

       2. South Africa's metros are facing a crisis in the provision of basic services, marked by declining safety, reliability,
          and accessibility. This significant decline in the last 10 years is due to several factors including: i) low collection
          rates resulting in loss of revenues; ii) trading services departments not having full control of the revenue cycle
          (governance failures); iii) lack of financial transparency and suboptimal procurement processes; iv) lack of proper
          asset management; and v) underinvestment in infrastructure operations and maintenance, has led to capacity
          constraints and unreliable services, resulting in a cycle of diminishing revenues and decreased investment. In
          many metros, the sustained deterioration of trading services infrastructure has (among other factors) been
          associated with the centralization of support services such as finance and collections, human resources, supply
          chain management, information technology, and fleet management, often under multiple separate components
          (e.g., Executive Directors or heads of departments) of the metro administration. Urgent action is needed to
          reverse the collapse of urban services and support the businesses’ turnaround to improve the quality of life for
          South Africa's residents.
    Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program

       3. Recognizing the imperative nature of addressing sustainable urban growth, the Government of South Africa has
          adopted a multi-pronged approach to support city governments. At the national level, the National Treasury is
          implementing an umbrella program that seeks to enable cities to address the dysfunctional spatial form and
          inefficiencies in the built environment. The Cities Support Programme (CSP) supports inclusive urban economic
          growth by strengthening the enabling intergovernmental environment for this agenda and providing city
          implementation support. The program outcome is focused on improving performance and strengthening
          governance to ultimately result in inclusive economic growth.

1
    Buffalo City, City of Cape Town, City of Ekurhuleni, City of Johannesburg, City of Tshwane, eThekwini, Mangaung, Nelson Mandela Bay.


                                                                                                                                                Page 2
           The World Bank
           South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)



       4. As part of efforts to turn around the deteriorating performance of municipal trading services the National
          Treasury requested the World Bank to support the conceptualization and design of the proposed Metro Trading
          Services Programme (MTSP), and in conjunction to develop a Programme for Results (PforR) that will support the
          three trading services2 in metro municipalities. This will involve a combination of grant reforms together with the
          provision of conditional financial incentives that encourage municipalities to aggressively target the challenges
          affecting service delivery.


    Relationship to CAS/CPF

       5. The central tenet of the CPF is to help South Africa tackle the legacy of socio-economic exclusion and achieve
          an inclusive and resilient society. The CPF builds flexibility to respond to the Government’s financing needs and
          emerging priorities. The CPF has three focus areas and three cross cutting themes which address the binding
          constraints to growth and inequality in SA, namely: (i) the promotion of greater competition and inclusion to
          create more competitive and sustainable markets; (ii) the jobs agenda, focusing on both the demand and supply
          sides, and including value chains; and (iii) more investment and efficiency improvements in infrastructure.

       6. The 2022-2026 CPF is anchored on a spatially driven approach, underpinned by the strengthening of basic
          service delivery, to unlock the potential of urban areas across the country. In the urban sector, support is focused
          primarily on the institutionalization of the National Treasury’s Cities Support Program. The Metro Trading Services
          Program and the PforR are direct results of the WBG and National Treasury’s sustained urban partnership,
          spanning over 10 years. The program will respond to the institutional capacity needs of metros to enable
          substantive interventions in response to the challenges of collapsing infrastructure services. The program will
          contribute towards the fiscal envelope of government to address service delivery imperatives and, as the reforms
          are implemented, ultimately assist metros with the possibility of leveraging additional funding for their
          infrastructure needs.
     Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument
      7. The World Bank has supported the National Treasury across policy, institutional, and technical aspects of urban
           development and basic services for more than a decade. Following the successful implementation of a first phase
           of support to the Cities Support Programme which initiated in 2013 through Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS),
           in 2018 the WB and South Africa partnered on a second urban RAS, which is coming to closure in February 2025.
           After more than a decade of support through two phases of RAS, the National Treasury has opted to explore other
           WBG instruments with the PforR being the most relevant for the current reform objectives associated with the
           metro trading services agenda.

       8. The choice of the financing instrument and rationale is multi-dimensional due to the following considerations:
                 i.     The Program-for-Results (PforR) financing instrument is the appropriate choice for a results-oriented
                        approach addressing structural and systemic sector challenges. The PforR will specifically support
                        National Treasury’s efforts to design and operationalize an ambitious multi-sectoral reform.
                ii.     Opportunities for strengthening the country system and fostering a results-based culture. The PforR

2
    Trading services are defined as services for which consumption or service charges are levied and include water, electricity, and solid waste management.




                                                                                                                                                               Page 3
          The World Bank
          South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


                      instrument offers the opportunity to strengthen the existing country systems in a sustainable way. The
                      usage of a PforR instrument will incentivize improved service delivery, while also furthering the reform
                      agenda by focusing on results and outputs and instilling a results-based culture in selected institutions.
             iii.     The Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) was considered given the volume of the Government
                      Program and the associated PforR envelope, however, it was ultimately not selected.
    C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

    Program Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to improve the performance of water and sanitation, electricity, and solid waste services
in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.


    PDO Level Results Indicators

      o    PDO Indicator #1: Improved performance3 of water and sanitation services in South Africa’s metropolitan
           municipalities.
      o    PDO Indicator #2 Improved performance of electricity services in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.
      o    PDO Indicator #3: Improved performance of solid waste services in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.

    D. Program Description

    PforR Program Boundary

Summary of the Government program
      9. South Africa’s local government infrastructure grant system endows local governments with annual allocations
         intended to support investments in municipal infrastructure. The grant system, however, lacks effective
         incentives that focus on results. This has culminated in poor grant spending and inadequate non-financial
         performance. Generally, there is misalignment, duplications, over-lapping and mismatches amongst conditional
         grants. Further challenges include lack of implementation, ineffective support, and inadequate allocation
         methodology and innovation.

      10. In response, the National Treasury is creating a new Government program, the Metro Trading Services Program
          (MTSP), to support institutional reform and investment needed to turnaround urban trading services. The
          rationale behind the MTSP reforms is driven by a need to introduce a results-based approach to support the
          turnaround in the financial, technical, and corporate performance of the trading services. The Program also seeks
          to increase access to commercial finance to supplement available grant finance, thus increasing the level of
          investment and ultimately improving service outcomes (service reliability and quality) and to build resilience. The
          MTSP will be underpinned by council-approved business turnaround strategies for the three trading services that
          includes:
               • Performance: Clearly defined and time-bound targets for financial, technical and corporate performance
                  improvements.

3
  Operational performance refers to how well an organization or system executes its day-to-day activities and processes. It encompasses various metrics and measures
that reflect efficiency, effectiveness, and overall productivity in operations. Detailed definitions for the indicators will be provided in the PAD and included in the POM.


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
      The World Bank
      South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


           •   Management: A practical pathway to professionalize management of the service and build capability to
               implement the strategy.
           •   Structure: Establishment of a business unit or company structure, as appropriate.
           •   Finance: Clear goals to become creditworthy and be able to access commercial finance, with milestones.
           •   Investment: A fundable investment strategy & plan to improve service outcomes and build resilience.

Program Boundaries


   11. The key financing mechanism within the Metro Trading Services Program (the Government program) is the
       Metro Trading Services Grant (the PforR Program), which comprises the Program the proposed operation will
       support. The Government’s Metro Services Trading Program (MTSP) includes: (i) all financing spent on the
       program (US$3 billion) comprising the Metro Trading Services Grant (MTSG) that will exclusively target water
       supply and sanitation, electricity, and solid waste services, and (ii) all Metro expenditure from their own revenues
       and borrowing across the three trading services (currently ~US$6 billion), for a total Government Program of
       ~US$9 billion. The Program will also require an increasing annual Metro capex allocation to ensure that the MTSG
       does not substitute for annual Metro contribution.
   12. The PforR Program comprises the Metro Trading Services Grant (US$3 billion) which includes IBRD financing
       ($US1 billion) and NT financing ($US2 billion). The PforR expenditures are all those under the MTSG, but do not
       include the MTSP expenditures financed by the Metros from their own resources.

   13. Further dimensions of the PforR Program boundaries are as follows:
       •   Program Duration: The Program supports permitted MTSG-funded investments during the first phase of the
           anticipated Government’s Metro Trading Services Programme over a period of 6 years (2025-2031).
       • Program Area: The Program focuses on the eight metropolitan municipalities, namely Buffalo City, City of
           Cape Town, City of Ekurhuleni, City of Johannesburg, City of Tshwane, eThekwini, Mangaung, and Nelson
           Mandela Bay.
       • Program’s Expenditure Framework: Permitted investments under the Program fully align with the
           Government Program and include technical assistance to support the consolidation, adoption, and
           implementation of the metro’s trading services Turnaround Strategies and accompanying institutional reform
           roadmaps, investment plans, and capacity building at both central and local levels. Eligible investments also
           consist of low-risk physical investments to support institutional strengthening across the trading services.
           However, investments that may cause significant adverse impact on the environment and/or nearby
           population as defined in the World Bank Policy and Directive on PforR Financing will be excluded. Also, all
           works, goods, and consultancy contracts above the Operations Procurement Review Committee (OPRC)
           thresholds of US$50m will be excluded.
   14. The Program-for-Results (PforR) component will finance activities across three Results Areas, in three thematic
       areas, listed below. The water supply and sanitation, and energy sectors will enter the MTSP in the first year of
       implementation, with solid waste entering as of year two. The MTSG grant performance assessment and award
       timeline is available in Annex 1, including details on the preliminary total MTSG envelope for each Metro, per
       sector.
       • Results Area 1: Water Supply & Sanitation (WSS) - Governance, Operational, and Financial Performance of
           WSS Services.
       • Results Area 2: Electricity - Governance, Operational, and Financial Performance of Electricity Services.


                                                                                                                       Page 5
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


      •   Results Area 3: Solid Waste - Governance, Operational, and Financial Performance of Solid Waste
          Management Services.

  15. Metros will prepare Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) which are both aspirational and realistic.
      Plans will have clear targets as well as a budget for proposed activities, with sources of funding identified (MTSG
      and other sources). PIAPs are metro-specific but will adhere to a prescribed format which will be provided to the
      Metros by November 2024. The PIAPs, and their successful implementation, will serve as the Program’s
      Disbursement Linked Indicator per metro.

  16. Main areas of reforms, specific for each Trading Service, include the following demonstrative indicators that,
      among many others, would be featured in the PIAPs:
         a. Governance and Accountability (with the following examples of actions)
                  i. Single point accountability
                 ii. Ring fencing of costs and revenues
                iii. Separate audited financial statement for each trading service
         b. Operational Performance (with the following examples of actions)
                  i. Water: Non-Revenue Water (NRW) Reductions, Water Effluent Improvements
                 ii. Waste: Weighbridge Functionality, Logistics Management
                iii. Electricity: Distribution Network Rehabilitation, Commercial Operations Improvements,
                     Reduction of technical and non-technical losses
         c. Financial Performance (with the following examples of actions)
                  i. Operating cost coverage ratio (operational revenues/operational cost)
                 ii. Collection ratio

  17. The PIAPs will contain a combination of performance indicators that apply to all Metros, and performance
      targets that are metro specific. Given the heterogeneity of metros’ institutional, technical, and financial
      circumstances, each metro will set their own targets in accordance with their respective baseline situation. Draft
      PIAPs will be adjudicated by three distinct National Treasury constituted sectoral review committees, prior to the
      PIAPs being Council (or Board, in case of the City Power, Centelec, Pikitup and Johannesburg Water) approved at
      the Metro level.
E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

  18. South Africa has a robust and progressive legislative framework for assessing and managing environmental risks
      and impacts. The country systems are considered adequate and reliable to mitigate risks associated with the
      Program’s activities. The National Environmental Management Act (NEMA) (Act 107 of 1998) and Specific
      Environmental Management Acts (SEMAS); forms the overarching pieces of legislation that governs
      environmental issues in South Africa, while local government (metropolitans) develops and administers by-laws,
      in line with national and provincial legislative requirements, for the effective management of environmental
      matters under their control. Accountability for municipalities to protect the environment is affirmed in the various
      other pieces of legislation such as the Municipal Systems Act (Act 32 of 2000) and Spatial Planning and Land use
      Management Act (Act 16 of 2013) among others. The eight metropolitans have environmental management
      structures and systems in place, however, the implementation and enforcement of environmental requirements
      at municipality level varies and is often hampered by the lack of adequate human resources and ring fencing of
      financial resource to ensure full integration of environmental considerations in municipal planning.

                                                                                                                     Page 6
         The World Bank
         South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)



     19. Impacts associated with physical interventions under the Program have a potential to cause adverse
         environmental impacts. These impacts are considered less severe and complex than high risk projects and are
         site specific and manageable through known mitigation measures. The Program is expected to result in more
         climate resilient infrastructure, improved air, soil and water quality and water and energy use efficiencies. The
         anticipated climate co-benefits are considered high given the nature of the interventions and will be further
         assessed. An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESSA) will be undertaken prior to Appraisal to further assess
         the environmental and social effects of the Program and borrower systems against the six core principles outlined
         in the Banks’ Policy and Directive for PforR projects.

     20. The proposed operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation to
         climate change. The Project is aligned with South Africa’s National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS)4
         and National Determined Contribution (NDC)5, and with the priorities outlined in South Africa’s Low-Emission
         Development Strategy 20506 to pursue a low-carbon growth trajectory, while ensuring a just transition and
         building the country’s resilience to climate change. Water, urban settlements, and energy are among the priority
         sectors highlighted in South Africa’s NCCAS, which recognizes the provision of basic services (water, electricity,
         waste removal and sanitation and sewage infrastructure maintenance) as critical actions required for climate
         change responses at the municipal level.




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
  CONTACT POINT

  World Bank
    Eric Dickson
    Senior Urban Specialist

    Diego Juan Rodriguez
    Lead Economist

    Tatyana Vladimirovna Kramskaya
    Senior Energy Specialist

  Borrower/Client/Recipient



4 Republic of South Africa, National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, August 2020. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/South-Africa_NAP.pdf
5 Republic of South Africa, South Africa First National Determined Contribution Under the Paris Agreement, (2016); NDC Update September 2021. https://unfccc.int/
6 Republic of South Africa, South Africa’s Low-Emission Development Strategy 2050, February 2020.




                                                                                                                                                              Page 7
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


 National Treasury
 Ulrike Britton
 Head: Policy Coordination (ODG)
 ulrike.britton@treasury.gov.za

Implementing Agencies
 City of Tshwane
 Johann Mettler
 City Manager
 CM@TSHWANE.GOV.ZA

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                            Page 8
