Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                           FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                          Report No: PADHP00141


                                                   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                      ON A

                                                                               PROPOSED LOAN

                                                                   IN THE AMOUNT OF US $925 MILLION

                                                                                       TO




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

                                                                                     FOR A

                                                                   METRO TRADING SERVICES PROGRAM
                                                                           PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS

                                                                               October 17, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Urban, Resilience and Land Global Practice
                                Eastern And Southern Africa Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                      CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

              Exchange Rate Effective March 31, 2025

                 Currency Unit = ZAR
                     ZAR 18.22 = US$1



                            FISCAL YEAR
                          April 1 – March 31




Regional Vice President: Ndiame Diop
     Regional Director: Erik Magnus Fernstrom
      Division Director: Satu Kristiina Jyrintytar Kahkonen
     Practice Manager: Abhas K. Jha
  Task Team Leader(s): Eric Dickson, Diego Juan Rodriguez, Tatyana Vladimirovna Kramskaya
                         ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

        French Development Agency (Agence         MTF     Multi-Tranche Facility
AFD
        Française De Développement)
AGSA    Auditor General of South Africa           MTSG    Metro Trading Services Grant
AMI     Automated Metering Infrastructure         MTSP    Metro Trading Services Program
AMR     Automatic Meter Reading                   NCCAS   National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
APA     Annual Performance Assessment             NCCRP   National Climate Change Response Policy
CAPEX   Capital Expenditure                       NDB     New Development Bank
CCDR    Country Climate and Development           NDC     Nationally Determined Contribution
        Report
CSP     Cities Support Program                    NDP     National Development Plan
DCOG    Department of Cooperative Governance      NERSA   National Energy Regulator of South Africa
DFFE    Department of Forestry, Fisheries and     NSSD    National Strategy for Sustainable
        Environment                                       Development
DLI     Disbursement Linked Indicator             NRW     Non-Revenue Water
DLR     Disbursement Linked Result                NT      National Treasury
DMRE    Department of Mineral Resources and       OPEX    Operational Expenditure
        Energy
DORA    Division of Revenue Act                   OPRC    Operational Procurement Review Committee
DWS     Department of Water and Sanitation        OT      Operational Technology
EEA     Employment Equity Act                     O&M     Operation and Maintenance
EPR     Extended Producer Responsibility          PDO     Program Development Objective
ESSA    Environmental and Social Systems          PforR   Program for Results
        Assessment
FCDO    Foreign, Commonwealth and                 PIAP    Performance Improvement Action Plan
        Development Office
FY      Fiscal Year                               QAR     Quality Assurance Review
GHG     Greenhouse Gases                          RA      Result Area
GRM     Grievance Redress Mechanism               SA      South Africa
HoD     Head of Department                        SECO    State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
IA      Implementing Agency                       SAWIS   South Africa Waste Information System
IBRD    International Bank for Reconstruction     SDGs    Sustainable Development Goals
        and Development
IFC     International Finance Corporation         SCM     Supply Chain Management
IFSA    Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment   SPD     Standard Procurement Documents
ILI     Infrastructure Leakage Index              STEAM   Science, Technology, Engineering, and
                                                          Mathematics
IT      Information Technology                    SWM     Solid Waste Management
IVA     Independent Verification Agent            ToC     Theory of Change
IWMP    Integrated Water Management Plan          ToR     Terms of Reference
KfW     KfW Development Bank                      UDFG-   Urban Development Financing Grant - Metro
                                                  MTS     Trading Services component
MDB     Multilateral Development Bank             WML     Waste Management Licenses
MFMA    Municipal Finance Management Act          WUL     Water Use Licenses
MIGA    Multilateral Investment Guarantee         WSS     Water Supply and Sanitation
        Agency
mSCOA   Municipal Standard Chart of Accounts      WtE     Waste to Energy
        (mSCOA)
The World Bank
South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................................i
I.     STRATEGIC CONTEXT .................................................................................................................. 1
      A. Program Strategic Context ............................................................................................................... 1
      B. Multi-Sectoral and Institutional Context .......................................................................................... 1
      C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives............................................................................................... 3
II.    PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ............................................................................................................ 4
      A. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO)....................................................................................... 4
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators.............................................................................................. 4
      C. PforR Program Scope ........................................................................................................................ 4
      D. Disbursement Linked Indicators ..................................................................................................... 11
      E. Role of Partners .............................................................................................................................. 12
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Program Design .................................................................. 12
III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION .................................................................................................. 13
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 13
      B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ............................................. 13
      C. Disbursement Arrangements.......................................................................................................... 14
IV. PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS SUMMARY ....................................................................................... 14
      A. Technical ......................................................................................................................................... 14
      B. Fiduciary.......................................................................................................................................... 19
      C. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 22
      D. Program Action Plan ....................................................................................................................... 24
V.    KEY RISKS ................................................................................................................................. 24
ANNEX 1. Results Framework .......................................................................................................... 26
ANNEX 2. Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification Protocols.. 30
ANNEX 3. PIAP Indicators Definition Sheets...................................................................................... 48
      The World Bank
      Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project Beneficiary(ies)   Operation Name
South Africa               South Africa Metro Trading Services Program
                                                     Does this operation have an IPF
Operation ID               Financing Instrument
                                                     component?
                           Program-for-Results
P505813                                              No
                           Financing (PforR)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)             [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Small State(s)                                             [ ] Conflict
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
07-Nov-2025                            31-Mar-2031
Bank/IFC Collaboration                 Joint Level
Yes                                    Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to improve the accountability, financial and operational performance of trading services
in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate




                                                                                                                        i
              The World Bank
              Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)



        Organizations

         Borrower:                       The Republic of South Africa

         Implementing Agency:            The National Treasury


intra




        @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
        COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


        Maximizing Finance for Development

        Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                       No

        Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                 No

        SUMMARY

          Government program Cost                                            3,002.31

          Total Operation Cost                                               3,002.31
           Total Program Cost                                                3,000.00

           Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                      2.31

          Total Financing                                                    3,002.31

          Financing Gap                                                         0.00

        Financing (US$, Millions)

         World Bank Group Financing
           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)       925.00

         Non-World Bank Group Financing
           Counterpart Funding                                               2,077.31

              National Government                                            2,077.31


        @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate

        @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate

                                                                                        ii
      The World Bank
      Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas
                                                              Energy & Extractives; Water; Environment, Natural
Urban, Resilience and Land
                                                              Resources & the Blue Economy

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                  High
2. Macroeconomic                                                             Substantial
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                            Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                    Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability              Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                 Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                    Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                              Moderate
9. Overall                                                                   Substantial




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE

Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

                                                                                                                  iii
       The World Bank
       Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)



Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No


Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Schedule 2, Section I.A.3. (b) (ii) Not later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, the borrower shall recruit and
thereafter maintain throughout the implementation of the Program, an environmental specialist, a social safeguards
specialist, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, and a communications specialist, all with skills, training, experience,
and under terms of reference agreed with the Bank.
Schedule 2, Section I. Section C. 1. Not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, the borrower shall recruit the
services of a verification consultant, with qualifications and experience and under terms of reference acceptable to the
Bank, in order to assist the MTSC team with the verification of the results from Year 0 of Program implementation.
Schedule 2, Section I. Section C. 2. Not later than six (6) months after the Effective Date, the borrower shall recruit and
thereafter maintain on annual basis during the implementation of the Program, an independent verification agent
(“Independent Verification Agent or “IVA”) , with experience and qualification, and under terms of reference, agreed
with the Bank to assume the responsibilities of the verification consultant for the remaining duration of the Program
and verify the data and other evidence supporting the achievement of one or more Disbursement Linked Results
(“DLRs”) and recommend corresponding withdrawals to be made thereunder, as applicable.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.4. The Borrower shall throughout the implementation of the Program, monitor that the
Municipal Managers have the requisite coordinating mechanism for overseeing reforms at the metro level including
maintaining Council approved Minimum Commitments and Performance Improvement Action Plans.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                            Citation                        Description                     Financing Source
                                                                Program Operations
Effectiveness                   Article IV, Section 4.01. (a)   Manual (POM) has been           IBRD/IDA
                                                                prepared and adopted.
                                                                A Metro Trading Services
                                                                Coordination (MTSC) team
Effectiveness                   Article IV, Section 4.01. (b)                                   IBRD/IDA
                                                                has been established within
                                                                National Treasury's


                                                                                                                           iv
     The World Bank
     Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


                                                           Intergovernmental
                                                           Relations (IGR) Division.
                                                           Arrangements have been
                                                           established to track
                                                           Program Expenditures at
                                                           the national level using the
Effectiveness              Article IV, Section 4.01. (d)   Standard Chart of Accounts     IBRD/IDA
                                                           and at the municipal level
                                                           using the Municipal
                                                           Standard Chart of
                                                           Accounts.




                                                                                                     v
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 I.   STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Program Strategic Context

 1.      South Africa's eight metropolitan municipalities (metros) 1 are home to approximately 40 percent of the national
 population, spread across 30,000 square kilometers, and generate 85 percent of the country’s economic activity.
 Recognized in the National Development Plan 2030, metros form the backbone of the national economy, providing
 essential services like water supply and sanitation (WSS), electricity, and solid waste management (SWM), collectively
 known as ‘trading services,’ to both residents and industrial customers. Trading services (TS) are services for which
 consumption charges are levied and determined with the intention of making a surplus (profit) on the delivery of the
 services. Given the revenue-generating nature of WSS, electricity, and solid waste trading services, they are referred to
 as ‘businesses’ in the South African (SA) context. Urbanization compounded with the enduring legacy of apartheid spatial
 planning has led to pronounced spatial challenges and inefficiencies. These include spatial injustice and inequality, where
 the urban poor tend to settle in peripheral urban areas far from social and economic opportunities.

 2.      South Africa's metros are facing a crisis in the provision of basic services, driven by a deterioration in functions
 that are central to effective city management including accountability, financial, and operational performance. The
 significant decline over the last 10 years is due to several factors: i) low collection rates resulting in loss of revenues; ii)
 trading services departments not having full control of the revenue cycle (governance failures); iii) lack of financial
 transparency and suboptimal procurement processes; iv) lack of proper asset management; and v) underinvestment in
 infrastructure operations and maintenance. In many metros, the sustained deterioration of trading services
 infrastructure has been associated with poorly defined lines of accountability, with support services such as finance and
 collections, human resources, supply chain management, information technology, and fleet management, often
 fragmented under separate units (e.g., Executive Directors or Heads of Departments) of the metro administration. 2
 Despite efforts to modernize and transform network industries, including electricity and water, as part of the Operation
 Vulindlela, a joint initiative of the Presidency and National Treasury (NT), urgent action is needed to reverse the rapid
 deterioration and increasing vulnerability to shocks of urban services and support the turnaround of trading services to
 improve the quality of life and resilience for metropolitan residents.

 3.     To address this, the Government of South Africa has developed a new six-year program which will provide
 performance-based conditional grants to the metros to incentivize improvement in service delivery in the three trading
 services (water supply and sanitation, electricity, and solid waste). The Metro Trading Services Program (MTSP) aims to
 introduce a new grant to incentivize the turnaround of metro trading service (TS) performance through institutional
 reform and increased investment, including an enhanced role for private sector investments. Performance improvements
 will be underpinned through targeted reforms and actions in (i) accountability, (ii) financial performance, and (iii)
 operational performance. The MTSP is South Africa’s first Program for Results (PforR) and highlights the relevance and
 economic impact that cities have on the country’s development trajectory.

B. Multi-Sectoral and Institutional Context

 4.      South Africa is a constitutional state, consisting of three spheres of government (national, provincial and local)
 that are distinctive and interdependent and interrelated. The three spheres are closely held to integrated planning by
 legislative and policy instruments and diagnostics on challenges and related policy plans are well established.

1 Namely Buffalo City, City of Cape Town, City of Ekurhuleni, City of Johannesburg, City of Tshwane, eThekwini, Mangaung, and Nelson Mandela Bay.
2 World Bank, DBSA (2023) ‘Going beyond the Infrastructure Funding Gap: A South African Perspective’, World Bank and Development Bank of Southern Africa;

Eberhard, R. (2023) State of Water in Cities: The Case for Change. A report produced for the National Treasury’s Cities Support Program by the World Bank.


                                                                                                                                                             Page 1


                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 Metropolitan municipalities are classified as Category A Municipalities, characterized by single metropolitan budgets,
 common property ratings and service-tariff systems. All original municipal legislative and executive powers rest with the
 metropolitan council headed by an Executive Mayor or Executive Committee.

 5.      At the national level, the National Treasury (NT) is leading efforts to drive policy implementation and improve
 the performance of metropolitan municipalities. For more than a decade, NT has been implementing an umbrella
 program through its Intergovernmental Relations (IGR) division to enable cities to address the inefficiencies in the built
 environment and drive meaningful change. The Cities Support Program (CSP) focuses on strengthening the
 intergovernmental environment for this agenda, improving performance and strengthening governance towards
 inclusive economic growth. Considering the multi-sectoral challenges that are faced by the metros, IGR coordinates and
 collaborates with government stakeholders across the three spheres of government.

 6. There has been a significant decline in WSS services in most of South Africa’s metros. Despite a notable increase
 in coverage of water and sanitation services, reliability and quality in the level of service has deteriorated. Infrastructure
 is in poor condition with inadequate renewal, maintenance, or investment in new infrastructure to facilitate growth.
 About 46 percent of households lack access to a safely managed water supply and 49 percent lack access to safely
 managed sanitation services. 3 Among the key challenges faced by WSS services are high levels of non-revenue water
 (NRW) in municipalities, at 41 percent of the system input volume. About 85 percent of NRW is due to technical losses
 (leaks, bursts, illegal connections), and the remaining to commercial losses (low collection rates). 4 This exacerbates the
 impact of climate change on water security in a country with low rainfall, which is mainly reliant on surface water storage.
 There is a marked negative social and environmental impact due to deficient water and wastewater treatment resulting
 from inadequate infrastructure, improper operating, monitoring and controlling. The largest share of the water gap to
 meet safety and reliability objectives, as per the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), is due to quality and reliability
 issues, while the largest sanitation gap is due to inadequately managed fecal sludge. Technical and management skills
 have eroded with high vacancy rates at all levels of seniority. There is a disconnect between technical and commercial
 aspects of the business across virtually all institutions who provide water services.

 7.      Many parts of the electricity distribution system are in the advanced stages of their lifespan and close to
 reaching the end of their operational life. This is leading to increased outages, maintenance costs, and the need for
 extensive upgrades. Over the past several years, a maintenance and refurbishment backlog in relation to grid
 infrastructure has been growing, largely due to shortage of resources, supply chain management delays/issues, and more
 recently, limited project funding. These constraints are exacerbated by vandalism and theft of critical grid network
 equipment. Poor performance of the national utility (Eskom) in recent years severely impacted municipalities via frequent
 supply interruptions of bulk electricity (i.e., foregone revenue) and damage to municipal equipment due to recurrent
 power stoppages and restarts. This deterioration is a major concern given that revenue from electricity trading services
 is key for the overall financial health of municipalities. Aging infrastructure is one of the main challenges faced by the
 metros. Although the institutional arrangements and performance differ widely, most metros have a challenge with
 available capital for refurbishment. The problem has become so acute that some metros only invest in refurbishment
 and replacement using grant funding. Metro’s electricity service departments are trapped in a vicious cycle of
 underperformance, where financial instability and operational inefficiency lead to poor service delivery. Widespread and
 long-term under-investment in metro bulk infrastructure has been associated with declining service delivery and financial
 performance of trading services, to the extent that infrastructure failures now threaten cities’ economic performance.


3 World Bank and Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA), (2023). Going Beyond the Infrastructure Funding Gap: A South African Perspective; Stats SA (Statistics

South Africa), 2019. General Household Survey 2019. Statistical Release P0318. Stats SA, Pretoria.
4 DWS, 2018. National Water and Sanitation Master Plan (NWSMP). DWS, Pretoria.




                                                                                                                                                              Page 2


                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 8.      Solid waste management in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities faces significant challenges, including
 rapid urbanization, inadequate infrastructure, lack of technical capacity, depleting landfill airspace, logistical
 constraints, and delayed implementation of critical waste minimization policies. The country generated an estimated
 122 million metric tons of waste in 2022, yet integrated solid waste management systems remain elusive, with many
 landfills running out of airspace 5 and failing compliance audits and licensing conditions. Uneven service coverage,
 particularly in underserved and informal areas, exacerbates inequality and public health risks. Financing remains a key
 obstacle, with waste services accounting for just four percent of metro operating budgets, and many senior positions in
 waste departments are vacant, impeding strategic decision making and routine oversight functions. Many metros lack
 functional weighbridges, basic fleet and route optimization, and robust waste collection and disposal data systems (e.g.
 Management Information System) needed to monitor waste flows, ensure accurate disposal, and comply with national
 reporting requirements, such as Integrated Waste Management Plans. Poor service delivery and insufficient waste
 management have also led to stormwater drainage system blockages causing urban flooding. 6

 9.     South Africa’s cities, infrastructure, and people are affected by climate change impacts, including rising
 temperatures and variable rainfall, resulting in recurring droughts, floods, and heatwaves. Extreme weather events
 and broader water scarcity have already caused significant damage, and their intensity is expected to worsen, with
 particularly disruptive impacts on underdeveloped peri-urban areas of the metros. Health risks exacerbated by climate
 change include heat stress and vector-borne diseases. Risks from drought, flooding and heatwaves in South Africa’s
 metros include physical damage to water and sanitation infrastructure, increasing incidence of water outages and
 maintenance needs, as well as increasing energy demand and health risks related to water quality. Chemical and
 biological processes of solid waste are also vulnerable to extreme heat, while floods may affect landfills and waste
 deposition. By improving service delivery through enhanced accountability, operational and financial performance of
 metro trading services, the Program will build resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related impacts.

C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives

 10.     The central tenet of the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework for South Africa (CPF: FY22-26;
 Report No. 154318-ZA, July 22, 2021) is to help the country tackle the legacy of socio-economic exclusion and achieve
 an inclusive and resilient society. The CPF: FY22-26 builds flexibility to respond to the government’s financing needs and
 emerging priorities. The framework is anchored on a spatially driven approach, underpinned by the strengthening of
 basic service delivery, to unlock the potential of urban areas across the country. The MTSP and the PforR are direct results
 of the World Bank Group and NT’s sustained partnership across policy, institutional, and technical aspects of urban
 development and basic services for more than a decade. Following the successful implementation of a first phase of NT’s
 Cities Support Program (CSP), which was initiated in 2013 through Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS), in 2018 the
 World Bank and South Africa partnered on a second urban RAS, completed in February 2025. The NT has opted to explore
 other World Bank instruments, with the PforR being the most relevant for the metro trading services reform objectives.

 11.     The choice of the financing instrument and rationale is multi-dimensional due to the following considerations:
 (i) the PforR financing instrument is the appropriate choice for a results-oriented approach addressing structural and
 systemic sector challenges, supporting NT to design and implement an ambitious multi-sectoral reform, as well as NT’s
 conditional grant review and recommendations to ensure improved returns on fiscal transfers; and (ii) opportunities for
 strengthening the country system and fostering a results-based culture. The PforR instrument offers the opportunity to
 strengthen the existing country systems in a sustainable way, incentivizing improved service delivery, while also


5 Landfill airspace is the amount of space on a landfill that is available for disposing of municipal solid waste.
6 Water Research Commission (2020). Detection and Removal of Illegal Discharges into Stormwater Systems. WRC Report No. TT 808/19.


                                                                                                                                             Page 3


                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


  furthering the reform agenda by focusing on results and outputs and instilling a results-based culture in selected
  institutions. Technical Assistance (TA) and capacity building to be delivered by the Metro Trading Services Coordination
  (MTSC) team within National Treasury’s IGR Division is envisaged to cover several areas, including tools for PIAP
  implementation, sector specific interventions, and general operational support on topics such as asset management,
  tariff structuring and revenue enhancement, and demand led operational support for emerging priority topics. Various
  design and implementation modalities for the TA are under consideration, including support from other Multilateral
  Development Banks (MDBs).

 II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
 A. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO)
 12.    The development objective is to improve the accountability, financial and operational performance of trading
 services in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators

13.    The theory of change (ToC) posits that accountability, financial and operational measures are critical to improve
the performance of water and sanitation, electricity and solid waste management trading services. The Program’s result
areas outline clear activities and outputs towards the achievement of performance outcomes that will lead to improved
trading services, ultimately contributing to enhanced service reliability, quality and financial sustainability in the long-term
(Figure 1). The impact of these improvements over the long term is improved living conditions in the metropolitan
municipalities, business climate, economic growth and job creation.

 14. The following outcome indicators will be used to measure the achievement of the PDO:
   • Indicator 1. Metros that have met and maintained the Program’s Minimum Commitments (MCs) (number).
   • Indicator 2. Non-revenue Water (NRW) reduction in South Africa’s metros as a result of the Program (percentage).
   • Indicator 3. Electricity losses reduction in South Africa’s metros as a result of the Program (percentage).

15.      PDO indicators are aligned with the Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) that are at the core to the
Program) (Annex 1). 7 The PIAPs will contain the metro commitments to a set of key performance indicators and targets
across the three reform areas of the Program, namely: (i) governance and accountability, (ii) financial performance, and
(iii) operational performance for each trading service. The reform areas are deemed critical to improve the performance
of trading services in the metros. PDO indicator 1 pertains to the Program’s Minimum Commitments (MCs), related to
matters such as the delegation of management authority in various business areas (such as procurement, human
resources, fleet management), the establishment of an effective organizational structure, and the appointment of the
head of the TS, among others. Collectively, the MCs seek to achieve the Single Point of Management Accountability
(SPoMA) for each trading service, which is cardinal to improved institutional, financial and operational performance. PDO
indicators 2 and 3 will be measured against the WSS and electricity PIAPs prepared by each metro (one per TS).

16.     The PIAP template includes material detailing baselines, targets, and the measurement methodology for each
 indicator. Improved performance includes aspects that enhance the metros’ adaptive capacity to climate impacts such as
 drought, floods and temperature increase through enhanced service sustainability and reliability, linked, for example, to
 NRW reduction, enhanced water security, energy efficiencies, and enhanced SWM.
 C. PforR Program Scope

7 The PIAPs correspond to ‘A3: PIAP’, as per NT’s Annexure 3: Performance Improvement Action Plan (A3: PIAP) of Metro Trading Services Reform Strategies.




                                                                                                                                                            Page 4


                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


(i)    Government program

  17.    While South Africa’s local government infrastructure grant system endows municipalities with substantial fiscal
   resources to support investments in municipal infrastructure, especially to the metropolitan municipalities, it lacks
   effective incentives that focus on results. This has resulted in inefficient spending of infrastructure grants, leading to
   under investment and deferred maintenance in municipal services and infrastructure and deterioration in the service-
   delivery performance of the trading services across all South Africa’s metros. To address this problem, the NT is
   introducing a new Metro Trading Services Program (MTSP). The core intended result of the Program is a profound
   improvement in the operating and financial performance of the trading services organizations and a robust strengthening
   of the institutional systems which underpins this performance. The overall outcome is a sustained enhancement of the
   quality and reliability of water supply and wastewater, electricity, and SWM services across the metros.

      Figure 1. Theory of Change




  18.    The government program leverages a holistic set of reforms aligned with various national policy objectives
   emanating from NT, DWS, the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE), the Department of Forestry,
   Fisheries and the Environment (DFFE), the Department of Cooperative Governance (DCOG), and the National
   Department of Human Settlements. These reforms are briefly summarized as follows: (i) institutional/structural reforms
   to improve accountability and governance for the trading service at metro level, by incentivizing effective management
   through establishing a single point of management accountability (including control over essential support services) and
   attending to management and technical capability. (ii) Reforms to increase the financial performance of the trading
   services, through increased transparency of financial data, improved operating cost recovery, and improved financial

                                                                                                                        Page 5


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


  relationship between the metro and each trading service, facilitated through full implementation of the mSCOA; (iii)
  reforms to improve the performance orientation of capital grants provided to metros for infrastructure investment in
  trading services. Grant reforms through restructuring existing grants and introduction of a new performance-based grant
  as a fiscal incentive for metros to undertake these reforms and increase investment in trading services; and (iv) reforms
  to address root causes of the deteriorating performance of local government, under phase II of Operation Vulindlela.

  19. The government Program (the Metro Trading Services Program, MTSP) will consist of a new targeted
  performance-based fiscal transfer (grant) to the metros (the Metro Trading Services Component of the Urban
  Development Financing Grant, UDFG) 8 that will be allocated to metros on achievement of specific results over the next
  six years. To participate in the Program, metros will prepare sector-specific PIAPs for each trading service which adhere
  to prescribed templates developed by NT. The PIAPs will reflect clear targets as well as a six-year budget envelope for
  proposed activities to achieve those targets, with sources of funding identified (MTSG and other sources). Metros will
  obtain Council approval for each PIAP as a sign of stakeholder commitment and submit the plan to NT for technical review
  and approval to be considered eligible for inclusion in the program and grant allocation.

  20. The PIAPs account for the heterogeneity of the metros’ institutional, technical, and financial circumstances and
  baselines. The types of indicators included in each PIAP under the three reform areas, and the associated reforms and
  activities to be undertaken by metros under the Program, are available in Annex 3. The PIAPs will align with and deepen
  recent efforts by metros outlining their reform interventions for water supply and sanitation, and electricity, respectively,
  which to date have included trading service turnaround strategies, institutional reforms roadmap, and business and
  investment plans. 9 There will be three versions of the PIAPs: (a) Version 1, a draft PIAP which is required as a condition
  of receipt of MTSG funding in Year 1 of the Program (Year 2 for the ‘second wave’ metros); (b) Version 2, a complete PIAP
  which is approved by NT, binds the metros, and provides the basis on which implementation performance is assessed.
  This is a condition of receipt of funding in Year 2 of the Program (Year 3 for second wave metros); and (c) Version 3, a
  reset PIAP which is approved by NT, binds the metros, and provides the basis on which implementation performance is
  assessed. This may be provided by the metros in Year 3 of the Program if found to be necessary.

  21. The Program supports the MTSP and the implementation of PIAPs through the provision of funds to the metros
  with the aim of improving the accountability, financial and operational performance of the trading services. Given
  Metro capacity constraints, the scope of the MTSP preparation by NT and other stakeholders over 2024-25, and the
  ‘reform readiness’ of the metros, the WSS and Electricity TSs will, by default, enter the Program from inception (‘first
  wave’ of metro participation, 2025/26); whereas entry of the SWM TS and other metros that failed to meet eligibility
  requirements for the first wave will be delayed by a year. It is possible that certain TSs in any given Metro may be unable
  to comply with the MCs, in which case these TSs will not enter the Program at that time. They will be able to enter the
  Program in line with the annual cycle and the achievement of the MCs, as part of the second wave of metro participation
  in 2026/27. This will be considered as the ‘cut-off date’ for entry to allow for sufficient implementation time, as per the
  Program’s cycle. Any metro that enters the Program in either the first or second waves (in year 2025/26 or in year
  2026/27, as per Table 1) which fails thereafter to comply with the MCs, will not be eligible to receive MTSG funding for
  the forthcoming year, but will be eligible to do so in a subsequent year should it become MC compliant.
     (ii)    Program Boundary and Results Areas
  22. Results Area 1: Improve Accountability Performance of Metro Trading Services. Reforming the metros
  institutional structures and governance processes to improve the management of the trading services businesses through


8 For the purposes of this document, the UDFG-MTS component will be referred to as ‘Metro Trading Services Grant’, MTSG.
9 Turnaround strategies, institutional reforms roadmap, and business and investment plans for solid waste management will be prepared and submitted in 2025.




                                                                                                                                                           Page 6


                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


     (a) establishment of a single point of management accountability for each trading service including, among other issues:
     (i) appointing the Head of Trading Services department, and (ii) delegating all relevant functions to the TS such as
     procurement and financial management to the head of said Department; and (b) improving the financial transparency of
     trading services including through issuing of separate Audited Financial Statements.

     23. Results Area 2: Improve Financial Performance of Metro Trading Services. Enhancing the Metro’s financial
     management of their trading services by: (a) implementing relevant cost-reduction and revenue improvement initiatives;
     (b) assigning the benefits (increased cash operating surpluses) to the trading service concerned; and (c) ensuring that
     increased surpluses are used to fund priority trading service investments.

     24.     Results Area 3: Improve Operational Performance of Metro Trading Services.
             3.1. Enhancing the metro’s operational performance in WSS operations, including through: (a) improving water
             security; (b) rehabilitation and expansion of networks and infrastructure/assets; and (c) improving operations of
             WSS networks and plants, including NRW, through improved systems, data management and digitalization.
             3.2. Enhancing the metro’s operational performance in electricity and energy operations, including through: (a)
             the rehabilitation/replacement of distribution networks infrastructure to improve network operations; (b)
             upgrading billing, collection and vending systems to improve system efficiency; and (c) deploying Management
             Information System (MIS) and smart metering, reliability monitoring to improve data quality and management.
             3.3. Enhancing the metros operational performance in SWM operations, including through: (a)
             rehabilitation/replacement of SWM systems; (b) improvements in landfill management; and (c) implementation of
             waste management information systems to improve data quality and management.

     25. The key financing mechanism of the MTSP is the new performance-based fiscal transfer, the MTSG, which is the
     government program that the proposed PforR operation will support. 10 The PforR comprises the Metro Trading
     Services Grant (US$3 billion), which includes IBRD financing (US$925 million) and NT financing (US$2,075 million) (Figure
     2). Based on an analysis of grant parameters compared to existing metro capex investment in the trading services, the
     funding level is assessed to be adequate to incentivize the metros to undertake reforms in governance and accountability,
     operational and financial performance improvement.

                                           Figure 2: Metro Trading Services program Financing (6 years)




     26. Horizontal allocation across metros and trading service sectors. The total MTSG envelope, as outlined in Table 2,
     will be horizontally divided across the eight participating metros using two criteria: population, as a proxy for expenditure
     needs (weight 70 percent); and metro poverty incidence, as a proxy for equity considerations (weight 30 percent). These
     criteria have been agreed with NT and the fiscal impact on each metro, relative to their current grant allocations from
     NT and expenditures on trading services, has been assessed to be reasonable. This allocation will determine the total

10
     Own revenue projections variation ranges from five to 66 percent, while borrowing projections variation ranges from 0 to 71 percent.


                                                                                                                                                   Page 7


                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


  potential funding envelope for each metro, which will then be awarded annually to the metros for expenditure on the
  three trading services on the basis of metros’ achievement of Minimum Commitments (MCs), submission of Council-
  approved PIAPs, and implementation of the PIAPs on a phased-in basis as follows (Year 1 of the Program will encompass
  WSS and electricity trading services PIAPs. Solid Waste Management will be included from Year 2 (2026/7) onwards):

        (i)    For the Year 1 (2025-26) award, metros who in Year 0 (2024/25) pass a satisfactory A3 PIAP version 1 with
               Minimum Commitments (MCs), will be awarded the Year 1 allocation as finalized with the national Adjusted
               Budget. 11 The award will be the full nominal envelope for the Fiscal Year (FY).

        (ii) For the Years 2 and 3 (2026-27 and 2027-28) awards, metros who in Year 1 (2025/26) achieve the eight MCs
             and pass a satisfactory A3 PIAP version 2, will be awarded the Year 2 and Year 3 allocations. Planned spending
             for those years will be based upon well substantiated business turnaround and financial strategies. The metro
             awards, if achieved, will be the full nominal envelope for the FYs. For Year 4 and thereafter, the funding awards
             will be based on a verification of PIAP implementation performance against plan, and retention of the MCs. The
             metro awards will have two components, a primary component and a reallocation component. The primary
             component will be based on the application of the achieved scores to the nominal envelope for the respective
             FY (i.e., the fraction of the FY envelope awarded will be directly proportional to the performance score). The
             scoring system includes binary and scalable indicators which have been weighted in accordance with the goals
             of the Program and various technical considerations. It includes a consideration of TS performance against
             sector benchmarks (absolute intra-Metro performance) and the metros’ respective starting points (relative
             intra-Metro performance).The reallocation component will take the funds within the total annual MTSG
             envelope that are not allocated through the primary award due to any metro scores amounting to less than 100
             percent of what is possible, and systematically reallocate those funds to relatively overperforming trading
             services. The reallocation will be made in proportion to their relative performance and the underlying formula
             (allocation key based on population and poverty), to improve the incentive impact of the grant.

  27. Assessment of PIAP implementation performance during Program. Two types of independent verifications will be
  undertaken during the Program: (i) verification of minimum commitments (to confirm whether the minimum
  commitments have been made, achieved or maintained, as the case may be), including whether A3-PIAPs have been
  approved by the Council; and (ii) verification of annual performance (to confirm performance against PIAP targets). The
  results will determine the MTSG award to each metro for the subsequent FY, based on objective scoring criteria for
  various performance indicators. No metro which has received an adverse or disclaimed financial audit for the previous
  FY will be eligible for a MTSG award in the forthcoming year, as communicated to the metros by NT in a Circular.

  28. Except for Year 0 (2024/25), when it will be undertaken by an individual/s, the verifications will be undertaken
  by a reputable private firm to be contracted by NT, having adequate technical expertise across the three trading
  services. This firm will also function as the Independent Verification Agent (IVA) for the purpose of verifying the
  achievement of disbursement conditions and disbursement of IBRD loan proceeds (Table 1). 12

 Table 1. Frequency of performance assessments over Program duration


11 The PIAP version 1 will not be used as a basis to assess actual performance in Year 1 or Year 2. It is intended as an introductory exercise only. It is not anticipated

that any metro will be in a position to submit a robust and reliable PIAP for Year 1. During Year 1 and Year 2, NT will provide technical assistance to metros to enable
implementation of priority accountability indicators and other minimum commitments.
12 For Year 0 and Year 1, verification will take place after the end of the given Year to determine the award for the Year within which the verification is undertaken,

rather than for the subsequent year. In Year 2 and thereafter, verification will take place during the course of the given FY, to determine the award the following FY.


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 8


                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


     Program Year                  Year-0                 Year-1               Year-2              Year-3             Year-4              Year-5            Year-6
     Financial Year              FY 2024/25             FY 2025/26           FY 2026/27          FY 2027/28         FY 2028/29         FY 2029/30        FY 2030/31
Performance Verification
                                      1                       2                    3                   4                  5                   6                 7
       Sequence
                                                                                                                                                            Aug–Oct
Verification takes place          Sept 2025           Aug – Oct 2026           Feb 2027         Aug–Oct 2027        Aug–Oct 2028       Aug–Oct 2029
                                                                                                                                                             2030
                             Independent
     Carried out by                            IVA firm           IVA firm          IVA firm       IVA firm       IVA firm      IVA firm
                               Consultant
                            Metro Council-   Full Council-      Retain MCs
                                                                                  Retain MCs,    Retain MCs,    Retain MCs,  Retain MCs,
                          approved PIAP v1 approved PIAP v2, (Metros have not
  Verification of what                                                              PIAP v2        PIAP v3        PIAP v3    Final PIAP v3
                         with Commitment to Achievement of become ineligible
                                                                                implementation implementation implementation   progress
                          Comply with MCs         MCs       for FY3 allocation)
    Determines grant                        FY 2 (2026/27)           FY 3              FY 4           FY 5           FY 6
                            FY 1 (2025/26)                                                                                         ---
 allocation for which FY                    FY 3 (2027/28)       (2027/28)         (2028/29)      (2029/30)      (2030/31)
Total Program Envelope
   (US$ million, out of                          133.6              248.2             506.3          666.7          694.4         750.8
     US$3.0 billion)

   Note: Annual allocations of Program (last row) are based on a ZAR/USD exchange rate of 18:1, the rate prevailing at the Program’s preparation. Actual expenditures
   may differ, based on municipalities’ expenditure. Final numbers will be based on the national budget, Midterm Expenditure Framework, and conditional grant
   framework approved by national Parliament as part of the DORA, and on prevailing exchange rates. For Year-1 and Year-2 the verifications will happen after financial
   year end and will therefore be accommodated in the national adjustment budget.


   29. PIAP reset. To allow metros to adjust their PIAPs in line with changing or unforeseen circumstances, and/or to
   accommodate corrections (e.g., concerning targets), a single ‘reset’ opportunity will be permitted in Year 3 of the
   Program, at which point the Metros will be permitted to revise their PIAPs. The revised PIAPs will be assessed for
   acceptability in the same manner as the original PIAPs. In both instances, the acceptability assessment will seek to
   establish an appropriate balance between ambition and realism of each metro TS PIAP and the targets therein.

   (iii)   Program Beneficiaries

   30. The eight metros and officials in the three sector departments in each city (totaling 24 service entities) are
   considered the primary beneficiaries to be impacted by and responsible for the Program outcomes. As direct
   beneficiaries, metros will have efficiently run trading services that add to the financial health of the municipality and
   government in sum. Indirect beneficiaries consist largely of the 22 million residents who reside in metros, who will benefit
   from access to improved water supply and sanitation, electricity and solid waste management services. The activities to
   be undertaken through the MTSP in WSS, electricity, and SWM are also closely linked to advancing the jobs agenda by
   fostering economic growth and creating employment opportunities. Investment in these sectors supports cities to
   become more productive, inclusive, and resilient to shocks. Metro officials in the service entities will benefit from tailored
   capacity building interventions, in addition to support from the Metro Trading Services Coordination (MTSC) team within
   National Treasury’s IGR Division, in the implementation of critical reforms across the governance, operational and
   financial thematic areas.

   (iv)    Program Expenditure Framework

   31. The government expenditure on the Program is the expenditure on the MTSG. Disbursement would be made
   based on achievement of DLIs. Program expenditures are relevant for reconciliation purposes towards program closure.
   The MTSG funds received by the metros will be used to support capital and operating expenditures in the trading service
   sectors to achieve the results of the PIAP. Hence, these expenditures constitute the Program expenditure framework.

                                                                                                                                                                Page 9


                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 The World Bank will monitor the disbursement of the MTSG to the metros to ensure that the government’s expenditure
 on the grant is greater than the amount disbursed by the Bank to finance the grant over the life of the operation. MTSG
 funds will be appropriated by NT using the national budget framework, and the Division of Revenue Act (DORA) will
 provide the legal and budgetary basis for the disbursement of the grant. The DORA, passed annually by Parliament as
 part of the budget, generally includes a summary framework for conditional grants with annual and medium-term budget
 envelopes and allocation and eligibility criteria for local governments. NT has prepared a conditional grant framework
 for the MTSG for inclusion in the annual budget for FY2025/26 and medium-term expenditure framework for the next
 three FYs. The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement issued by NT on October 30, 2024, describes the government’s
 intention to introduce this new grant ‘to incentivize reforms to trading services and unlock additional infrastructure
 financing’. Consistent with the accounting practices, disbursement would be made upon achievement of results. There
 will also be reporting of expenditures to NT that would be included in the audited statements. At Program closure the
 reconciliation of disbursements and program expenditures reported as per the audited statements will be undertaken to
 determine if a refund is required or not. Any financing from other donors and related expenditures would be excluded
 as part of this reconciliation.

 32. Eligible expenditures funded by the MTSG fully align with the government Program and include technical
 assistance to support the consolidation, adoption, and implementation of the metro’s trading services Turnaround
 Strategies and accompanying institutional reform roadmaps, investment plans, and capacity building at both central
 and local levels. Eligible expenditures for the use of MTSG funds include capital investments and operations and
 maintenance costs incurred by metros to achieve their PIAP targets; these expenditures will be costed by metros and
 included in their annual budgets. Eligible expenditures also consist of low-risk physical investments to support
 institutional strengthening across the trading services (e.g., rehabilitation or expansion of distribution networks, fleet
 optimization). However, expenditures that may cause significant adverse impact on the environment and/or nearby
 population as defined in the World Bank Policy and Directive on PforR Financing, as defined in the ESSA, will be excluded.

(v) Program Financing
33. An overview of the funding envelope for the MTSG is provided in Table 2, for the overall duration of the Program.

   Table 2. Funding Envelope for Metro Trading Services Grant (US$ million)

                                                 YR-1        YR-2        YR-3         YR-4         YR-5         YR-6
                                    Min/Max     2025/26    2026/27     2027/28      2028/29      2029/30      2030/31         TOTAL
     NT allocations for the MTSG                 133.6      248.2        506.3        666.7        694.4        750.8          3,000
                                                 4.45%      8.27%       16.88%       22.22%       23.15%       25.03%          100%
                   of which for
          Water and Sanitation     40% to 70%   53 to 93   99 to 173   203 to 354   267 to 477   278 to 486   300 to 526   1,200 to 2,010
                     Electricity   20% to 50%   27 to 67   50 to 124   101 to 253   133 to 333   139 to 347   150 to 375   600 to 1,500
                   Solid Waste     10% to 40%   13 to 53   25 to 99    50 to 203    67 to 267    69 to 278    75 to 300    300 to 1,200


34.     The indicative annual envelopes given above are subject to variation insofar as any trading service in any Metro
does not meet the Minimum Commitments in any FY, in which case the total annual envelope will be reduced in
proportion to the governing formulae. If a Metro is unable to spend its annual allocation by the end of the FY for which
it has been allocated, the metro will be permitted to rollover the unspent funds into the subsequent FY subject to certain
limitations and procedures specified by NT. NT will develop rules and procedures for MTSG rollovers which are
appropriate for a performance grant. These will be specified in the Program Operations Manual (POM).


                                                                                                                                            Page 10


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


35.   From the perspective of the Results Areas of the Program, the PIAP scoring system consists of two parts: (a) the
achievement and maintenance of the eight minimum commitments (Accountability requirements to access the incentive
funding, and hence not weighted), and (b) indicators weighted to leverage results in the following proportions:
Accountability (Institutional) Results – 10 percent; Financial Results – 30 percent; Operational Results – 60 percent.

D. Disbursement Linked Indicators
36.    The design of the DLIs mirrors that of the MTSG and its allocations to metros upon preparation and successful
implementation of PIAPs for the three trading services (Table 3). As such, the DLIs are an aggregation of the results to be
achieved under the PIAPs, which comprise of a set of key performance indicators across the reform areas, separately for
each trading service. Improved performance of metros on achieving indicators in their respective PIAPs will lead to higher
grant allocations from NT, and a corresponding higher disbursement of DLIs from the Bank to NT. IBRD Financing amounts
associated with each DLI are directly proportional to NT’s allocations to the three trading services, as specified by the
metros, in the MTSG financing envelope over six years. Details on DLIs, disbursement arrangements and verification
protocols are provided in Annex 2.

 Table 3: Disbursement Linked Indicators

   Purpose of DLIs                             Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)                                     Financing
                                                                                                                      allocated (US$)
                                Buffalo City has council approved PIAPs for the (3) trading services and is meeting    $66,031,187
                       DLI 1.   its accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
    Strengthen the
                                The City of Cape Town has council-approved PIAPs v3 for the (3) trading services      $148,958,893
    Accountability,    DLI 2.   and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
       Financial
   Performance and              The City of Ekurhuleni has council-approved PIAPs v3 for the (3) trading services     $132,520,982
                       DLI 3.   and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
      Operational
    Performance of              The City of Johannesburg has council-approved PIAPs v3 for the (3) trading services $174,562,822
                       DLI 4.   and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
       Water and
      Sanitation,               The City of Tshwane has council-approved PIAPs for the (3) trading services and is    $123,562,282
                       DLI 5.   meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
    Electricity, and
      Solid Waste               eThekwini has council-approved PIAPs for the (3) trading services and is meeting its $147,922,298
     Management        DLI 6.   accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
       Services.
                                Mangaung has council-approved PIAPs for the (3) trading services and is meeting        $60,796,942
                       DLI 7.   its accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
                                Nelson Mandela Bay has council-approved PIAPs for the (3) trading services and is      $70,644,594
                       DLI 8.   meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets.
                                                                                                             TOTAL    $925,000,000


 37. Program activities related to the DLIs across the trading services will contribute to climate adaptation and
 mitigation in all metros. Activities in WSS aim to reduce the impact of water scarcity and ensure continuity of essential
 services under climate change-exacerbated extreme heat and drought. Under DLIs 1-8, operational improvements in WSS
 will enhance water security, promote adaptive capacity through improved WSS service provision and NRW reduction,
 and ensure that infrastructure is more resilient to flooding and drought. This will be ensured by PIAP indicators (NRW
 reduction, water security), water network and sewer network performance improvement (Annex 3). The Program will
 also contribute to emissions reduction by incentivizing asset optimization and efficient operation of WSS, electricity and


                                                                                                                             Page 11


                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


  solid waste assets, including for waste collection transfer, recycling and recovery assets, such as MRFs and as well as
  excavation, compaction and methane management assets used at landfill for gas management, flaring and remediation. 13

 E. Role of Partners
  38. Given the scale of the reform across these critical trading services, select development partners have expressed
  an interest and willingness to support MTSP through either financing or technical assistance. Interest in supporting the
  Program is expressed by several development partners and dialogue is on-going. These financial contributions are
  proposed to be included as part of additional financing to the Program to provide technical assistance for
  implementation. The Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Cooperation (SECO), who have supported the CSP for over a
  decade, indicated interest in providing TA focused on the institutional and infrastructure thematic areas. The World Bank
  Group including International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
  Agency (MIGA), and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) is uniquely positioned to support the Government of
  South Africa’s reform, including an enabling role for private sector investments. NT will engage development partners
  regarding potential financing and technical assistance as required.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Program Design
  39. The Program design and implementation arrangements are informed by substantial World Bank experience on
  results-based financing to strengthen institutional and service delivery performance of city governments and
  municipal service utilities. Almost two decades of World Bank experience supporting government programs that provide
  performance-based conditional grants to city governments shows that they are an effective mechanism to increase
  municipal service delivery outcomes as well as transparency and accountability. 14 Such programs rely on the following
  mutually reinforcing elements, each of which is present in this Program:

        (i) A robust design of the performance-based grant to cities premised on a financial incentive that should be
              substantial enough to incentivize performance improvement, formula-based distribution of funding across the
              participating cities, and carefully calibrated performance indicators that are within the mandates of cities.
        (ii) The performance of cities is assessed through a robust, externally executed, and transparent periodic
              performance assessment, the findings of which form the basis for funding allocations to them and are synced
              with the annual budget planning cycle at the central and local government levels.
        (iii) The Program is supplemented by extensive capacity building and technical assistance support provided by the
              central government to help cities achieve the intended results and performance indicators.
        (iv) This should also be underpinned by a conducive enabling environment led by national government and enacted
              through a strong local government commitment to resourcing and strengthening municipal service delivery.

 40.     PIAPs are a recognized tool to support the reform and turnaround of utilities and municipal service delivery
 entities, especially in the WSS and electricity distribution sectors. The use of PIAPs as the instrument to support reforms
 in these sectors has been used in various countries with notable success. In most cases the PIAPs have been structured
 around the same three result areas as in this Program, namely accountability, financial and operational performance. For
 example, the power sector in Nigeria is being supported by two PforRs (Power Sector Recovery Program (P164001) and
 Distribution Sector Recovery Program (P172891)) which channel funds to electricity distribution companies to implement
 their PIAPs which were prepared by them, approved and regularly monitored by the national regulator. There are similar

13
    PIAP indicators on financial viability, cash collections and cash flow (PIAP indicators F1-F3, in Annex 3), and metering in operational performance are
interdependent, ensuring funds for investments. Capex and self-financing indicators (PIAP indicators F5 and F6, in Annex 3) track sector-wide asset investments.
14 For examples of specific financing operations, see: 1) World Bank “Strengthening Urban Management and Service Delivery through Performance-Based Fiscal

Transfers”; 2) World Bank “Performance based fiscal transfers for urban local governments: Results and Lessons from Two Decades of World Bank Financing”.


                                                                                                                                                               Page 12


                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


examples on the use of PIAPs in the WSS sector, including India (Shimla-Himachal Pradesh Water Supply and Sewerage
Services Improvement PforR (P174732), Egypt (Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services PforR (P154112) and Nigeria
(Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene PforR (P170734).

41.    The focus on accountability as one of the result areas is based on global best practice in aligning incentives for
improving service delivery results. Lessons from WSS PforRs in India, Egypt, and Nigeria show that a focus on
accountability translates to service improvements for end users as well as improved efficiency and sustainability of
services. Further, by supporting the transparency of performance information and integration of mechanisms of customer
feedback, the Program reinforces a ‘service culture’ approach, rather than a ‘build and abandon’ approach. Lessons also
indicate the importance of strengthening asset management, including operation and maintenance (O&M) systems, to
improve the sustainability of services.

III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
42.    Implementation Arrangements. Management and implementation of the Program will be undertaken through the
National Treasury with specific functions established for grant regulation, financing, alignment with infrastructure
reforms, metro oversight, delivery and support, and grant administration, as illustrated in Figure 3. The MTSC team will
also be responsible for day-to-day Program management, including providing technical and capacitation support to the
metros in the development and execution of the PIAPs, monitoring and reporting. At the metro level, the Municipal
Manager will oversee the implementation of the reforms.

43.     A Program Operations Manual (POM) will be developed by Program effectiveness. The POM will set forth the
institutional, administrative, financial, technical and operational guidelines and procedures for the implementation of
the Program, including the composition of the MTSC team, environmental and social risk mitigation measures, the
financial management protocols, including relevant budget codes to track program expenditures, and standards applicable
to the Program, procurement arrangements, protocols for reporting to the World Bank on, and sharing the findings of,
any case of fraud and corruption denounced and/or investigated under the Program.

B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
 44. The Program will be subject to a multi-tiered system of routine monitoring and evaluation delivered through
existing government systems, and verification of results through an IVA. The main elements of the results monitoring
process will include the APA reports prepared by the IVA, and periodic progress reports prepared by metros for NT as part
of regular government reporting systems for all conditional grants in the country. NT has robust systems in place for
progress monitoring and reporting of conditional grants to municipalities as well as performance of municipalities on
various sector indicators. Specifically for this program, NT will require participating metros to provide half-yearly progress
reports, as per prescribed format, covering financial expenditures incurred from MTSG allocations on PIAP and progress
reporting on PIAP key performance indicators. The World Bank will also undertake certification of results through a quality
assurance review process of the APA as part of its due diligence and implementation supervision.

 45. The IVA will be a private firm competitively selected by NT based on Terms of Reference acceptable to the World
Bank. The IVA’s tasks will include i) reviewing relevant documents such as PIAPs and progress reports and visiting all
metros to assess progress against PIAP implementation firsthand; and ii) providing assessment scores of each metro’s
progress on PIAP implementation using prescribed templates and scoring criteria. The IVA reports will also be used for



                                                                                                                       Page 13


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 requests for DLI disbursement. The World Bank will make the final decision on whether DLIs have been achieved, as
 provided for in World Bank Policy Program-for-Results Financing.

                                          Figure 3: Proposed Institutional and Implementation Arrangements




       C. Disbursement Arrangements
46.    Disbursement arrangements of the Program. Disbursements by the World Bank will be made based on the verified
achievement of DLIs. The Disbursement Deadline Date will be six months after the closing date stated in the Loan
Agreement.

47.       Disbursements to metros. NT will allocate and release funds to the participating and eligible metros as conditional
(performance-based) grants as per Program design using their existing and well-established intergovernmental budget and
fiscal transfer mechanisms which are used to administer several other grants to all subnational governments in the country
(provinces, metros, and other municipalities). IBRD loan proceeds will be disbursed to the government’s bank account in
the Central Bank upon verification of agreed results and will be used by NT to finance a part of the conditional grant
allocations to the metropolitan municipalities. As such, IBRD loan proceeds will not flow separately to the metropolitan
municipalities outside of the conditional grant framework of the National Treasury. The recipient entity of grant (and
Program) funds at the municipal level will be the metropolitan municipalities, who can grant the Program funds to ring-
fenced trading services entities and utilities 15 established by the metropolitan municipalities either at present or during
Program implementation. Reporting back of these expenditures would be relevant for the reconciliation exercise towards
program closure. This is consistent with existing intergovernmental budget systems.

 IV. PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS SUMMARY
 A. Technical

15 For example, City Power, Johannesburg Water, and Pikitup as the three separate trading services entities/utilities established by the City of Johannesburg. More

broadly, the metro trading services would report back expenditures to the metropolitan municipalities and the National Treasury.


                                                                                                                                                               Page 14


                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


48.      WSS Assessment Summary: The rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, including water supply and sanitation,
represents a significant share of spending needs because of the lack of maintenance, vandalism, theft, and sabotage. The
impact of water conservation and demand management (WCDM) measures can reduce operating costs below what is
currently being spent. There are important weaknesses in how water supply and sanitation services are structured. There
is a poor understanding, due to lack of transparency, of financial performance and an opaque financial relationship between
the trading services and the city. Accountability for performance is dispersed without any single point of accountability,
and management of the revenue value chain is divorced from the rest of the business. Essential support services have been
centralized within the cities and perform poorly. There is an absence of management accountability for performance.
Consequently, businesses lose revenue, are inefficient in how money is spent and how resources are used and have become
ineffective in delivering on their core mandate of providing safe and reliable basic services.

49.       While significant achievements have been made in extending access to WSS to the majority of South Africans in
the democratic era, water supply reliability in major cities cannot be taken for granted. The progress achieved by metros
in expanding access to both WSS since 1994 is now being undermined by inadequate investments in, as well as lack of
maintenance and upgrading of existing infrastructure. Operating deficiencies have led to widespread declines in the
reliability and quality of services. Providing adequate WSS services in informal settlements is challenging and increases the
financial burden in the absence of any recovery of these costs. Non-revenue water (NRW) accounts for approximately 47
percent of municipal water, with water losses estimated at 40.8 percent. 16 National NRW and water loss trends show a
steady increase in NRW over the past 10 years, and the Infrastructure Leakage Index (ILI) deteriorated drastically from 2016
to date. 17 At metro level, challenges include capital expenditure allocations that are too low to ensure viability;
inappropriate and generally not cost-reflective tariffs; lack of long-term planning and investment in renewal, repairs and
maintenance; declining staff capacity on utility management; reduced utility performance, autonomy on investment
decisions, declining collection rates, and management accountability; and lack of utility-level financial transparency due to
municipal aggregation. Reforms to clarify or establish the single point of accountability for WSS services, financial
transparency, and operating interventions are crucial to reverse the long-term decline of WSS service provision.

50.     Electricity Assessment Summary: The financial performance of the metros has deteriorated significantly over the
last 10 years with profitability and efficiency in most metros as a threat. In some municipalities, total system losses
(technical and non-technical) are as high as 30 percent (City of Cape Town is a notable exception), making it very difficult
to achieve adequate revenue generation and financial sustainability. Profitability indices summarizing the final
performance of the utilities are in negative (except for City of Cape Town) and are declining. Metro electricity departments
do not have the full competences of classic electricity distribution and retail utility on management and operations in three
key business areas: (a) electricity supply to customers: distribution network operation and maintenance (O&M); (b)
commercial operations: revenue cycle (metering, billing, collection, disconnection/reconnection) of credit customers,
management of prepayment customers; and (c) management of corporate resources (‘shared services’): accounting,
finance, human resources, procurement, warehouses, fleet, and information technology.

51.     The structure and governance of the metro electricity departments are such that decision-making authority (such
as over capital investment and tariff decisions) are diffused over multiple units, leading to poor coordination and a lack
of accountability. Electricity departments are not entitled to receive and manage revenues from electricity sales to
consumers as per tariffs set by the national electricity regulator. The metro finance department manages collected
revenues as per directives and decisions made at the highest level (Council). As an example, in one metro (Nelson Mandela


16 Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS), Republic of South Africa, (2023). https://ws.dws.gov.za/wsks/default.aspx
17 DWS, Republic of South Africa, (2023). No Drop National Report,   https://ws.dws.gov.za/IRIS/releases/ND_2023_Report.pdf


                                                                                                                                   Page 15


                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


Bay) this led to 80,000 prepayment customers who owe municipal bills continuing to use electricity for months without
payment after their meters were disabled.

52.     Many parts of the electricity distribution system are in the advanced stages of their lifespan and close to reaching
the end of their operational life. This is leading to increased outages, maintenance costs, and the need for extensive
upgrades. Over the past several years, a maintenance and refurbishment backlog in relation to grid infrastructure has been
growing, largely due to shortage of resources, supply chain management delays/issues, and more recently, limited project
funding. These constraints are exacerbated by vandalism and theft of critical grid network equipment. Delayed
maintenance cycles have led to premature failure of equipment thus resulting in the replacement of equipment that require
to be undertaken in the capital budget, which is also constrained. Outage Management Systems (OMS) are also often
lagging – they are a tool to quickly and accurately identify location and analyze extent of an interruption in electricity supply
and enable fast resolution and service restoration. Some metros have not yet implemented Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition System (SCADA): systems (hardware and software) that allow remote operation and control of high and
medium voltage network infrastructure.

53.      Effective billing is a critical link in the municipal revenue value chain that underpins the financial sustainability
of any municipal trading service. Upgrades are needed to enhance revenue management and protection and improve
customer service through: (1) incorporation of state-of-art Commercial Management System (CMS) as single information
system to manage commercial operations for all customers; (2) expansion of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI); (3)
incorporation of state-of-art Meter Data Management System (MDMS) to make adequate use of all functionalities of AMI
for systematic consumption monitoring and oversight; (4) investments to improve accuracy of existing metering systems
(replacement of current and voltage transformers for large and medium customers with indirect metering, installation of
tamper-proof boxes for meters); and (5) upgrade of vending platform for prepayment customers.

54.       Solid Waste Assessment Summary: Metro SWM faces significant challenges, including rapid urbanization,
inadequate infrastructure, lack of technical capacity, depleting airspace, logistical constraints, delayed implementation of
critical waste minimization policies, and limited public awareness. While some metros have made progress in implementing
waste management plans aligned with the relevant strategies, there is need for continued investment in waste
infrastructure, improved diversion and recycling initiatives, increased technical capacity, and enhanced community
engagement. In addition, the waste function in metros has typically not been run as a business, compromising efficiency,
technically-sound-decision making and financial sustainability. Insufficient data on landfill airspace, due to limited
operational weighbridges, minimal route optimization, and the absence of software solutions for fuel theft and logistics
optimization further limits operational effectiveness.

55.     Improving compliance and accountability is crucial to accurately pricing waste activities, particularly as
alternatives struggle to compete with the low costs of landfilling. Additionally, inefficiencies in fleet management
continue to undermine waste collection services. Prolonged repair turnaround times, worsened by centralized fleet
management, exacerbate delays in service provision. In terms of policy and strategy, many Provincial and Metro Integrated
Waste Management Plans (IWMPs) are outdated and lack alignment with the National Waste Management Strategy
(NWMS). This misalignment limits the efficiency of waste management efforts, compounded by insufficient funding and
poor financial controls, which hamper capital investments and service optimization.

56.      Waste departments face critical operational issues, such as limited fleet availability, inefficient transport and
disposal practices, and landfill airspace constraints. Persistent underinvestment in fleet maintenance exacerbates these
issues, often leading to service disruptions. Illegal dumping remains a widespread issue due to weak enforcement, and
broken leachate management infrastructure further impacts environmental standards. In terms of data and

                                                                                                                          Page 16


                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


documentation, although most waste facilities have Waste Management Licenses (WMLs), many lack supporting Water
Use Licenses (WULs). Furthermore, data management is severely hindered by the absence or malfunction of weighbridges,
undermining tracking and planning efforts.

57.      Solid waste services are typically underfunded and operate at a loss due to their dual nature as both public and
private goods. These services face challenges in securing capital budgets, tariff approvals, and sufficient revenue
allocations. Legislative and policy pressures further drive-up operational costs, but the sector remains highly susceptible to
disruptions in staff and fleet availability. Service failures, often stemming from historic underinvestment in fleet
maintenance and renewal, are immediate and visible. Solid waste departments depend heavily on Equitable Share
allocations and transfers from municipal rates accounts, while receiving minimal support from Urban Settlements
Development Grant (USDG).

58.       Disaster Risk/Climate Screening. There has been a 57 percent increase in recorded weather-related disasters in
South Africa over the past two decades compared to the preceding two. 18 Disaster losses are expected to increase due to:
(i) direct impact of climate change on weather-related hazards, which is expected to increase temperatures as much as 3°C
in the northern provinces, and severity of storms across the country; (ii) the expected increase of unplanned urban growth
with poor land-use practices and housing market constraints which increase the likelihood of exposure; and (iii) limited
consideration of climate change adaptation in urban planning and urban infrastructure planning, delivery and maintenance.
Urban areas in South Africa are subject to various climate impacts, including significant flood hazard and drought. In
Gauteng, settlements have continuously expanded in flood-prone areas at rapid rates. Gauteng and Cape Town have the
most settlement areas at risk of flooding, and the total area of exposed settlements is expected to continue to expand at
varying speeds, depending on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) scenarios. Average precipitation in most metros
is expected to decline by mid-century, but extreme precipitation may still intensify. This could exacerbate pluvial flood
hazard, as drier, more degraded soil will have reduced capacity to absorb floodwater. Rising temperatures due to climate
change could amplify future drought hazards by accelerating evapotranspiration.

59.      The Program is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement, consistent with the country’s National Determined
Contribution (NDC), South Africa’s Low-Emission Development Strategy, and National Climate Change Adaptation
Strategy (NCCAS). In the latest NDC submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
South Africa commits to 31 percent reduction and a fixed target for greenhouse gas emissions levels of 398-510 MtCO2e
by 2025, and 350-420 MtCO2e by 2030. The country has set the goal to reach net zero emissions by 2050 in its Low-Emission
Development Strategy submitted in 2020. South Africa’s updated NDC also contains its first adaptation communication in
terms of Article 7 of the Paris Agreement, Section 3, which serves as South Africa’s adaptation NDC, and identifies water
and human settlements among key climate vulnerability sectors. Program activities will actively support the achievement
of NDC targets, including NRW reduction, rehabilitation and expansion of production, pumping, treatment, and storage
infrastructure to enhance water security and improve WSS systems, and the use of adequate information systems to help
monitor and track climate relevant data and enhance decision-making. Relevant domestic legislation and policy that the
Program aligns with include the National Climate Change Response Policy (NCCRP), the National Strategy for Sustainable
Development (NSSD), 19 the National Development Plan (NDP), 20 as well as provincial, municipal, and sectoral adaptation
strategies/plans. Program activities are on the universally aligned list, including the rehabilitation and expansion of water
supply and sanitation systems, NRW management, wastewater management systems, and improving energy eﬃciencies.
The Program will support low-carbon energy for WSS operations wherever technically/ﬁnancially feasible. It supports South

18 Institute for Security Studies, 2021; EM-SAT, International Disaster Database.
19 Department of Environmental Affairs (2011), South Africa.
20 National Planning Commission (2011), South Africa.




                                                                                                                       Page 17


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


Africa’s Just Energy Transition, which aims to shift from fossil fuels to cleaner energies and accelerate the decarbonization
of key sectors, and leverages integrated SWM planning principles via metro IWMPs, and focuses its activities around landﬁll
gas recovery and the proper capping and remediation of landﬁlls.

60.      Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The operation is not at material risk of having a negative impact on
the country’s low-GHG emissions development pathways. The Program will contribute to the implementation of Climate
Change Action Plans at the metro level, as they include the improvement of sanitation facilities and safe disposal of sewage,
leading to reduction of GHG emissions in the medium to long term. The water supply activities under DLI 1-8 are expected
to have net emissions of -62,588 tCO2-eq/year, while the sanitation activities are estimated to result in net emissions of -
410,421 tCO2-eq/year. The water supply activities have lifetime net emissions of -1,877,636 tCO2-eq and gross emissions
of 21,592,809 tCO2-eq due to NRW reduction, resulting in energy efficiency gains. The sanitation activities have lifetime
net emissions of -12,312,637 tCO2-eq and gross emissions of 23,465,030 tCO2-eq, through collecting and treating waste
that would otherwise remain untreated and would thus generate GHG emissions unabated. The NRW emission reductions
are dependent on PIAPs W1, W2, W5, W7, W8, W10, and W11 to both improve the physical infrastructure and ensure
proper operations and maintenance to prevent future leakages, while the sanitation emission reductions rely on PIAPs W3,
W4, W6, and W9 to build, maintain, and operate the relevant sanitation system infrastructure and practices. Electricity
targets will contribute to climate mitigation through increased energy efficiencies, improved cost recovery, and loss
reduction. On the electricity side, the program will finance activities relating to governance and financial transparent reform
program, loss control program, and rehabilitation of installation of advanced metering infrastructure (including bi-
directional meters for customers with embedded renewable generation), improved revenue management programs, and
rehabilitation of the high, medium and low voltage lines to enhance their maintenance efficiency and effectiveness and to
improve network reliability, all of which are universally aligned. Electricity activities will contribute to net GHG reductions
by 3,368,823 tCO2/year. The electricity and energy activities have lifetime emission reductions of 67,376,461 tCO2. The
emission reductions are dependent on PIAP indicators E4, E5, E6 (Annex 3) which focus on enhancing repairs and
maintenance, minimizing electricity losses, and reducing the frequency and duration of network interruptions, thereby
improving overall network effectiveness. SWM targets will mitigate climate impact through landfill gas flaring and/or
combustion, with supplementary co-benefits from optimized SWM routes and waste diversion and recycling, with net GHG
emissions reduced by 1,503,000 tCO2e, annually, by 2031, while also enhancing adaptation by preventing waste from
clogging storm drains and contaminating water sources. PIAP indicators also contribute to mitigation and emission
reduction by ensuring that landfills, transfer, and materials recovery infrastructure align with national policy and NDCs.

61.      Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. South Africa’s metros have high exposure to climate risks,
particularly more frequent droughts and extreme weather events. Result Area (RA) 3 prioritizes operational performance
improvements that will enhance water and electricity security and resilience, and ensure that WSS, electricity and solid
waste infrastructure are resilient to flooding, drought, and other disasters. This includes reducing NRW (increasing water
availability and service reliability, thus strengthening adaptive capacity of vulnerable households to drought and
temperature increase), improving water network and sewer network performance (lowering water mains failures and
blockages that obstruct system flow, improving water distribution to cope with heat stress and flood risks), and providing
water storage reservoirs with quality sensors and automated distribution, along with strengthened waste management
systems, to prevent overflow risks during heavy rainfall events (Annex 3). Climate resilience measures for the water and
waste sectors are included in metro Climate Change Plans and will be integrated into WSS designs. The design process for
infrastructure rehabilitation, repair or expansion will also ensure that water and sanitation infrastructure is resilient to
drought and flooding. 21 PIAP indicators on wastewater treatment systems and final effluent quality PIAP (W3 and W4)

21 The resilient design process will follow the principles outlined in the World Bank’s Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief, Building the Resilience of WSS Utilities

to Climate Change and Other Threats, and the Decision Tree Framework.


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 18


                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


address public health risks exacerbated by climate change. For SWM, planning enables integration of flood risk mapping to
prioritize waste collection in flood-prone areas, expedite complaint response to issues like river blockages, and use digital
reporting systems to address waste buildup to mitigate flooding risks. These efforts will reduce the potential impact of
drought, floods, and storms on water quality and waste system functionality, ensuring continuity of essential services. Asset
resilience will also be fostered through comprehensive asset management plans and asset renewal. Following climate-
resilient design standards will also contribute to resilient operations of wastewater management systems by reducing
potential disruptions that could lead to sewage overflows, as monitored by the indicators on water quality and sewage
blockages. In the energy sector, updated Outage Management Systems and the comprehensive introduction of SCADA will
enhance resilience to climate-induced interruptions such as floods and high winds (monitored by service interruption
indices 36 and 37). In turn, fewer disruptions in the electricity network will make the municipalities more resilient to climate
hazards such as extreme heat. Most metros have identified SWM as a priority in their city level climate action plan/ circular
economy plan, to address adaptation and mitigation risks. Weighbridges and telematics enhance waste tracking and quality
assurance in South Africa, where weak enforcement has led to widespread illegal dumping. By curbing illicit disposal on
land, drains and waterways, these measures help prevent blockages that drive urban flooding and improve service
efficiency (see PIAP indicators S2, S3 and S6). PIAP indicator A5 on technical and management capacity building includes
asset management and operational resilience under climate stress, proactive climate risk management, and sustainable
WSS services during climate emergencies. PIAP indicator F5 supports capex for climate-resilient infrastructure. Thus, risks
from climate hazards have been reduced to an acceptable level and are not likely to have material impact on the PDO.

62.     Strategic Relevance. The selected Program activities under the PforR are of strategic relevance to the NT and are
known areas of increasing weaknesses among the metros. Specifically, the Program will support the NT by developing ways
of enhancing metro trading services’ accountability, operational and finance performance to reverse declining trends, and
ensure the provision of essential services. The metro trading services reform is core to the local government reforms being
driven by Operation Lindela (phase 2) and were mentioned in the President’s State of the Nation address.

63.     Technical Soundness. All the proposed activities are based on sectoral diagnostics, 22,23,24 technical assessments,
and stakeholder dialogue with the responsible national departments and associated metro level departments.

 B. Fiduciary
Financial Management

64.       The Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA) found that South Africa has a satisfactory financial
management system. The country’s fiduciary framework is adequate to support the proceeds of the loan as evidenced by
the conclusions of the February 2024 International Monetary Fund (IMF) technical report and the 2023 Open Budget Index
(OPI). Based on the IMF report South Africa meets the standard of advanced practice on the fiscal transparency practices
on: (i) fiscal reporting, (ii) fiscal forecasting and budgeting, and (ii) fiscal risk analysis. South Africa has long scored well in
the Open Budget Index (OBI) with an 83 out of 100 in the 2023 OBI survey. In terms of Program funds flow, the World Bank
would disburse to NT in US dollars upon achievement of results, to the South African Reserve Bank. There are presently no
outstanding audit reports. For the purposes of the Program, budget codes at both the national level (to record the
expenditure of the grant) and at the Metro level (on both the revenue and expenditure side) will be used and will be
included in the POM.


22 Waste Not, Want Not: A Diagnostic of Solid Waste Management in South Africa’s Metros. A report produced for National Treasury’s CSP by the World Bank. 2023.
23 State of Water in South African Cities: The Case for Change. Report produced for NT’s Cities Support Program by the World Bank. 2023.
24 Assessment of electricity businesses in South Africa’s Metros. Report produced for NT’s Cities Support Program by the World Bank. 2022. (Unpublished)




                                                                                                                                                           Page 19


                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


65.      The Public Finance Management (PFM) environment. The Minister of Finance and the Deputy Minister of Finance
sit at the center of the economic and fiscal development agenda in South Africa, that is responsible for all government
departments and key entities (including the eight identified metros). The PFM Act of 1999 mandate the National Treasury
with ensuring the accountability, transparency, and control of PFM systems in South Africa, including the management of
budget preparation processes and revenue administration. The Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) governs the
financial landscape of the metros. The major strengths of the SA PFM systems are (i) transparency and access to information
by leveraging technology; (ii) established use of a performance-assessment tool across levels of government; (iii) integrated
approach to reform coordination; and (iv) investing in ethical skills development in the public sector. However, the
following constitute key systemic and institution-specific weaknesses: (i) undue influence of political office holders on PFM;
(ii) weak public sector accountability culture and professional ethics; and (iii) lack of consequence management.

66.     Section 8 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) requires that the NT prepares consolidated financial
statements in accordance with generally recognized accounting practices, and that those statements be submitted to the
Auditor General of South Africa (AGSA) for audit within three months after the end of the financial year and be tabled to
the Parliament within one month. The consolidated financial statements must be made public when submitted to
Parliament.

67.     For municipalities, the Municipal Financial Management Act (MFMA) requires that the annual financial
statements be audited within three months after receipt of the statements from the municipality - in effect, within six
months of the close of the municipal financial year. If not, the Auditor General needs to submit a report outlining the
reasons for the delay to the relevant municipality and entity, and to the relevant provincial legislature and Parliament.
Section 121 of the MFMA requires that every municipality and every municipal entity prepare an annual report which needs
to be submitted to the municipal council within nine months after the end of the financial year. The annual report must
include the annual financial statements, as well as the AGSA report on those financial statements.

68.      Audited financial statements are published by the Office of the AGSA. The timely compilation, audit, and
publication of the audited financial statements of individual entities as well as the national consolidated statements is
mandated by the PFMA and the MFMA. In adherence to the PFMA and MFMA, the financial statements will be embedded
in the annual reports as required by the two Acts. The annual reports constitute financial statements (which disclose the
sources and uses of funds), performance information (which discloses the details of the programs under implementation),
and the opinion by the AGSA on both. These auditing arrangements are assessed and found to be adequate for the Program
to rely on. The statutory audits of National Treasury and metros by AGSA, inclusive of MTS Program expenditures, shall be
submitted to the World Bank no later than nine months following the end of the Metro financial year.

Procurement Management System

69.      Program Procurement. The recent National Procurement system assessment report reveals that the SA Public
Procurement legal and regulatory body of norms applying to public procurement is extensive, complex, and fragmented.
The multitude of legislative provisions present significant challenges in planning, conducting, and delivering procurement
outcomes. The legislative framework in the South African public procurement system is developed and maintained at a
central level within National Treasury and implemented at decentralized levels. The Municipal Finance Management Act
2003 (MFMA), that provides for municipalities’ procurement framework, is applicable to all municipalities and municipal
entities including the metropolitan municipalities that will implement this PforR operation.

70.    Program Procurement Profile. Given metro PIAPs will be finalized early in implementation, the IFSA was conducted
based on high level expenditure framework information and historical expenditure trends. The high-level expenditure

                                                                                                                       Page 20


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


framework includes capital investment works, goods, non-consulting services and consulting services. The cost items may
include the trading services’ new and existing infrastructure, rehabilitations, expansions, new distribution networks, fleet
modernizations/optimization investments, institutional management and systems improvement investments, technical
consulting services and other operating costs that would support the consolidation, adoption, and modernizations for
enhanced efficiency of services delivery by the metros.

 71.    Program procurement system risk identification and management. According to the South African Methodology
 for Assessing Procurement Systems (MAPS) assessment report (August 2024), the general Procurement system, overall
 public procurement landscape and its performance has some deficiencies. South African Auditor General’s report of 2022-
 23 on Local Government Audit outcomes reveals that basic financial management and procurement processes are not
 functioning as they should. These include gaps in applying standardized procedures, ineffective processes for
 procurement, payment, and accounting disciplines. The report indicates that the main reasons for the continuing financial
 losses and waste were poor payment practices, uncompetitive and uneconomical procurement practices, limited value,
 and benefit received for money spent, and weaknesses in project management. The findings of the assessment of the
 metros’ procurement system performance for this Program reconfirm the findings of the MAPS report in general. The
 Program’s procurement risk is therefore rated Substantial after implementation of procurement related Program Action
 Plan (PAP). The new national Procurement Act (enacted on July 23, 2024) is yet to be supplemented by detailed
 regulations, implementation guides, and standard procurement documents. The recommendations made by MAPS
 assessment included the need for development of detailed procurement regulations to complement the rather generic
 recently enacted Public Procurement Act, promotion of sustainable public procurement, introduction of e-Procurement
 system, professionalization of the procurement function, and strengthening of the procurement and contracts
 management governance framework including control/audit, and suspension/debarment systems. The following
 procurement risk mitigation measures are proposed to strengthen overall country procurement systems as part of the
 PAP: (i) preparation and adoption of a Program Operations Manual (POM) satisfactory to the Bank and containing a
 dedicated procurement section, and (ii) annual statutory audit by Auditor General (AGSA) including an audit of
 procurement activities and published annually.

 72.    Procurement exclusions. The Program is not expected to procure large value contract that would be above the
 Operational Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) thresholds, which refer to contracts, based on the Program’s
 Substantial Procurement risk rating (i), estimated to cost USD$100 million equivalent or more per contract package for
 works; (ii), estimated to cost USD$50 million equivalent or more per goods and non-consulting services contracts; and (iii),
 estimated to cost USD$20 million equivalent or more per consulting services contract. In circumstances where such high
 value investments are critical for the achievement of Program’s objectives, either other financing instruments (IPF) may
 be applied, or the PforR Policy updated in July 2015 to allow certain high-value contracts to be included in the Program
 may be considered. Such exceptions will require the approval of the Managing Director and Chief Procurement Officer
 (CPO) or his/her designate, if the contracts are deemed to be important to the integrity of the Program, and their monetary
 value in relation to the overall Program is modest.

Fraud and Corruption Risk Management System

 73.     Fraud and corruption risks to the Program stem from a weak preventative framework at the local government
 level. This includes challenges in preventing and detecting corruption in public procurement arising from the use of manual
 processes and non-compliance with regulatory requirements, a fear of whistleblowing, lack of accountability, and
 weaknesses in the financial disclosure and conflict of interest management framework. Numerous efforts are underway
 to strengthen the anti-corruption framework with the adoption of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy 2020-2030
 including a review of the country's anti-corruption institutional architecture and strengthened anticorruption response.

                                                                                                                      Page 21


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)



74.    The World Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combatting Fraud and Corruption in Program-For-Results
Financing will apply to the entire Program. The Program will build on existing mechanisms for reporting fraud and
corruption to NT, with a reporting protocol agreed with the Government of South Africa in the POM. The MTSC team will
be responsible for reporting allegations of fraud and corruption to the World Bank and preparing compliance reports.
Procurement regulations require verifying bidders against NT’s Restricted Suppliers Database and procurement under the
Program will make use of the same protocol to ensure the exclusion of firms debarred by the World Bank. Advertising of
bids and notifications of bid awards will be published on NT’s eTender Portal and other venues as provided for in MFMA
Circular 83. Additional measures to strengthen anticorruption controls will be included in the POM as agreed with the
government, including the debarment of suppliers engaging in restricted practices in terms of MFMA Circular 43.

75.    Program Fiduciary System Conclusion. The IFS assessment concludes that the Program’s residual fiduciary risk is
rated as Substantial. The Program fiduciary systems including financial management, procurement system and
anticorruption measures, if properly implemented, provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used
for the intended purposes, with due attention to principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and
accountability and for safeguarding program assets. This assurance is subject to successful implementation of risk
mitigation measures as agreed in the PAP.

 C. Environmental and Social
76.     The environmental and social risk rating is considered Substantial. The exact details of the activities will be
determined based on the investment development plans submitted by metros to NT. Based on the current Program
design, the activities will largely take place at existing facilities. The ESSA assessed that the environmental and social
impacts and risks will be site specific, medium to short term in duration, and not likely to lead to significant adverse direct,
indirect, or cumulative impacts to human health or the environment. This determination is based on the findings that the
proposed investment projects will take place at facilities with existing environmental approvals or will obtain an
environmental authorization prior to construction and will have mitigated E&S risk to acceptable levels. There is a risk of
some resettlement associated with the water sector infrastructure scheduled for expansion or re-habilitation. However,
this can be avoided by utilizing existing wayleaves. Some risk to informal settlements may occur but the South African
Prevention of Illegal Eviction and Unlawful Occupation of Land Act (Act 19 of 1998) would offer some protection even in
this eventuality. Activities that may be deemed as having significant adverse environmental and social risks and impacts
will not be supported as per the World Bank PforR Policy. A non-exclusive list of activities is included in the ESSA and will
be reviewed as design information becomes available during implementation as described in the POM. Overall, the
outcome of the Program is expected to result in substantial environmental benefits as it will result in more climate resilient
infrastructure, improved air, soil and water quality and water and energy use efficiencies.
77.    South Africa has a robust and progressive legislative framework which is considered adequate and reliable to
mitigate risks associated with the Program’s activities. The majority of the eight metropolitans have environmental
management structures and systems which are generally prepared in line with international industry best practices;
however, some systems are outdated. To address the outdated systems, a recommendation for metros to review outdated
systems and prepare an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) has been included in the Environmental
and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA). Environmental and social indicators form part of the existing monitoring
framework and will be integrated into other instruments prepared following the national legislative requirements.
However, the implementation and enforcement of environmental requirements varies between metropolitans and is
often hampered by the lack of adequate human resources and ring fencing of financial resource. This is meant to be
addressed through the implementation of the Program and a recommendation for capacity building as included in the



                                                                                                                         Page 22


                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 ESSA. The draft ESSA has been consulted with different stakeholders on January 20 and 21, 2025 and disclosed on February
 11, 2025, on the World Bank website. The ESSA was finalized and redisclosed on October 6, 2025.
 78.    Gender. Women in South Africa face significant barriers in accessing professional opportunities in utility sectors,
 with only 32,000 women are working in the overall utility sectors compared to 67,000 men25 highlighting occupational
 segregation in the sectors as women are mostly engaged in low skills vulnerable employment. Women are
 underrepresented in technical and leadership positions as reflected in the energy utility where women hold only 31
 percent of jobs in the state-owned electricity utility 26. Similarly, in the water utility on average only 18 percent of female
 workforce are women and 23 percent of them are in technical and managerial roles 27. In addition, women are also
 underrepresented at the metro level 28 and tend to be employed in administration, customer relations rather than
 technical domains of engineering, supervision, operations and maintenance. Women face structural obstacles such as
 gender biases in hiring, skills shortages, occupational segregation, lack of training, mentorship and childcare
 responsibilities that limits their opportunity to entry, retention and advancement in the technical and leadership roles. At
 the metro level, the combination of the hiring processes, lack of transparency of job openings, and social hierarchy gaps
 limit women’s advancement in technical professional opportunities in the trading services.

 79.      The Program seeks to narrow the gender gap in women’s representation in the trading services at the metro
 level through the implementation of the Government of South Africa Employment Equity Act of 55 of 1998 (EEA), which
 provides a framework for increased inclusion of female labor force participation through metro-level Employment
 Equity Plans (EEP). The Program will support the eight metropolitan cities and each metro level EEP is expected to
 implement gender mainstreaming strategies that aim to increase women’s participation at the technical level across the
 trading services value chain, based on the findings of metro level gender mainstreaming audits 29. These EEP activities
 include: i) talent acquisition (recruitment and selection) of new female staff at technical and managerial level; ii)
 succession planning of existing staff through skills development trainings at various technical and management levels; and
 iii) creating awareness and advocacy campaign through Women’s Forum to encourage more women to apply for technical
 positions. This ensures that metro level plans are gender inclusive and aim to improve retention, promotion and hiring of
 women in the utility sectors. In addition, a monitoring framework will be established during the implementation to gather
 gender disaggregated data at each metro level for all three sectors to monitor progress. The Program will monitor progress
 through the indicator “the percentage of newly appointed female technical staff in utility sectors at the metro level under
 the program”, with the baseline of zero percent and expected end target of 20 percent by the end of the project.” 30

 80.    Citizen Engagement (CE). Regarding capital investments, the Program will have citizen engagement-oriented
 design, and will include systematic consultation throughout implementation, feedback and grievance redress
 systems. Consultations will be guided by thorough stakeholder analysis, including requirements of South Africa’s
 Municipal Systems Act, and will be inclusive of all stakeholder groups. They will be conducted during the Program’s life
 cycle (preparation, implementation, and closing). In addition, Accountability Performance in the PIAP includes regular
 customer satisfaction surveys for each trading service, to monitor and evaluate customer experience.
 81.   Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected because of a World
 Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the

25 Electricity, Water and Sanitation and Gas; Statistics South Africa 2021; World Bank; 2022; South Africa: Gender Assessment.
26 ESKOM project.

27World Bank. 2019. Women in Water Utilities: Breaking Barriers   . World Bank. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/32319
28 Metropolitan cities in SA currently do not have data separated by utilities and due to lack of data we are using national level data as a proxy.
29
   Employment Equity Plan of the City of Ekurhuleni: December 2022-November 2027 (Section 5.1)
30
    Due to data constraints, national level proxy data is used where average women’s participation is 18 percent in water utilities, and 31 percent in electricity. Baseline
is zero, as all new recruited female staff will be through the new project. The Program will be able to establish a baseline after the gender assessment.


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 23


                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


existing program grievance mechanism or the World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that
complaints received are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns. Program affected communities and individuals
may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection
Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, because of World Bank non-compliance with its policies
and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to
address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been
brought directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For
information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit
https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. Information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism is
available at https://accountability.worldbank.org.

D. Program Action Plan

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexprogramactionplan#doctemplate
 Action                                                                                               Completion
 Description    Source         DLI#     Responsibility    Timing                                      Measurement
 Develop and    Environmental  NA       Trading Services Other      Six months                        GRM is in place and
 implement a    and Social              Coordination                after                             functioning.
 GRM at         Systems                 Team and                    effectiveness
 Program level                          Municipalities

 Develop &          Environmental       NA          Metros              Other        One year         ESMS Manual &
 implement          and Social                                                       after            Procedures.
 functional ESMS    Systems                                                          effectiveness
 Assign E&S         Environmental       NA          NT                  Other        Six months       Responsibilities
 responsibilities   and Social                                                       after            assigned to
 in the Metro       Systems                                                          Program          experienced Metro
 Trading Services                                                                    effectiveness    Trading Services
 Coordination                                                                                         Coordination
 (MTSC) team to                                                                                       (MTSC) team staff.
 support metros.
 Statutory audit    Fiduciary           NA          Trading Services    Other        Within 9         Statutory audit by
 by AGSA            Systems                         Coordination                     months from      AGSA including
 including audit                                    Team                             close of each    Program
 of Program                                                                          Metro            expenditures
 expenditures                                                                        financial
                                                                                     year




 V. KEY RISKS
82.   The overall risk is assessed as substantial. Key risks which may impair the effective implementation of the
program include: (i) technical design, (ii) political and governance, (iii) fiduciary, (iv) environment, (v) social, and (vi)


                                                                                                                      Page 24


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


financial sustainability. Several mitigation measures have been identified, and the different risk categories are to be
mitigated during the Program’s implementation.

83.     Political and Governance: This risk is considered high given the multi-stakeholder nature of the sector, and the
political changes and governance challenges affecting many of the metropolitan municipalities. Four metropolitan
municipalities are run by political coalitions, and each has seen political instability based on shifting coalition alliances
leading to changes in political leadership and hampering decision-making. Local government elections in late 2026
similarly present a degree of uncertainty. A key risk mitigation measure is the requirement for metro Councils to approve
the reform strategy and metro Council’s to approve the PIAPs, as part of metro eligibility for the reform. This commits
the metro beyond the current political term. The Program will also support counterparts in understanding the benefits
of the program through stakeholder engagement.

84.     Macroeconomic: This risk is considered substantial given the low gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate
projected for the South Africa’s economy and the fiscal consolidation required to control the public debt trajectory, which
is expected to peak in 2027/28. The World Bank team will closely monitor the economic and fiscal situation (in
collaboration with other partners including the IMF) and plans, at the request of the NT, to conduct a Public Financial
Review to develop a series of recommendations to help reduce the fiscal gap in both the short and medium term.
Furthermore, this operation is expected to contribute to the country’s fiscal effort by supporting key reforms in the WSS,
electricity, and solid waste sectors that will improve the delivery of infrastructure services by municipalities. Improved
service delivery will encourage business development, contributing to higher public revenues and reduced fiscal risks.

85.     Technical Design of the Program: This risk is assessed as substantial given the institutional and technical
complexity of undertaking the proposed reforms across three sectors and across eight large metropolitan municipalities,
and the novel undertaking of using a performance grant approach in large metropolitan city environments. To mitigate
this risk, the Program will work closely with the metros to ensure engagement and capacity to implement the PIAP,
including use of strategic communications. South Africa is subject to notable rent seeking behaviors and vested interests,
mafias and risks relating to vandalism and theft of infrastructure. To mitigate these risks, the Program will invest heavily
in developing a robust and detailed design, combining World Bank and South African experts.

86.     Fiduciary: The fiduciary risk for this operation is substantial. The IFSA revealed that de facto procurement
operations and market practices, as well as monitoring and oversight performance exhibit weakness, and there is huge
opportunity for improvement. Most of the fiduciary weaknesses are identified in procurement and governance
effectiveness. The new SA national procurement law was enacted in July 2024, while its secondary legislative documents
are yet to be developed for its operationalization. SA public procurement process digitization is not integrated and does
not cover the complete procurement cycle. Details of risks that may directly affect this operation and their mitigation
measures are identified by the IFSA. Measures to address these risks are included in the PAP and in the POM.

87.     Environmental and Social. The overall environmental and social risk is substantial. The ESSA assessed that the
environmental and social impacts and risks will be site specific, medium to short term in duration, and not likely to lead
to significant adverse direct, indirect, or cumulative impacts to human health or the environment. This determination is
based on the findings that the proposed investment projects will take place at facilities with existing environmental
approvals or will obtain an environmental authorization prior to construction and will have mitigated E&S risk to
acceptable levels. To mitigate the risk, the ESSA has proposed boundaries that classify the eligibility of the possible MTSP
civil works additionally specific capacity and system strengthening measures have been proposed in the PIAPs.




                                                                                                                        Page 25


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
             The World Bank
             South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)



                                                                                       ANNEX 1. Results Framework 31




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexpolicyandresult#doctemplate
  Program Development Objective(s)
  The development objective is to improve the accountability, financial and operational performance of trading services in South Africa’s metropolitan
  municipalities.


  PDO Indicators by Outcomes


      Baseline                                                                                   Closing Period
      Program's Minimum Commitments met and maintained by South Africa's metros
      Metros that have met and maintained the Program's Minimum Commitments (Number)
      Sep/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
      0                                                                                          8
      Non-Revenue Water (NRW) reduction in South Africa's metros as a result of the Program
      Non-Revenue Water reduction in South Africa's metros as a result of the Program (Percentage)
      Sep/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
      41                                                                                         28
      Electricity losses reduction in South Africa's metros as a result of the Program
      Electricity losses reduction in South Africa's metros as a result of the Program (Percentage)
      Sep/2025                                                                                   Mar/2031
      22                                                                                         12


  Intermediate Indicators by Results Areas



31 For clarity, please refer first to Annex 2, which presents the Program’s DLI Matrix, the DLI disbursement schedule by IBRD fiscal years, and the combined DLI verification protocols and disbursement Table.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 26


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


Baseline                                                                                 Closing Period
Water & Sanitation: Operational Performance of W&S Services
Bulk water system input volume versus the permitted raw water allocation volume (Percentage)
                                                                                         Mar/2031
                                                                                         To be identified at PIAP formulation
Green Drop Score (Percentage)
                                                                                         Mar/2031
                                                                                         To be identified at PIAP formulation
Electricity: Operational Performance of Electricity Services
Industrial (bulk) and commercial customers metered and operational (Percentage)
                                                                                         Mar/2031
                                                                                         To be identified at PIAP formulation
Repairs Efficiency, Total operational spend on repairs and maintenance / total operational revenue (Percentage)
                                                                                         Mar/2031
                                                                                         To be identified at PIAP formulation
Solid Waste Management: Operational Performance of SWM Sevices
Formal and informal settlements receiving basic waste collection services. (Percentage)
                                                                                         Mar/2031
                                                                                         To be identified at PIAP formulation
Improved service reliability (Percentage)
                                                                                         Mar/2031
                                                                                         To be identified at PIAP formulation
Net greenhouse gas emissions (tCO2eq/year)
                                                                                         Mar/2031
                                                                                         To be identified at PIAP formulation
Gender Inclusion
Newly appointed female technical staff in trading sectors at metro level under the Program (Percentage)
Sep/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
0                                                                                        20
Accountability Performance of Trading Services
City Manager delegations to Trading Services Head of Department for: human resources, SCM, revenue, fleet management, IT, customer service, real estate, and security (Yes/No)
Sep/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
No                                                                                       Yes
Service compact between service authority (Metro) and service provider (Trading Service) for effective delivery of the trading service (Yes/No)
Sep/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031



                                                                                                                                                                          Page 27


                                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


   No                                                                                       Yes
   Full separate Annual Financial Statement for each trading service (Yes/No)
   Sep/2025                                                                                 Mar/2031
   No                                                                                       Yes
   Financial Performance of Trading Services
   Operating cost coverage ratio (OCCR) (Yes/No)
                                                                                            Mar/2031
                                                                                            To be identified at PIAP formulation
   Cash collection rate (Percentage)
                                                                                            Mar/2031
                                                                                            To be identified at PIAP formulation



Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI)


   Period                                                                                    Period Definition
   Period 1                                                                                  Year 1
   Period 2                                                                                  Year 2
   Period 3                                                                                  Year 3
   Period 4                                                                                  Year 4
   Period 5                                                                                  Year 5
   Period 6                                                                                  Year 6



   Baseline                   Period 1                Period 2                 Period 3                     Period 4                   Period 5              Period 6
   1:Buffalo City has council approved PIAPs for the Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
   No
   0.00                       2,828,087.00            4,970,173.00             11,060,994.00                14,843,673.00              15,499,023.00         16,829,237.00
   DLI allocation                                     66,031,187.00                                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation                   7.14%
   2:The City of Cape Town has council approved PIAPs for the Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
   No
   0.00                       6,379,845.00            11,212,148.00            24,952,352.00                33,485,648.00              34,964,043.00         37,964,857.00



                                                                                                                                                                                Page 28


                                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program(P505813)


DLI allocation                                    148,958,893.00                                       As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     16.1%
3:The City of Ekurhuleni has council approved PIAPs for the Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
No
0.00                      1,947,547.00            10,268,049.00              22,851,284.00             30,666,049.00              32,019,959.00           34,768,094.00
DLI allocation                                    132,520,982.00                                       As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     14.33%
4:The City of Johannesburg has council approved PIAPs for the Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
No
0.00                      7,476,450.00            13,139,358.00              29,241,309.00             39,241,358.00              40,973,868.00           44,490,479.00
DLI allocation                                    174,562,822.00                                       As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     18.87%
5:The City of Tshwane has council approved PIAPs for the (3) Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
No
0.00                      5,292,119.00            9,300,543.00               20,698,123.00             27,776,543.00              29,002,881.00           31,492,073.00
DLI allocation                                    123,562,282.00                                       As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     13.36%
6:eThekwini has council approved PIAPs for the (3) Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
No
0.00                      6,335,448.00            11,134,123.00              24,778,710.00             33,252,623.00              34,720,730.00           37,700,661.00
DLI allocation                                    147,922,295.00                                       As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     15.99%
7:Mangaung has council approved PIAPs for the (3) Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
No
0.00                      1,761,080.00            4,642,469.00               10,331,698.00             13,864,969.00              14,477,109.00           15,719,617.00
DLI allocation                                    60,796,942.00                                        As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     6.57%
8:Nelson Mandela Bay has council approved PIAPs for the (3) Trading Services and is meeting its accountability, financial and operational performance targets (Yes/No )
No
0.00                      0.00                    5,555,358.00               12,363,309.00             16,591,358.00              17,323,868.00           18,810,701.00
DLI allocation                                    70,644,594.00                                        As a % of Total DLI Allocation                     7.64%




                                                                                                                                                                               Page 29


                                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                     ANNEX 2. Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification Protocols

           This Annex includes the DLI Matrix, the DLI disbursement schedule by IBRD fiscal years, and the combined DLI verification protocols and
           disbursement Table. * FY25/26 does not include the SWM PIAP. In FY26/27, PIAP v1 will be submitted for SWM.

2.1       Disbursement Linked Indicator Matrix
                                                     Total          % of                             Indicative Timeline for DLI Achievement and Disbursement
                                                                               DLI
                                                   Financing       PforR                  FY*           FY            FY             FY             FY             FY
                                                                             Baseline
                                                   Allocated     Financing               25/26         26/27         27/28          28/29          29/30          30/31
 DLI-1. Buffalo City has council approved
 Performance Improvement Action Plans
 (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation;
 (ii) energy and electricity; and (iii) solid     $66,031,187      7.1%         0       $2,828,087   $4,970,173    $11,060,994    $14,843,673    $15,499,023    $16,829,237
 waste management and is meeting the
 defined institutional, financial and
 operational performance targets
 DLI-2. The City of Cape Town has council
 approved Performance Improvement
 Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water
 and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;     $148,958,893    16.0%         0       $6,379,845   $11,212,148   $24,952,352    $33,485,648    $34,964,043    $37,964,857
 and (iii) solid waste management and is
 meeting the defined institutional, financial
 and operational performance targets
 DLI-3. The City of Ekurhuleni has council
 approved Performance Improvement
 Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water
 and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;
                                                  $132,520,982    14.6%         0       $1,947,547   $10,268,049   $22,851,284    $30,666,049    $32,019,959    $34,768,094
 and (iii) solid waste management and is
 meeting the defined institutional, financial
 and operational performance targets




                                                                                                                                                        Page | 30
                                                    Total          % of                             Indicative Timeline for DLI Achievement and Disbursement
                                                                              DLI
                                                  Financing       PforR                  FY*           FY            FY             FY             FY             FY
                                                                            Baseline
                                                  Allocated     Financing               25/26         26/27         27/28          28/29          29/30          30/31
DLI-4. City of Johannesburg has council
approved Performance Improvement
Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water
and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;     $174,562,822    18.7%         0       $7,476,450   $13,139,358   $29,241,309    $39,241,358    $40,973,868    $44,490,479
and (iii) solid waste management and is
meeting the defined institutional, financial
and operational performance targets
DLI-5. The City of Tshwane has council
approved Performance Improvement
Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water
and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;     $123,562,282    13.2%         0       $5,292,119   $9,300,543    $20,698,123    $27,776,543    $29,002,881    $31,492,073
and (iii) solid waste management and is
meeting the defined institutional, financial
and operational performance targets
DLI-6. eThekwini City has council approved
Performance Improvement Action Plans
(PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation;
(ii) energy and electricity; and (iii) solid     $147,922,298    15.9%         0       $6,335,448   $11,134,123   $24,778,710    $33,252,623    $34,720,730    $37,700,661
waste management and is meeting the
defined institutional, financial and
operational performance targets
DLI-7. Mangaung has council approved
Performance Improvement Action Plans
(PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation;
(ii) energy and electricity; and (iii) solid     $60,796,942      6.6%         0       $1,761,080   $4,642,469    $10,331,698    $13,864,969    $14,477,109    $15,719,617
waste management and is meeting the
defined institutional, financial and
operational performance targets




                                                                                                                                                       Page | 31
                                                  Total          % of                              Indicative Timeline for DLI Achievement and Disbursement
                                                                            DLI
                                                Financing       PforR                   FY*           FY            FY             FY             FY             FY
                                                                          Baseline
                                                Allocated     Financing                25/26         26/27         27/28          28/29          29/30          30/31
DLI-8. Nelson Mandela Bay has council
approved Performance Improvement
Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water
and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;   $70,644,594      7.9%         0           $0        $5,555,358    $12,363,309    $16,591,358    $17,323,868    $18,810,701
and (iii) solid waste management and is
meeting the defined institutional, financial
and operational performance targets
                                TOTAL          $925,000,000     100%                 $32,020,576   $70,222,222   $156,277,778   $209,722,222   $218,981,481   $237,775,720




                                                                                                                                                       Page | 32
2.2.              DLI Disbursement Schedule by IBRD Fiscal Years, in USD million, by year, by DLI

                                                          World Bank Fiscal Years:             2026         2027          2028          2029          2030          2031              Total
 Disbursement linked indicators
           Buffalo City has council approved PIAPs for the Trading Services
                                                                                                                                                                                    $66,031,187
 DLI 1     and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational                       $2,828,087   $4,970,173    $11,060,994   $14,843,673   $15,499,023   $16,829,237
           performance targets
           Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality has submitted to NT satisfactory draft
 DLR 1.1                                                                                     $2,828,087                                                                             $2,828,087
           PIAPs for the TSs and a Commitment to the MCs.
           Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality has submitted to NT Council Approved                                                                                              $4,970,173
 DLR 1.2                                                                                                  $4,970,173
           PIAPs for the TSs and Achieved the MCs for Year 1.

 DLR 1.3 Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality has met the MCs for Year 2 and                                          $11,060,994                                                 $11,060,994
            i i d h          f h        f
         Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality has met and maintained the MCs and                                                                                                  $47,171,933
 DLR 1.4                                                                                                                              $14,843,673   $15,499,023   $16,829,237
         implemented the PIAPs for the TSs and their Performance Targets.

           The City of Cape Town has council approved PIAPs for the Trading
 DLI 2     Services and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational $6,379,845                $11,212,148   $24,952,352   $33,485,648   $34,964,043   $37,964,857      $148,958,893
           performance targets
           City of Cape Town has submitted to NT satisfactory draft PIAPs for the TSs and                                                                                           $6,379,845
 DLR 2.1                                                                                     $6,379,845
           a Commitment to the MCs.

           City of Cape Town has submitted to NT Council Approved PIAPs for the TSs and                                                                                             $11,212,148
 DLR 2.2                                                                                                  $11,212,148
           Achieved the MCs for Year 1.

 DLR 2.3 City of Cape Town has met the MCs for Year 2 and maintained the MCs for                                        $24,952,352                                                 $24,952,352
          h       f                                                                                                                                                                $106,414,548
         City of Cape Town has met and maintained the MCs and implemented the
 DLR 2.4                                                                                                                              $33,485,648   $34,964,043   $37,964,857
         PIAPs for the TSs and their Performance Targets.

           The City of Ekurhuleni has council approved PIAPs for the Trading
 DLI 3     Services and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational $1,947,547                $10,268,049   $22,851,284   $30,666,049   $32,019,959   $34,768,094      $132,520,982
           performance targets
           City of Ekurhuleni has submitted to NT satisfactory draft PIAPs for the TSs and                                                                                          $1,947,547
 DLR 3.1                                                                                     $1,947,547
           a Commitment to the MCs.
           City of Ekurhuleni has submitted to NT Council Approved PIAPs for the TSs and                                                                                            $10,268,049
 DLR 3.2                                                                                                  $10,268,049
           Achieved the MCs for Year 1.


                                                                                                                                                                                Page | 33
                                                         World Bank Fiscal Years:            2026         2027          2028          2029          2030          2031               Total
Disbursement linked indicators
                                                                                                                                                                                  $22,851,284
DLR 3.3 City of Ekurhuleni has met the MCs for Year 2 and maintained the MCs for                                      $22,851,284
           h       f
          City of Ekurhuleni has met and maintained the MCs and implemented the                                                                   $32,019,959   $32,019,959       $97,454,102
DLR 3.4 PIAPs for the TSs and their Performance Targets.                                                                            $30,666,049


          The City of Johannesburg has council approved PIAPs for the
DLI 4     Trading Services and is meeting its institutional, financial and                 $7,476,450   $13,139,358   $29,241,309   $39,241,358   $40,973,868   $44,490,479       $174,562,822
          operational performance targets
          City of Johannesburg has submitted to NT satisfactory draft PIAPs for the TSs                                                                                          $7,476,450
DLR 4.1                                                                                    $7,476,450
          and a Commitment to the MCs.
          City of Johannesburg has submitted to NT Council Approved PIAPs for the TSs                                                                                           $13,139,358
DLR 4.2                                                                                                 $13,139,358
          and Achieved the MCs for Year 1.

DLR 4.3 City of Johannesburg has met the MCs for Year 2 and maintained the MCs for                                    $29,241,309                                               $29,241,309

          City of Johannesburg has met and maintained the MCs and implemented the                                                                                                 $124,705,706
DLR 4.4                                                                                                                             $39,241,358   $40,973,868   $44,490,479
          PIAPs for the TSs and their Performance Targets.

          The City of Tshwane has council approved PIAPs for the Trading
DLI 5     Services and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational $5,292,119               $9,300,543    $20,698,123   $27,776,543   $29,002,881   $31,492,073       $123,562,282
          performance targets
          City of Tshwane has submitted to NT satisfactory draft PIAPs for the TSs and a
DLR 5.1                                                                                    $5,292,119                                                                              $5,292,119
          Commitment to the MCs.
          City of Tshwane has submitted to NT Council Approved PIAPs for the TSs and
DLR 5.2                                                                                                 $9,300,543                                                                 $9,300,543
          Achieved the MCs for Year 1.
          City of Tshwane has met the MCs for Year 2 and maintained the MCs for the
DLR 5.3                                                                                                               $20,698,123                                                 $20,698,123
          TSs for Year 1.
          City of Tshwane has met and maintained the MCs and implemented the PIAPs                                                                $29,002,881   $29,002,881
DLR 5.4                                                                                                                             $27,776,543                                   $88,271,497
          for the TSs and their Performance Targets.

          eThekwini has council approved PIAPs for the Trading Services
DLI 6     and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational                      $6,335,448   $11,134,123   $24,778,710   $33,252,623   $34,720,730   $37,700,661       $147,922,298
          performance targets

DLR 6.1 eThekwini has submitted to NT satisfactory draft PIAPs for the TSs and a           $6,335,448                                                                              $6,335,448
          Commitment to the MCs.




                                                                                                                                                                              Page | 34
                                                        World Bank Fiscal Years:          2026           2027          2028           2029           2030           2031               Total
Disbursement linked indicators
          eThekwini has submitted to NT Council Approved PIAPs for the TSs and                                                                                                       $11,134,123
DLR 6.2                                                                                               $11,134,123
          Achieved the MCs for Year 1.

DLR 6.3 eThekwini has met the MCs for Year 2 and maintained the MCs for the TSs for                                  $24,778,710                                                     $24,778,710
        Year 1
        eThekwini has met and maintained the MCs and implemented the PIAPs for
DLR 6.4 the TSs and their Performance Targets.                                                                                      $33,252,623    $34,720,730    $37,700,661       $105,674,015




          Mangaung has council approved PIAPs for the Trading Services
DLI 7     and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational                   $1,761,080     $4,642,469    $10,331,698    $13,864,969    $14,477,109    $15,719,617        $60,796,942
          performance targets
          Mangaung has submitted to NT satisfactory draft PIAPs for the TSs and a                                                                                                    $1,761,080
DLR 7.1                                                                                 $1,761,080
          Commitment to the MCs.
          Mangaung has submitted to NT Council Approved PIAPs for the TSs and                                                                                                        $4,642,469
DLR 7.2                                                                                                $4,642,469
          Achieved the MCs for Year 1.
          Mangaung has met the MCs for Year 2 and maintained the MCs for the TSs for                                                                                                 $10,331,698
DLR 7.3                                                                                                              $10,331,698
          Year 1.
          Mangaung has met and maintained the MCs and implemented the PIAPs for
DLR 7.4                                                                                                                             $13,864,969    $14,477,109    $15,719,617        $44,061,695
          the TSs and their Performance Targets.

          Nelson Mandela Bay has council approved PIAPs for the Trading
DLI 8     Services and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational              $0         $5,555,358    $12,363,309    $16,591,358    $17,323,868    $18,810,701        $70,644,594
          performance targets
        Nelson Mandela Bay has submitted to NT satisfactory draft PIAPs for the TSs                                                                                                    $0.00
DLR 8.1                                                                                   $0.00
        and a Commitment to the MCs.
        Nelson Mandela Bay has submitted to NT Council Approved PIAPs for the TSs                                                                                                    $5,555,358
DLR 8.2                                                                                                $5,555,358
        and Achieved the MCs for Year 1.
        Nelson Mandela Bay has met the MCs for Year 2 and maintained the MCs for                                                                                                     $12,363,309
DLR 8.3                                                                                                              $12,363,309
        the TSs for Year 1.
        Nelson Mandela Bay has met and maintained the MCs and implemented the
DLR 8.4                                                                                                                             $16,591,358    $17,323,868    $18,810,701        $52,725,928
        PIAPs for the TSs and their Performance Targets.
                                                                              TOTAL     $32,020,576   $70,222,222    $156,277,778   $209,722,222   $218,981,481   $237,775,720      $925,000,000

                                                                        as % of total     3.46%          7.59%         16.89%         22.67%         23.67%         25.71%              100%

                                                                        Cumulative      $32,020,576   $102,242,798   $258,520,576   $468,242,798   $687,224,280
                                                                                                                                                                  $925,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                                        100%



                                                                                                                                                                                 Page | 35
                                 World Bank Fiscal Years:    2026    2027     2028     2029     2030     2031            Total
Disbursement linked indicators


                                             as % of total   3.46%   11.05%   27.95%   50.62%   74.29%   100.00%         100%




                                                                                                                   Page | 36
2.3.       Combined DLI Verification Protocols and Disbursement Table

 DLI 1:
 Buffalo City has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity; and (iii)
 solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
 Description              Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                          for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                          performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                          strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance indicators
                          (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD funding is set
                          proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
 Data source/agency       Annual performance assessment by team of experts
 Verification entity      Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
 Procedure                As outlined in the POM
                                                                                               Maximum # of units                                           Formula
                                                                                  Allocated         on which                            Deadline for        x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
 DLR     Period           Scalability Unit of measurement
                                                                                 amount (USD) disbursement can be                       achievement         the allocation of their MTS-Grant 32, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                                     based                                                  =100%
                                       Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with written
                                                                                   $2,828,087
 1.1     FY 2025/26          YES         commitment to achieving the MCs for                           2                                 30/06/2025         $2,828,087*(x% + y%) for the TSs
                                        two Trading Services as verified by IVA
                                        Full Council-approved PIAPs submitted
                                        to NT and Metro has achieved the MCs       $4,970,173
 1.2     FY 2026/27          YES                                                                       3                                 30/06/2026         $4,970,173* (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                         for two Trading Services as verified by
                                                           IVA
                                       The Metro has adhered to the Minimum
                                                                                  $11,060,994
 1.3     FY 2027/28          YES       Commitments for three Trading Services                          3                                 30/06/2027         $11,060,994* (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                                   as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                                            Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                                            $14,843,673
                                         Performance Score of achieving targets                                                                             * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                           $14,843,673
 1.4.1   FY 2028/29           YES         in PIAPs for three Trading Services as                                        3                30/06/2028         $14,843,673
                                                      verified by IVA                                                                                       * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                                            $14,843,673
                                                                                                                                                            * z% * Performance Targets (%)




         32
            Within bands, metros have discretion to allocate their MTSG-allocations across the three trading services. The shares for each sector for the program duration will be set through the full PIAPs, and
         are referred to as x, y and z respectively.

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page | 37
                                                                                                                                        Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                        $15,499,023
                                     Performance Score of achieving targets                                                             * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                  $15,499,023
1.4.2   FY 2029/30       YES          in PIAPs for three Trading Services as                             3              30/06/2029      $15,499,023
                                                  verified by IVA                                                                       * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                        $15,499,023
                                                                                                                                        * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                        Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                        $16,829,237
                                     Performance Score of achieving targets                                                             * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
1.4.3   FY 2030/31       YES          in PIAPs for three Trading Services as      $16,829,237            3              30/06/2030      $16,829,237
                                                  verified by IVA                                                                       * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                        $16,829,237
                                                                                                                                        * z% * Performance Targets (%)




 DLI 2:
 The City of Cape Town has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;
 and (iii) solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
 Description           Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                       for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                       performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                       strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance
                       indicators (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD
                       funding is set proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
 Data source/agency    Annual performance assessment by team of experts
 Verification entity   Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
 Procedure             As outlined in the POM
                                                                                                                                      Formula
                                                                                            Maximum # of units on
                                                                           Allocated                                Deadline for      x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
 DLR     Period        Scalability    Unit of measurement                                    which disbursement
                                                                          amount (USD)                              achievement       the allocation of their MTS-Grant, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                                can be based
                                                                                                                                      =100%
                                     Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                     written commitment to achieving                                                                  $6,379,845
 2.1     FY 2025/26       YES                                                  $6,379,845            2                30/06/2025
                                     the MCs for two Trading Services                                                                 * (x% + y%) for the TSs
                                              as verified by IVA
                                        Full Council-approved PIAPs        $11,212,148                                                $11,212,148
 2.2     FY 2026/27       YES                                                                        3                30/06/2026
                                      submitted to NT and Metro has                                                                   * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs



                                                                                                                                                                             Page | 38
                                  achieved the MCs for two Trading
                                      Services as verified by IVA
                                    The Metro has adhered to the                                                                     $24,952,352
                                                                        $24,952,352
2.3     FY 2027/28       YES      Minimum Commitments for three                                    3                 30/06/2027      * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                  Trading Services as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $33,485,648
                                    Performance Score of achieving                                                                   * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                        $33,485,648
2.4.1   FY 2028/29       YES       targets in PIAPs for three Trading                              3                 30/06/2028      $33,485,648
                                       Services as verified by IVA                                                                   * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $33,485,648
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $34,964,043
                                    Performance Score of achieving                                                                   * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                        $34,964,043
2.4.2   FY 2029/30       YES       targets in PIAPs for three Trading                              3                 30/06/2029      $34,964,043
                                       Services as verified by IVA                                                                   * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $34,964,043
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $37,964,857
                                    Performance Score of achieving                                                                   * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                        $37,964,857                                                  $37,964,857
2.4.3   FY 2030/31       YES       targets in PIAPs for three Trading                              3                 30/06/2030
                                       Services as verified by IVA                                                                   * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $37,964,857
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)




DLI 3:
The City of Ekurhuleni has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;
and (iii) solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
Description           Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                      for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                      performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                      strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance
                      indicators (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD
                      funding is set proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
Data source/agency    Annual performance assessment by team of experts
Verification entity   Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
Procedure             As outlined in the POM

                                                                                                                                                                           Page | 39
                                                                                                                                Formula
                                                                                         Maximum # of units on
                                                                           Allocated                             Deadline for   x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
DLR      Period       Scalability    Unit of measurement                                  which disbursement
                                                                          amount (USD)                           achievement    the allocation of their MTS-Grant, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                             can be based
                                                                                                                                =100%
                                    Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                    written commitment to achieving                                                             $1,947,547
3.1      FY 2025/26      YES                                                $1,947,547            2               30/06/2025
                                    the MCs for two Trading Services                                                            * (x% + y% ) for the TSs
                                             as verified by IVA
                                       Full Council-approved PIAPs
                                     submitted to NT and Metro has         $10,268,049                                          $10,268,049
3.2      FY 2026/27      YES                                                                      3               30/06/2026
                                    achieved the MCs for two Trading                                                            * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                        Services as verified by IVA
                                      The Metro has adhered to the                                                              $22,851,284
                                                                           $22,851,284
3.3      FY 2027/28      YES        Minimum Commitments for three                                 3               30/06/2027    * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                    Trading Services as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                Subject to meeting Minimum commitmentss:
                                                                                                                                $30,666,049
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                             * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                           $30,666,049
3.4.1    FY 2028/29      YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                            3               30/06/2028    $30,666,049
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                             * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                $30,666,049
                                                                                                                                * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                $32,019,959
                                     Performance Score of achieving        $32,019,959                                          * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
3.4.2    FY 2029/30      YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                            3               30/06/2029    $32,019,959
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                             * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                $32,019,959
                                                                                                                                * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                $34,768,094
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                             * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                           $34,768,094                                          $34,768,094
3.4.3    FY 2030/31      YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                            3               30/06/2030
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                             * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                $34,768,094
                                                                                                                                * z% * Performance Targets (%)




DLI 4:

                                                                                                                                                                       Page | 40
The City of Johannesburg has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and
electricity; and (iii) solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
Description           Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                      for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                      performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                      strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance
                      indicators (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD
                      funding is set proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
Data source/agency    Annual performance assessment by team of experts
Verification entity   Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
Procedure             As outlined in the POM
                                                                                                                                     Formula
                                                                                         Maximum # of units on
                                                                           Allocated                               Deadline for      x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
DLR     Period        Scalability    Unit of measurement                                  which disbursement
                                                                          amount (USD)                             achievement       the allocation of their MTS-Grant, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                             can be based
                                                                                                                                     =100%
                                    Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                    written commitment to achieving         $7,476,450                                               $7,476,450
4.1     FY 2025/26       YES                                                                       2                 30/06/2025
                                    the MCs for two Trading Services                                                                 * (x% + y% ) for the TSs
                                             as verified by IVA
                                       Full Council-approved PIAPs
                                     submitted to NT and Metro has                                                                   $13,139,358
4.2     FY 2026/27       YES                                               $13,139,358             3                 30/06/2026
                                    achieved the MCs for two Trading                                                                 * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                        Services as verified by IVA
                                      The Metro has adhered to the                                                                   $29,241,309
4.3     FY 2027/28       YES        Minimum Commitments for three          $29,241,309             3                 30/06/2027      * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                    Trading Services as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $39,241,358
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                                  * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                           $39,241,358
4.4.1   FY 2028/29       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                             3                 30/06/2028      $39,241,358
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                                  * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $39,241,358
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $40,973,868
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                                  * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
4.4.2   FY 2029/30       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading     $40,973,868             3                 30/06/2029      $40,973,868
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                                  * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $40,973,868
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)


                                                                                                                                                                            Page | 41
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $44,490,479
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                                  * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
4.4.3   FY 2030/31       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading     $44,490,479             3                 30/06/2030      $44,490,479
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                                  * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $44,490,479
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)




DLI 5:
The City of Tshwane has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;
and (iii) solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
Description           Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                      for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                      performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                      strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance
                      indicators (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD
                      funding is set proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
Data source/agency    Annual performance assessment by team of experts
Verification entity   Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
Procedure             As outlined in the POM
                                                                                                                                     Formula
                                                                                         Maximum # of units on
                                                                           Allocated                               Deadline for      x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
DLR     Period        Scalability    Unit of measurement                                  which disbursement
                                                                          amount (USD)                             achievement       the allocation of their MTS-Grant, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                             can be based
                                                                                                                                     =100%
                                    Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                    written commitment to achieving                                                                  $5,292,119
5.1     FY 2025/26       YES                                                $5,292,119             2                 30/06/2025
                                    the MCs for two Trading Services                                                                 * (x% + y% ) for the TSs
                                             as verified by IVA
                                       Full Council-approved PIAPs
                                     submitted to NT and Metro has                                                                   $9,300,543
5.2     FY 2026/27       YES                                                $9,300,543             3                 30/06/2026
                                    achieved the MCs for two Trading                                                                 * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                        Services as verified by IVA
                                      The Metro has adhered to the                                                                   $20,698,123
5.3     FY 2027/28       YES        Minimum Commitments for three          $20,698,123             3                 30/06/2027      * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                    Trading Services as verified by IVA
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                                  Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                           $27,776,543
5.4.1   FY 2028/29       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                             3                 30/06/2028      $27,776,543
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                                  * x% * Performance Targets (%) +


                                                                                                                                                                            Page | 42
                                                                                                                                     $27,776,543
                                                                                                                                     * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $27,776,543
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $29,002,881
                                      Performance Score of achieving                                                                 * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
5.4.2   FY 2029/30       YES         targets in PIAPs for three Trading   $29,002,881              3                30/06/2029       $29,002,881
                                         Services as verified by IVA                                                                 * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $29,002,881
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                     Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                     $31,492,073
                                      Performance Score of achieving                                                                 * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
5.4.3   FY 2030/31       YES         targets in PIAPs for three Trading   $31,492,073              3                30/06/2030       $31,492,073
                                         Services as verified by IVA                                                                 * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                     $31,492,073
                                                                                                                                     * z% * Performance Targets (%)


 DLI 6:
 eThekwini has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity; and (iii)
 solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
 Description           Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                       for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                       performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                       strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance
                       indicators (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD
                       funding is set proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
 Data source/agency    Annual performance assessment by team of experts
 Verification entity   Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
 Procedure             As outlined in the POM
                                                                                                                                      Formula
                                                                                         Maximum # of units on
                                                                           Allocated                                Deadline for      x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
 DLR     Period        Scalability    Unit of measurement                                 which disbursement
                                                                          amount (USD)                              achievement       the allocation of their MTS-Grant, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                             can be based
                                                                                                                                      =100%
                                      Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                      written commitment to achieving                                                                 $6,335,448
 6.1     FY 2025/26       YES                                               $6,335,448                 2              30/06/2025
                                      the MCs for two Trading Services                                                                * (x% + y%) for the TSs
                                              as verified by IVA



                                                                                                                                                                            Page | 43
                                    Full Council-approved PIAPs
                                  submitted to NT and Metro has                                                                     $11,134,123
6.2     FY 2026/27      YES                                            $11,134,123                 3                30/06/2026
                                 achieved the MCs for two Trading                                                                   * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                     Services as verified by IVA
                                 Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                 written commitment to achieving       $24,778,710                                                  $24,778,710
6.3     FY 2027/28      YES                                                                        3                30/06/2027      * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                 the MCs for two Trading Services
                                          as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                    Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                    $33,252,623
                                   Performance Score of achieving                                                                   * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                       $33,252,623
6.4.1   FY 2028/29      YES       targets in PIAPs for three Trading                               3                30/06/2028      $33,252,623
                                      Services as verified by IVA                                                                   * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                    $33,252,623
                                                                                                                                    * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                    Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                    $34,720,730
                                   Performance Score of achieving                                                                   * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
6.4.2   FY 2029/30      YES       targets in PIAPs for three Trading   $34,720,730                 3                30/06/2029      $34,720,730
                                      Services as verified by IVA                                                                   * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                    $34,720,730
                                                                                                                                    * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                    Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                    $37,700,661
                                   Performance Score of achieving                                                                   * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
6.4.3   FY 2030/31      YES       targets in PIAPs for three Trading   $37,700,661                 3                30/06/2030      $37,700,661
                                      Services as verified by IVA                                                                   * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                    $37,700,661
                                                                                                                                    * z% * Performance Targets (%)




DLI 7:
Mangaung has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity; and (iii)
solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
Description          Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                     for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                     performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                     strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance


                                                                                                                                                                         Page | 44
                      indicators (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD
                      funding is set proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
Data source/agency    Annual performance assessment by team of experts
Verification entity   Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
Procedure             As outlined in the POM
                                                                                                                                  Formula
                                                                                         Maximum # of units on
                                                                           Allocated                             Deadline for     x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
DLR     Period        Scalability    Unit of measurement                                  which disbursement
                                                                          amount (USD)                           achievement      the allocation of their MTS-Grant, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                             can be based
                                                                                                                                  =100%
                                    Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                    written commitment to achieving                                                               $1,761,080
7.1     FY 2025/26       YES                                                $1,761,080            2               30/06/2025
                                    the MCs for two Trading Services                                                              * (x% + y% ) for the TSs
                                             as verified by IVA
                                       Full Council-approved PIAPs
                                     submitted to NT and Metro has                                                                $4,642,469
7.2     FY 2026/27       YES                                                $4,642,469            3               30/06/2026
                                    achieved the MCs for two Trading                                                              * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                        Services as verified by IVA
                                      The Metro has adhered to the                                                                $10,331,698
                                                                           $10,331,698
7.3     FY 2027/28       YES        Minimum Commitments for three                                 3               30/06/2027      * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                    Trading Services as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                  Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                  $13,864,969
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                               * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                           $13,864,969
7.4.1   FY 2028/29       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                            3               30/06/2028      $13,864,969
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                               * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                  $13,864,969
                                                                                                                                  * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                  Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                  $14,477,109
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                               * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                           $14,477,109
7.4.2   FY 2029/30       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                            3               30/06/2029      $14,477,109
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                               * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                  $14,477,109
                                                                                                                                  * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                  Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                  $15,719,617
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                               * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                           $15,719,617                                            $15,719,617
7.4.3   FY 2030/31       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                            3               30/06/2030
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                               * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                  $15,719,617
                                                                                                                                  * z% * Performance Targets (%)


                                                                                                                                                                        Page | 45
DLI 8:
Nelson Mandela Bay has council approved Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) in place for (i) water and sanitation; (ii) energy and electricity;
and (iii) solid waste management and is meeting its institutional, financial and operational performance targets
Description           Metros are invited to present Performance Improvement Action Plans, with clear targets to turn around the Trading Services provision for Water and Sanitation;
                      for Energy and Electricity; and for Solid Waste. The targets relate to areas of (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) financial performance and (iii) operational
                      performance. For each Trading Service a number of Minimum Commitments are set in regard to institutional reform to provide a solid basis for the turn-around
                      strategy. The Metro is annually assessed, for compliance with the Minimum Commitments and for YR-4, YR-5 and YR-6 also against a set of performance
                      indicators (23 for water and sanitation; 19 for energy and electricity; 21 for solid waste) resulting in a score on a scale of 0-100% for each Trading service. IBRD
                      funding is set proportionally (1/3) to the government committed budget for the Metro Trading Services Grant for the period 25/26 – 2030/31.
Data source/agency    Annual performance assessment by team of experts
Verification entity   Expert panel, with government representatives and independent experts
Procedure             As outlined in the POM
                                                                                                                                      Formula
                                                                                             Maximum # of units on
                                                                          Allocated amount                           Deadline for     x, y and z are the shares for the three different TSs in
DLR     Period        Scalability    Unit of measurement                                      which disbursement
                                                                                 (USD)                               achievement      the allocation of their MTS-Grant, whereby x+y+z
                                                                                                 can be based
                                                                                                                                      =100%
                                    Draft PIAPs submitted to NT with
                                    written commitment to achieving
8.1     FY 2025/26       YES                                                        $0.00             2               30/06/2025      $0 * (x% + y%) for the TSs
                                    the MCs for two Trading Services
                                             as verified by IVA
                                       Full Council-approved PIAPs
                                     submitted to NT and Metro has                                                                    $5,555,358
8.2     FY 2026/27       YES                                                   $5,555,358             3               30/06/2026
                                    achieved the MCs for two Trading                                                                  * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                        Services as verified by IVA
                                      The Metro has adhered to the                                                                    $12,363,309
8.3     FY 2027/28       YES        Minimum Commitments for three             $12,363,309        $12,363,309          30/06/2027      * (x% + y% + z%) for the TSs
                                    Trading Services as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                      Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                                                                      $16,591,358
                                     Performance Score of achieving                                                                   * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                              $16,591,358
8.4.1   FY 2028/29       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                                3               30/06/2028      $16,591,358
                                        Services as verified by IVA                                                                   * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                                                                      $16,591,358
                                                                                                                                      * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                                                                      Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                     Performance Score of achieving
                                                                              $17,323,868                                             $17,323,868
8.4.2   FY 2029/30       YES        targets in PIAPs for three Trading                                3               30/06/2029
                                                                                                                                      * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                        Services as verified by IVA
                                                                                                                                      $17,323,868

                                                                                                                                                                          Page | 46
                                                                                               * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                               $17,323,868
                                                                                               * z% * Performance Targets (%)
                                                                                               Subject to meeting Minimum commitments:
                                                                                               $18,810,701
                            Performance Score of achieving                                     * x% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                $18,810,701                    $18,810,701
8.4.3   FY 2030/31   YES   targets in PIAPs for three Trading                 3   30/06/2030
                               Services as verified by IVA                                     * y% * Performance Targets (%) +
                                                                                               $18,810,701
                                                                                               * z% * Performance Targets (%)




                                                                                                                              Page | 47
                                          ANNEX 3. PIAP Indicators Definition Sheets
     Accountability Performance, Financial Performance, and Operational Performance for WSS, Electricity and SWM
   *NT’s A3: PIAP Guidance Notes and Resource Documents: https://mfma.treasury.gov.za/Guidelines/Documents/Trading%20Services
Performance areas            Ref   Minimum commitments & performance indicators           YR-1     YR 2     YR 3-6      Weights
Accountability Performance    M1   SPoMA Service Compact                                  binary   binary    binary
Minimum Commitments           M2   SPoMA Appointment                                      binary   binary    binary
                              M3   SPoMA Organizational structure                         binary   binary    binary
                              M4   SPoMA Delegations                                      binary   binary    binary
                              M5   Financial Model and Business & Investment Plan         binary   binary    binary
                              M6   Budget Support of Business & Investment Plan           binary   binary    binary
                              M7   Financial Transparency – separate AFS                  binary   binary    binary
                              M8   Support for management of organizational change        binary   binary    binary
Accountability Performance    A1   Customer surveys                                        n.a.    binary   scalable   2
Indicators                    A2   Financial Accounting – mSCOA compliance                 n.a.    binary   scalable   2
                              A3   Public Procurement Transparency                         n.a.    binary   scalable   2      10
                              A4   Capital Budget Execution                                n.a.    binary   scalable   2
                              A5   Core Technical & Management Capacity                    n.a.    binary   scalable   2
                              F1   Financial Viability OCCR                                n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Financial Performance
                              F2   Cash Collection rate                                    n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Indicators
                              F3   Operational Cash Flow                                   n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                                                                                                                              30
                              F4   Customer Debt management – debtors days                 n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                              F5   Infrastructure Capex                                    n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                              F6   Self-Financing ratio                                    n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Operational Performance      W1    Water Security – input volume % raw water allocation    n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Indicators                   W2    Drinking Water Systems Blue Drop                        n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Water & Sanitation
                             W3    Waste Water Treatment Systems Green Drop                n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                             W4    Wastewater % of samples compliant with license          n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                             W5    Water Network – mains failures frequency / 100 km       n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                             W6    Sewer Network – blockages frequency / 100 km            n.a.    binary   scalable   5      60
                             W7    Physical Water Loss – Infrastructure Leakage Index      n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                             W8    Water Service Complaints Response % in 48 hours         n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                             W9    Sewer Service Complaints Response % in 48 hours         n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                             W10   Non-Revenue Water (NRW)                                 n.a.    binary   scalable   10
                             W11   Metering Performance                                    n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Operational Performance       E1   Bulk Commercial Metering Performance                    n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Indicators                    E2   Vending Efficiency % of metering operational            n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Electricity & Energy
                              E3   Automated Meter Reading Coverage                        n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                              E4   Repairs Efficiency                                      n.a.    binary   scalable   5      60
                              E5   Electricity losses as % of electricity purchased        n.a.    binary   scalable   30
                              E6   Network effectiveness ASIFI                             n.a.    binary   scalable   5
                              E7   Network effectiveness ASIDI                             n.a.    binary   scalable   5
Operational Performance       S1   Service Collection Coverage                             n.a.             scalable   7
Indicators                    S2   Service Reliability                                     n.a.             scalable   7
Solid Waste Management
                              S3   Asset Maintenance & Operations                          n.a.             scalable   12
                              S4   Waste Minimization                                      n.a.             scalable   7
                              S5   Environmental Compliance                                n.a.             scalable   8      60
                              S6   Cost Efficiency                                         n.a.             scalable   3
                              S7   Climate Change Mitigation                               n.a.             scalable   5
                              S8   Asset Creation: Landfill Airspace                       n.a.             scalable   6
                              S9   Access Control/Security                                 n.a.             scalable   5




                                                                                                                            Page | 48
                                                         ACCOUNTABILITY PERFORMANCE
                                                               MINIMUM COMMITMENTS
Indicator No & Name                   M1 SPoMA Service Compact
Performance Area                      Service Compact.
Indicator Cross Reference              M2, M3, M4.
Definition                            The Service Compact between Service Authority (Metro) and the trading service 33
                                      • Specifies Internal Business Unit / Municipal Owned Entity decision
                                      • Provides for the transfer of Metro obligations and responsibilities in terms of law
                                          (both municipal and sector legislation) to its Service Provider as agent to execute
                                          these services on its behalf and within the scope of applicable municipal
                                          legislation. The Metro discharges its responsibilities in terms of its Service
                                          Compact including that of the (previously) shared services 34.
                                      • Defines and structures the service role that the new utility business must execute
                                          on behalf of its parent body (the metro).
Purpose                               The new utility business becomes responsible for full financial and managerial
                                      operation of the trading service and shall be accountable to the accounting officer of
                                      the metro. The compact, among others, will define reporting and other obligations and
                                      responsibilities between the parties.
Key Components                        The service compact defines the execution requirements in both municipal and
                                      applicable sector legislation from service authority to service provider and includes the
                                      service provider’s role to the IDP, license requirements, specific service delivery
                                      requirements, free basic services, tariff setting, among other. It sets the division of
                                      responsibilities across value chains (including decision-making and operational
                                      performance), investments, performance metrics, consequence management,
                                      information sharing, oversight meetings, among other.
Calculation Formula                   Binary. (Council commitment to service compact, approval, implementation and
                                      retention of service compact).
Frequency                             Once as per Target for commitment, approval and appointment and also, retention of
                                      service compact.
Performance Interpretation            Benchmark: Service Compacts reflects and re-enforces SPoMA.
                                      Y0: Council Commitment to service compact
                                      Y1: Council approval of service compact
                                      Y2 – Y6: Implementation and retention of service compact.
Definition of Success                 Service compact committed to, approved by council and implemented as per targets.
                                      Signed into operation by City Manager. Retention of compact.
Benefits                              Clearly defined division of responsibilities across value chains for service authority to
                                      service provider with clear performance and accounting metrics. Transparent
                                      expectation of service delivery and sustainability targets. Clear accountability for
                                      sustainable service delivery.


Indicator No & Name                   M2 SPoMA Appointment
Performance Area                      TS Leadership.



33
  Regarding Municipal Services Act, Municipal Finance Management Act, & other mandates transferred; and services and standards required.
34
   Shared services refer to financial management, customer services, supply chain management, human resources, fleet, IT systems & support, and other shared
services as per indicator M4.

                                                                                                                                                   Page | 49
Indicator No & Name          M2 SPoMA Appointment
Indicator Cross Reference    M1, M3, M4 (see Guidance Notes 1 and 3), M5.
Definition                   The appointment of a chief executive of the trading service with an appropriate job
                             description, reflecting all delegated powers and responsibilities, and an appropriate
                             performance contract.
Purpose                      To ensure properly authorised executive leadership of the trading service.
Key Components               Acknowledgement of enhanced and additional functions, competencies, requirements,
                             responsibilities and obligations of the executive officer of the new business unit that
                             will have all elements of the classical utility business under their jurisdiction, as
                             applicable for the particular TS.
                                  • The TS leadership position will oversee all the elements of the utility value
                                      chain, expanding from the current (mostly infrastructure related)
                                      responsibilities.
                                  • Since this job description (incorporating commercial as well as technical and
                                      managerial skills) in almost all cases differs from what is currently applicable,
                                      filling the new SPoMA post requires a formal recruitment process.
                                  • Such process should be (1) open and transparent; (2) designed and executed
                                      to ensure that a person with the necessary commercial, technical and
                                      managerial experience and stature is appointed; (3) appropriately timed to
                                      align with other accountability minimum access conditions.
                                  • The appointees performance contract should focus on achievement of targets
                                      regarding the trading services reform as expressed in A3: PIAP (M7) as well as
                                      other statutory targets such as SDBIP.
Calculation Formula          Binary.
Performance Interpretation   BENCHMARK: Commitment by metro, appointment of new executive officer of utility
                             business, per annual targets.
                             Y0: Commitment to appropriate appointment process as outlined
                             Y2: New appointee in place
                             Y3–Y6: Appointee supported to remain in place.
Definition of Success        Scoping and redefinition of ex HOD/ Executive officer Job description and role for new
                             business unit, commitment thereto, appointment and retention of executive role for
                             business unit as SPoMA.
Benefits                     Ensure definition and recruitment of right competencies and skills to run TS (under
                             Model 2) as a full trading business (or under Model 3 as Municipal Owned Entity) in a
                             sustainable manner.


Indicator No & Name          M3 SPoMA Organisational Structure
Performance Area             Organisational Structure.
Indicator Cross Reference    M1, M2, M4 (see Guidance Notes 1 and 3).
Definition                   See Guidance Note 3. An appropriate organisational structure, described in an
                             organizational chart, is established and maintained to support the delegations and
                             effective business functioning of the Trading Service as SPoMA.
Purpose                      To create an organisational structure for a capable, professional and effective utility
                             along best practises that has all the required functions of the classical value chain in
                             one business for service delivery enhancement.




                                                                                                                          Page | 50
Indicator No & Name                        M3 SPoMA Organisational Structure
Performance Area                           Organisational Structure.
Key Components                             A single organisational structure with all elements of the infrastructure and
                                           commercial value chain, with the necessary supporting business processes and systems
                                           under an appropriate capable and professional management and governance
                                           framework. It shall have measurements of performance KPI’s of the targeted
                                           conditions of accountability, financial and operational performance as part of the
                                           structural arrangement.
Calculation Formula                        Binary, but scalable for implementation. Appropriate organisational structure along
                                           the classical utility value chain and 7-box model.
Performance Interpretation                 Benchmark = organisational structure which support the delegations and effective
                                           functioning of the trading service as SPoMA
                                           Y0: Council Commitment to revising and approving org structure to support SPoMA
                                           delegations
                                           Y1: Council approves org structure as required
                                           Y2-Y6: Implementation and retention of org structure as required.
Definition of Success                      SPoMA is supported by effective org structure and reporting lines along the classical
                                           value chain of the particular utility, as required. Approved by council and signed off by
                                           City Manager.
Benefits                                  An effective organisational structure along the full value chain requires a coherent,
                                          non-fragmented delivery structure, SPoMA accountability and will ensure an
                                          appropriate operational utility management structure for sustainability and service
                                          delivery.


Indicator No & Name                       M4 SPoMA Delegations
Performance Area                          Delegations.
Indicator Cross Reference                 M1, M2, M3 (see Guidance Notes 1 and 3).
Definition                                Business Unit (Model 2): Delegations means the delegations/ passing of the authority
                                          for the financial management, operational and management control of all shared
                                          services for the effective operation of the Trading Services (TS) as a Single Point of
                                          Accountability (SPoMA) Business.
                                          Municipal Entity (Model 3 35): Same but SPoMA accounts to Board.
Purpose                                   To ensure that the responsibilities and functions pertaining to/or supporting
                                          operational, financial management and overall management of the Trading Service are
                                          fully accounted for within that Trading Service SPoMA. This requires delegation by the
                                          City Manager of all the shared service responsibilities to the SPoMA to operate the
                                          Trading Service business enabling the SPoMA to be responsible for the effective
                                          execution of these services in support of the TS as a single business unit.
Key Components                            Financial and operational management of HR, SCM, revenue, fleet management, IT,
                                          customer service, real estate, security and operational and safety requirements 36.
                                          The SPoMA may determine how to discharge its responsibilities in terms of its Service
                                          Compact (Indicator M4) regarding the shared services.




35
     Model 3 (MoE): ensure appropriate Water Service Provider (WSP) responsibilities and/ or Electricity Service as applicable
36
     Including appropriate accountabilities iro Occupational Health and Safety Act and other RSA social protection & environmental legislation, and licenses

                                                                                                                                                               Page | 51
Indicator No & Name                      M4 SPoMA Delegations
Performance Area                         Delegations.
Calculation Formula                      Binary. (All shared services as applicable captured in the formal delegation document 37
                                         of the metro (as required in MFMA C80) and approved by council. Signed delegation
                                         from City Manager to HOD/ Executive officer of TS in place).
Performance Interpretation               Benchmark: Formal delegation commitment by Council, delegations in place in target
                                         year, retention in place over remainder of period.
                                         Y0: Council commitment for delegations for full SPoMA
                                         Y1: Delegations in place
                                         Y2-Y6: Delegations remain in place.
Definition of Success                    •     Formal delegations part of metro delegations and delegation policy
                                         •     SPoMA has full accountability for service performance with all the related shared
                                               services delegated under its control.
                                         •     Service Delivery Agreements (SDA) between Service Provider and Trading services
                                               for all services in place, self-executed or contracted out as applicable as per target
                                               year signed by both parties.
                                         •     Full accountability with HOD/ Executive officer of TS.
Benefits                                 All delegation and shared services responsibilities rest in the new business unit and can
                                         be accounted for and managed as a SPoMA ensuring effective service delivery of
                                         complete business for sustainability.


Indicator No & Name                       M5 Financial Model and Business & Investment Plan
Performance Area                          Business and Investment Planning.
Indicator Cross Reference                 M6.
Definition                                Submission of annual Trading Services business and investment plan, which has been
                                          supported and prioritised by means of a utility financial model to ensure business
                                          financial sustainability, turnaround and improvement.
Purpose                                   The annual business and investment plans need to be supported by a financial model
                                          to ensure a robust PIAP (A3) that supports sustainability and business turnaround.
                                          The model will be used to inform strategic financial and business decisions for business
                                          turnaround/ performance improvement; and to target and focus investments for
                                          turnaround/ performance improvement.
Key Components                            •     Multi-year utility financial model reflecting the utility characteristics and
                                                requirements, to underpin utility reform priorities and strategy development
                                          •     Annual business plan and budget incorporating a long-term strategic perspective,
                                                and medium-term capital and operational planning.
                                          •     Data development programme to ensure that trading services management has
                                                access to all the financial and operational data required for effective utility
                                                management
                                          •     initially to inform A3-PIAP v2 for 2026/27 onwards, and then to track performance
                                                and build on to the model over remainder of period as the trading service
                                                improves.
Calculation Formula                       Binary. Comprehensive business plan supported by financial model outcomes and
                                          indicators.



37
     NB see indicator A2: Delegations, segregation of duties & organisational structure must be embedded in the financial system configuration

                                                                                                                                                 Page | 52
Indicator No & Name          M5 Financial Model and Business & Investment Plan
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark: Annual trading service business plan as defined
                             Y0: Council commitment to production and approval of a business and investment
                             plan for the utility by end of Y1
                             Y1: Council approves turnaround and reform business plan and budget
                             Y3 – Y6: annual submission & approval of revised business plans

                             NB: The business plan must be funded and reflected in Council budgets per indicator
                             M5.
Definition of Success        A full annually updated business and investment plan based on a financial model for
                             each trading service with a multi-year focus.
Benefits                     The financial model will underpin the investment plans to ensure targeted and robust
                             business and investment strategies to result in business performance improvement. It
                             provides transparency and focused investment strategies across all areas of the SPoMA
                             business (not for infrastructure alone). Multi-year focus of the model will ensure
                             correct tracking and targeting of investment of whether utility performance
                             improvement is still on track and will be used in mid-term review A3: PIAP.


Indicator No & Name          M6 Budget support of Trading Service business and investment plan
Performance Area             Budget Support.
Indicator Cross Reference    M5.
Definition                   The metro budget supports the Financial Model and Business & Investment Plan (M7).
Purpose                      The metro budget must be structured to provide the required funding for its utility
                             businesses (different trading services). This includes own metro funding,
                             borrowings/loans, equitable share allocations, funding from operations, the allocation
                             under DORA, other grants and other allocations the metro received from NT and/ or
                             other bodies annually or from time to time.

                             Metro budget allocations need to align with Financial Model and Business &
                             Investment Plan to ensure financial sustainability in service delivery.
Key Components               Supportive framework of policy commitments by metro for MTS improvement as
                             expressed in increasing capex budgets, appropriate transition and change
                             management cost allocations; re-investment of TS operational surpluses, co-funding,
                             among other.
Calculation Formula          Binary.
Performance Interpretation   BENCHMARK: Planned trading services opex and capex for each FY, as reflected in
                             A3-PIAP costing and funding sheets, are evident and reflected in corresponding
                             metro budgets for that financial year.
                             Y0: Council commitment to supporting the budgetary and funding implications of the
                             business plan and budget
                             Y1: Council budget for Y2 reflects and is consistent with M7.
                             Y2 – Y6: Council budgets and AFS continuously reflect and are consistent with M7.
Definition of Success        Business plan developed under M7 should be substantially evident in the metro
                             budget from the Y2 onwards.
Benefits                     Investment will be as per the Business and Investment plan that will be based on a
                             financial model (M7) for utility sustainability.



                                                                                                                      Page | 53
Indicator No & Name          M7 Financial Transparency – separate AFS
Performance Area             Financial Transparency.
Indicator Cross Reference    A2.
Definition                   Model 2: Full separate MTS AFS, published within aggregated metro AFS, per specimen
                             template (MFMA circular July 2024) (the easiest way to comply with M6 is to ensure
                             A2 is achieved)
                             Model 3: Full separate published trading services financial statements, also
                             consolidated into Metro AFS
                             Models 2 and 3: including ‘flows and balances statement’ per below.
Purpose                      Full financial transparency is essential for trading services reform
                             • To track financial performance of the utility service itself (without being hidden
                                  within overall municipal performance)
                             • To monitor trading services recovery improvement and ongoing sustainability
                             • To ensure the TS is performing according to its business and investment plan
                             • To generate key performance indicators for purposes of disbursement, C88, and
                                  license/ regulatory reporting.
Key Components               •    Full trading service AFS each year (statements of financial performance, financial
                                  position, and cash flow with notes and tables as regulated)
                             • Corresponding annual report for each trading services.
                             • Statement of Metro Trading Services Flows and Balances, to comprise at least
                                       o Grant shares: Equitable share, USDG, incentive grants, ISDG, HSDG, other
                                       o Cost of shared and internal services (shared costs & activity-based
                                            costing) such as revenue, treasury, facilities management, HR, city
                                            manager and Council, among other.
                                       o Contributions & subsidies: contributions by trading service (including any
                                            dividends) to metro rates account, subsidies paid by metro to trading
                                            services
                                       o Cash balances: Trading services cash balances held by metro, amounts
                                            invoiced on behalf of trading service, proceeds not yet paid over
                                       o Other as appropriate
                             NB: Assessment of this indicator will necessarily be based on unaudited financial
                             information as submitted to the AG and simultaneously to the assessor.
Calculation Formula          Binary
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark: Preparation of full Trading Services AFS per year per specimen formats
                             issued by NT, accompanied by an annual report
                             Y0: Council Commitment to preparation of Trading Services AFS separately
                             Y1: Separate TS AFS and annual report produced and published as regulated
                             Y2-Y6: separate TS AFS and AR produced as regulated.
Definition of Success        Full reporting as defined.
Benefits                     Provide financial transparency of TS- utility business performance as a ringfenced
                             business.


Indicator No & Name          M8 Support for management of organisational change and increased delivery
Performance Area             Change and Delivery Management Capacity.
Indicator Cross Reference    M1, M2, M3, M4.




                                                                                                                       Page | 54
Indicator No & Name          M8 Support for management of organisational change and increased delivery
Definition                   Additional capacity in place that responds to requirements outlined in Annexures A1:
                             Institutional Road Map and A2 (Business & Investment Plans)
                             • Capacity to support the process of managing organisational change including staff
                                  engagements, communications, detailed design, capacity enhancement (filling
                                  critical vacancies and beyond), key documentation, service compact and other
                                  activities, to manage and facilitate planned changes
                             • Capacity to manage the increased TS capex envisaged, including engineering
                                  project and contract management capacity.
Purpose                      •   To create and establish the necessary capacity to support migration from to a new
                                 organisational structure under the SPoMA.
                             •   Significant additional investment will be undertaken, and the utility will need the
                                 additional capacity to successfully execute this additional investment.
Key Components               •   Additional management capacity whether contracted in or recruited, change
                                 management, communications and filling of critical vacancies for service delivery.
Calculation Formula          Binary.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark: Additional capacity that responds to requirements outlined in
                             Annexures A1 (Institutional Road Map) and A2 (Business & Investment Plans), as
                             further developed, is in place:
                             Y0: Council Commitment to put additional capacity in place that responds to
                             requirements outlined in A1 and A2
                             Y1: Effective change management & project implementation support, with approved
                             change management plan in place
                             Y2 – Y6: implementation and continued refinement of the plan

                             NB1: The costs and funding of the additional change management and project
                             management capacity must be incorporated into the metro budget per M5.

                             NB2: The additional change management and project management capacity is
                             required to implement the business plan (M7), yet must be put in place parallel to that
                             business plan being developed.
Definition of Success        •   Additional capacity in place during Y1, to help plan and start preparing to
                                 implement in Y2
                             •   Additional capacity regarding, as required in the particular case: (a) planning,
                                 driving, leading institutional change; (b) business turnaround strategy; (c)
                                 communication and stakeholder engagement; (d) negotiating and formalising new
                                 value chain contractual arrangements (e) recruiting, contracting, and managing
                                 additional project management capacity, as required.
Benefits                     A well thought through and robust change management plan is critical to the
                             transformation of the trading service. Capacity and change support is necessary as the
                             organisation will be in flux, new functions will be added and shared services will be
                             incorporated to create the SPoMA business.




                                   ACCOUNTABILITY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS


                                                                                                                       Page | 55
Indicator No & Name          A1 Customer Surveys
Performance Area             Customer Surveys.
Indicator Cross Reference    -
Definition                   Customer service satisfaction surveys are undertaken annually and reflect progress
                             towards the benchmark.
Purpose                      Customer surveys provide a measurable feedback mechanism or data point that can be
                             used to assess the effectiveness of customer satisfaction, identify trends in customer
                             feedback, and derive actionable insights.
                             All metros already conduct annual surveys of customer satisfaction, and generate
                             headline results per trading service
                             Using the historical results of these surveys, metro trading services should plan and
                             execute actions to improve these results, as part of the business and investment plan
                             (M7).
                             a) Surveys assist trading service businesses to monitor and evaluate customer
                                  behaviour, sentiment, and experience.
                             b) They provide the business units with quantifiable insights into customer
                                  experiences and can help track performance over time.
Key Components               a)    Actual customer satisfaction result as % of planned customer satisfaction result for
                                   the year
Calculation Formula          Actual improvement of trading service customer satisfaction result, as % of planned
                             trading services customer satisfaction result, per year.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 70% customer satisfaction result (per trading service)
                             Y0:
                             Y1: Customer satisfaction improvement plan incorporated in business plan; substantive
                             targets set for Years 2 – 6
                             Y2–Y6: Improvement in headline result: progress against plan.
Definition of Success        Feedback from surveys used to guide key business decisions and improved customer
                             interface to eventually improve customer satisfaction thereby improving customer
                             sentiments towards service payments.
Benefits                     Surveys provide independent opinion to assist in identifying areas of improvement,
                             highlighting strengths, and guiding future decision-making processes.


Indicator No & Name          A2 Financial Accounting - mSCOA compliance
Performance Area             Financial Accounting.
Indicator Cross Reference    M5.
Definition                   The mSCOA compliance technical indicator evaluates a Trading Services Business Unit
                             or Entity’s alignment with the prescribed standards for financial accounting, reporting,
                             and internal controls (minimum business processes and system requirements) as
                             articulated in Annexure B of MFMA Circular No. 80.
Purpose                      mSCOA compliance ensures that the business unit’s financial systems, processes, and
                             reporting mechanisms meet the requirements outlined in the Minimum Business
                             Processes and Systems Requirements (MBPSR).




                                                                                                                          Page | 56
Indicator No & Name          A2 Financial Accounting - mSCOA compliance
                             Such compliance re-enforces the Metro Trading Service Reform programme by offering
                             the easiest and only feasible way for metros to achieve financial transparency
                             requirements (M5).
Key Components               Major requirements of MFMA Circular No. 80 include that
                             • Delegations, segregation of duties & org structure should be embedded in the
                                configuration of the integrated system solution
                             • AFS Module / sub-system to should seamlessly integrate to core integrated system
                                solution used by the Metro (no manual integration)
                             • Generation of audited data strings (PAUD, AUDA, RAUD) from integrated system
                                solution.
Calculation Formula          City Manager (Accounting Officer) certificate of mSCOA compliance, confirmed /
                             counter-signed by NT mSCOA team.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark: full compliance with mSCOA requirements
                             Y0: Baseline position
                             Y1: CM certificate of mSCOA compliance, countersigned by mSCOA team
                             Y2–Y6: CM certificate of mSCOA compliance, countersigned by mSCOA team.
Definition of Success        Improved financial transparency, accountability, and management, contributing to
                             more efficient and effective trading service performance.
Benefits                     1.   Transparency leading to trust between the trading service business and the parent
                                  municipality including the public.
                             2.   Confidence on good governance and evidential integrity of financial governance.


Indicator No & Name          A3 Public Procurement Transparency
Performance Area             Public Procurement Transparency.
Indicator Cross Reference    Program procurement system requirements & good international public procurement
                             practices.
Definition                   This measures the degree to which the Trading Service Business Unit adheres to best
                             practices in ensuring transparency in its procurement process. This includes openness
                             in tendering, decision-making, and reporting, aiming to reduce corruption, promote
                             competition, and ensure the effective use of public resources.
Purpose                      To assess the transparency of Trading Service procurement processes, ensuring that
                             they are conducted with integrity, fairness, and openness.

                             Procurement transparency depends upon clear and accessible tender documentation,
                             public access to information, bid evaluation transparency, fairness and consistence
                             with evaluation criteria set in the issued procurement documents, conflict of interest
                             management, adequate resolution of procurement complaints, adequacy of
                             procurement information disclosure including use of Open Contract Data Standard,
                             more use of e-procurement systems, audit and oversight Mechanisms. whistleblower
                             protections, compliance with Legal and Regulatory Frameworks, and stakeholder
                             Engagement and Feedback.
Key Components               At a minimum, this indicator requires compliance with statutory regulations regarding
                             procurement transparency: that all TS tender opportunities are advertised, and
                             bidders’ lists, tender awards and contracts signed are all published according to
                             regulations.



                                                                                                                      Page | 57
Indicator No & Name          A3 Public Procurement Transparency
                             Trading Services should however take steps to improve their procurement
                             transparency beyond the minimum. Such steps should include use of a reliable e-
                             procurement portal as regulated, and comprehensive disclosure of all procurement
                             information, presented in an accessible manner, on a well-maintained, up-to-date
                             website.
Calculation Formula          Plan implementation.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark: full transparency
                             Y0:
                             Y1: Baseline to be set with trading service business plans and targets for improvement
                             in trading services procurement transparency
                             Y2 – Y6: implementation of the plan.
Definition of Success        Improved financial transparency, accountability, and management, contributing to
                             more efficient and effective trading service performance.
Benefits                     Transparency leading to trust between the trading service business and the parent
                             municipality including the public.
                             Confidence on good governance and evidential integrity of financial governance.


Indicator No & Name          A4 Capital Budget Execution
Performance Area             Project implementation effectiveness.
Indicator Cross Reference    -
Definition                   This measures how effectively an organization or public sector entity manages and
                             executes investment projects to achieve its objectives.
Purpose                      Effective performance of trading services depends on effectively executed
                             procurement and project implementation processes.
Key Components               Capital Budget Execution is measured by the percentage of the capital budget agreed in
                             the budget each year, that is spent.
Calculation Formula          Final capital spending as a % of budget.
Frequency                    Annually and bi-annually at MYBR.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 90%
                             Y0:
                             Y1: Plan with targets for increasing tech and management capacity
                             Y2 – Y6: implementation of the plan.
Definition of Success        % of capital expenditure against original council-approved budget meets the planned
                             performance improvement each year.
Benefits                     Achievement of targets indicates effective procurement processes and results in actual
                             capital spending aligning more closely with planned and budgeted capital expenditure.


Indicator No & Name          A5 Core technical and management capacity
Performance Area             Technical & Management Capacity.
Indicator Cross Reference    M5, M7.
Definition                   Progress against planned technical and managerial capacity increases.




                                                                                                                      Page | 58
Indicator No & Name          A5 Core technical and management capacity
Performance Area             Technical & Management Capacity.
Purpose                      While M8 is focused on change management and project management capacity for the
                             short & medium-term, this indicator is concerned with the strengthening of permanent
                             technical and managerial capacity. That capacity must include an ability to effectively
                             plan, manage, and operate the utility, as well as execute projects, ensuring that both
                             technical expertise and management skills are sufficient to meet strategic goals. The
                             appointment or development of staff through professional registration and
                             representation aligned with acceptable norms and gender equity policies also
                             contributes to professionalisation.

                             Metros already have a strong sense of the capacity shortages they face. The indicator
                             is therefore focused upon the inclusion with the trading services business plan (M5) a
                             component which to increase permanent professional capacity, including contract
                             management capacity, according to specified standard benchmarks in the water and
                             sanitation, electricity and energy, and other relevant sectors (such as Professional
                             Engineers, Registered Technologists, Registered Technicians, among other, per 100 k
                             population in the applicable service area) appointed in terms of gender equity policy.
Key Components               No of technical management and contract management staff per 100 k population in
                             the service area; appointed in terms of gender policy, & plan to improve from starting
                             point; progress against plan.
Calculation Formula          No of technical, managerial and contract management posts per benchmark at start
                             Plan with targets for annual improvement of critical positions & skills aligned with the
                             organisational structure (see M5)
                             % achievement of target.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = to be set in set as part of business plan (M7)
                             Y0:
                             Y1: Plan with targets for increasing tech (including gender representation) and
                             management capacity
                             Y2 – Y6: implementation of the plan.
Definition of Success        Enhanced operational effectiveness and overall performance.
Benefits                     Provides a holistic view of an organization's ability to manage both its technical and
                             managerial functions effectively, enabling informed decision-making, efficient resource
                             management, and the successful execution of projects.


                                         FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS

Indicator No & Name          F1 Financial Viability OCCR
Performance Area             Financial viability.
Indicator Cross Reference    For consideration: new trading services-specific indicator suggested for inclusion in
                             MFMA S71 reports going forward.
Definition                   The basic definition is “operating revenue / operating expenses.” Operating revenue
                             excludes any capital items (capital grants) and interest income. Operating expenditure
                             excludes any capital related items (interest and depreciation).




                                                                                                                        Page | 59
Indicator No & Name          F1 Financial Viability OCCR
                             The basic formula is adjusted to take into account cost of sales (bulk purchases). Bulk
                             purchases is subtracted from operating revenue to give a gross operating profit. And
                             operating costs are similarly adjusted to exclude the bulk purchases.
Purpose                      Measures the financial viability of the trading service. In particular, it shows the extent
                             to which revenue covers the operating costs of the distribution business, and hence
                             the ability of the service to generate revenues to invest in the distribution business, as
                             a share of the costs needed to operate the distribution business.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Against planned performance improvement.
                             Data Sources: Income statement for the trading service.
                             Operational Adjustments: none.
Calculation Formula          The formula is: Gross Profit / Operating expenditure (excluding bulk purchases)
                             where
                             • Gross Profit = Operating revenue (including operating grants, excluding capital
                                 grants, excluding interest) less bulk purchases
                             • Operating expenditure (excluding bulk purchases) = operating expenditure
                                 excluding depreciation and interest, and excluding bulk purchases

                             NB: For the water service, the operating expense should be adjusted as follows:
                             • subtract inventory consumed (instead of bulk purchases), and
                             • add back chemicals purchased.

                             This adjustment is necessitated by the accounting rules related to inventory consumed.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 1.5 to 2 (as determined in financial model and business plan)
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieving performance target (and on track along planned path).
Benefits                     Resource Management: Tracks ability of the service to generate resources to invest in
                             the trading service business.
                             Risk Mitigation: Guides corrective action to enhance financial viability of the business.
                             Performance Benchmarking: Enables comparisons between municipalities.
                             Public Confidence: gives confidence that the business is financially viable and
                             sustainable.


Indicator No & Name          F2 Cash Collection Rate
Performance Area             Cash collection.
Indicator Cross Reference    For consideration: new trading services-specific indicator suggested for inclusion in
                             MFMA S71 reports going forward.
Definition                   The efficiency of cash collection measured as cash collected from customers / total
                             invoiced to customers (over the same relevant 12 month period).
Purpose                      Measure effectiveness and efficiency of the cash collection process (translation of
                             invoices amounts into cash available to the service).
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Against planned performance improvement.
                             Data Sources: Income statement and cash flow statement for the trading service.
                             (These need to include the items necessary to calculate cash collection rate directly
                             from the income statement and cash flow statement)


                                                                                                                           Page | 60
Indicator No & Name          F2 Cash Collection Rate
                             Operational Adjustments: none.
Calculation Formula          Cash receipts from customers (12 months) / amount invoiced to customer
                             (corresponding period).
Performance Interpretation   Benchmarks: 95% for water and 98% for electricity.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieving performance benchmark (and on track along planned path).
Benefits                     Resource Management: Tracks efficiency to collect invoiced revenue.
                             Risk Mitigation: Guides corrective action to improve cash collections.
                             Performance Benchmarking: Enables comparisons between municipalities.
                             Public Confidence and fairness: gives confidence that the business is efficient at
                             collecting revenue from all invoiced customers, and hence fair to all customers.


Indicator No & Name          F3 Operational Cash Flow
Performance Area             Operational cash flow.
Indicator Cross Reference    For consideration: new trading services-specific indicator suggested for inclusion in
                             MFMA S71 reports going forward.
Definition                   The cash available from operations after all operating costs have been met.
Purpose                      Measures the availability of cash to invest in the business.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Against planned performance improvement.
                             Data Sources: Trading service cash flow statement.
                             Operational Adjustments: none.
Calculation Formula          Cash flow from operations (as shown on cash flow statement) which should be
                             equivalent to the following: Cash receipts (related to operating revenues, and
                             excluding capital items) less operating expenses (as depicted on the income statement
                             excluding provisions for bad debt and capital related items).
Performance Interpretation   Performance target: as per financial model and business plan showing a financial
                             turnaround and substantial improvement in cash from operations.
                             Benchmark =
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieving performance target (and on track along planned path).
Benefits                     Resource Management: Tracks ability to generate cash resources to invest in the
                             business.
                             Risk Mitigation: Guides corrective action to cash generation from operations.
                             Performance Benchmarking: Tracks improvement in ability to invest in the business.
                             Public Confidence: gives confidence that the business is able to invest in the business
                             to sustain services.


Indicator No & Name          F4 Customer Debt Management – debtors-days
Performance Area             Customer debt management.


                                                                                                                       Page | 61
Indicator No & Name          F4 Customer Debt Management – debtors-days
Indicator Cross Reference    For consideration: new trading services-specific indicator suggested for inclusion in
                             MFMA S71 reports going forward.
Definition                   Customer debt outstanding expressed as days of revenue.
Purpose                      Measures customer debt management.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Against planned performance improvement.
                             Data Sources: Trading service income statement and balance sheet.
                             Operational Adjustments: none.
Calculation Formula           Customer accounts receivable (net of provisions for bad debt) / Invoiced customer
                             revenues (12 months) x 365.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark <60 days
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieving performance target (and on track along planned path).
Benefits                     Resource Management: Tracks ability to manage customer debt and that adequate
                             provisions have been made for customer debt .
                             Risk Mitigation: Guides corrective action to manage customer debt.
                             Performance Benchmarking: allows comparison across services and municipality.
                             Public Confidence and fairness: gives confidence that customer debt is well managed
                             and customers are treated fairly.


Indicator No & Name          F5 Infrastructure Capex on PPE
Performance Area             Level of expenditure on infrastructure.
Indicator Cross Reference    Reported in MFMA Section 71 reports (with clarified definition), based on, and
                             matching what is reported in the financial statements for the trading service.
Definition                   Actual capital expenditure incurred during the financial year on property, plant and
                             equipment (PPE) for that trading service. (Includes replacement, refurbishment,
                             upgrades and expansion).
Purpose                      Ongoing and sufficient investment in property, plant and equipment (PPE) is essential
                             to provide a reliable and sustainable service and to meet service needs.

                             The expectation is that actual capital investments in PPE each year need to increase by
                             a factor or 2 to 3 times in real terms over a period of 3 to 5 years. A suitable
                             investment path will be determined for each metro based on a realistic investment plan
                             anchored in a financial model.
Key Components               Actual cash expenditure on property, plant and equipment (PPE) during the financial
                             year.
Calculation Formula          As reported in the cash flow statement (actual cash invested in property, plant and
                             equipment) during the financial year, supported the statement of changes in PPE
                             reported in the notes to the financial statement.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 200% subject to business & investment planning
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: implementation.



                                                                                                                       Page | 62
Indicator No & Name          F5 Infrastructure Capex on PPE
Definition of Success        Annual investments meet the planned investment pathway.
Benefits                     Improvements in service reliability and performance, and expansion to meet service
                             needs.


Indicator No & Name          F6 Self-financing ratio
Performance Area             Ability to finance capex from own operations.
Indicator Cross Reference    Recommended to be reported in MFMA Section 71 reports, based on, and matching
                             what is reported in the financial statements for the trading service.
Definition                   Cash flow from operations (Indicator F3) divided by actual capital expenditure incurred
                             during the financial year on property, plant and equipment (PPE). (Indicator F5).
Purpose                      The expectation is that the ability of the service to finance a share of its capital
                             expenditure from its internal resources will increase over time as a result of the
                             reforms.
                             This ratio reflects the ability of the trading service to do that.

                             A suitable performance pathway will be determined for each metro based on a realistic
                             investment plan anchored in a financial model, modelling both CAPEX (indicator F5)
                             and cash flow from operations (Indicator F3).
Key Components                   •    Cash flow from operations
                                 •    Actual cash expenditure on property, plant and equipment (PPE) during the
                                      financial year.
Calculation Formula          Ratio = Indicator F3 / Indicator F5.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 100% subject to business & investment planning
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        An increase ability to finance CAPEX from internal resources (as per the defined
                             performance pathway).
Benefits                     Improvements in the financial sustainability of the service, assuring ongoing reliable
                             service provision.


                                     OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
                                             WATER & SANITATION

Indicator No & Name          W1 Water Security input volume % of raw water allocation
Performance area             Water Security.
Indicator Cross Reference    New indicator to be considered for inclusion in future amendments to National
                             Treasury C88.
Definition                   The Water Security indicator measures the adequacy of a water utility’s supply system
                             in meeting demand while adhering to regulatory bulk raw water allocation limits and
                             ecosystems requirements. It is defined as the ratio of the bulk water system input
                             volume (all sources) to the permitted raw water allocation volume. The planned water
                             use allocations are determined through Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS)


                                                                                                                       Page | 63
Indicator No & Name          W1 Water Security input volume % of raw water allocation
                             facilitated water reconciliation strategies, which reconcile all available water resources
                             (surface, ground, desalinated and reused water) with current use requirements. These
                             allocations are formalized in Water Use Licenses (WUL) or Service Level Agreements
                             (SLA) and apply to water service providers, such as municipalities and Water Boards.
Purpose                      Supports sustainable water use, effective water conservation and demand
                             management, regulatory compliance, and sustainable access to resources by
                             monitoring adherence to allocated water use limits.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Bulk system input volumes, allocated abstraction volumes, water
                             use/demand/water requirements, regulatory compliance, and resource reconciliation
                             specific to user requirements.
                             Data Sources: Flow meter abstraction records, bulk water supplied and releases,
                             WULs/SLAs, and DWS reconciliation strategies, municipal and water board water
                             resource planning documentation.
                             Operational Adjustments: Temporary variations permitted under extraordinary
                             conditions such as droughts, with documentation.
Calculation Formula          Water Security (%) = (Bulk Water System Input Volume / Permitted Raw Water
                             Allocation Volume) × 100
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = <80%: Adequate security; significant buffer for future growth or
                             emergencies.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieving <80% of permitted bulk allocation volume annually.
Benefits                     •   Resource Management: Promotes sustainable water supply by balancing demand
                                 and availability.
                             •   Regulatory Compliance: Ensures adherence to DWS and Water Board water
                                 allocations.
                             •   Risk Mitigation: Guides corrective action to prevent overuse.
                                 Performance Benchmarking: Enables comparisons across municipalities and
                                 utilities.
                             •   Stakeholder Engagement: Aligns practices with national water resource
                                 management goals and fosters collaboration.


Indicator No & Name          W2 Drinking Water Systems Blue Drop
Performance Area             Drinking water systems.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing Indicator, National Treasury C88 WS4.5, DWS Blue Drop Certification
                             Programme.
Definition                   The Blue Drop Score is a performance indicator developed as part of the Blue Drop
                             Certification Program to assess and promote the excellence of drinking water quality
                             management. It evaluates compliance by the Water Services Authority (WSA)with
                             water quality standards and the effectiveness of operational and management systems
                             supporting safe drinking water provision The WSA is supported by a Water Services
                             Provider (WSP), which is a public or private entity. For example, waterboards are
                             regarded as WSPs, also known as a Bulk Water Supplier or Provider, and their
                             performance contributes to the overall municipal Blue Drop score. In several instances
                             the WSAs themselves act as water service providers in their own areas and may also be
                             WSPs for other WSAs.

                                                                                                                          Page | 64
Indicator No & Name          W2 Drinking Water Systems Blue Drop
Purpose                      Benchmarking and promoting high standards in drinking water quality management.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Drinking water quality compliance (microbiological, chemical, and
                             physical), operational management, infrastructure reliability, community engagement.
                             Data Sources: Laboratory tests, safety plans, maintenance logs, audits.
                             Assessment Methodology: Annual or periodic assessments by regulatory authorities.
Calculation Formula          Blue Drop Score (%) = (Total Points Achieved / Total Points Available) ×100.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark ≥95–100%: Excellent situation; need to maintain via continued
                             improvement.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve a Blue Drop Score ≥95%, demonstrating compliance with best practices and
                             regulatory standards for municipal water service provision.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Facilitates comparisons and encourages achievement/adherence to
                                 high standards.
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust by demonstrating commitment to safe drinking
                                 water.
                             •   Regulatory Compliance: Assists utilities in meeting water quality standards.
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Identifies and addresses gaps in water quality
                                 management.


Indicator No & Name          W3 Wastewater Treatment Systems Green Drop
Performance Area             Wastewater treatment systems.
                             Existing Indicator, National Treasury C88 WS4.4, DWS Green Drop Certification
Indicator Cross Reference
                             Programme.
Definition                   The Green Drop Score is a performance indicator introduced as part of the regulatory
                             Green Drop Certification Program to assess the quality and efficiency of wastewater
                             management systems. It evaluates the ability of water service authorities and providers
                             to treat wastewater effectively, protect public health, and minimize environmental
                             impacts. The score reflects adherence to regulatory and best-practice standards in
                             wastewater management.
Purpose                      Assess the quality and efficiency of wastewater management systems.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Effluent compliance, infrastructure reliability, risk management,
                             operational efficiency, transparency.
                             Data Sources: Lab analyses, maintenance logs, regulatory inspections.
                             Assessment Methodology: Periodic evaluations by regulators or auditors.
Calculation Formula          Green Drop Score (%) = (Total Points Achieved / Total Points Available) × 100
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 90–100%: Excellent situation, need to maintain via continued
                             improvement.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve Green Drop status (a Green Drop Score of ≥90% as per DWS audits of
                             municipal wastewater services).



                                                                                                                       Page | 65
Indicator No & Name          W3 Wastewater Treatment Systems Green Drop
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Facilitates comparisons of performance across utilities.
                             •   Environmental Stewardship: Encourages sustainable wastewater management and
                                 reduces pollution.
                             •   Regulatory Compliance: Supports adherence to wastewater discharge standards,
                                 Public Confidence: Builds trust through transparency and accountability.
                             •   Public Health: Reduction in waterborne diseases.


Indicator No & Name          W4 Percentage of wastewater samples compliant with water use license
Performance Area             Final effluent quality.
                             Existing Indicator, National Treasury C88 WS4.22, aligned with DWS Green Drop
Indicator Cross Reference
                             standards.
Definition                   The Wastewater Final Effluent Compliance indicator measures the extent to which
                             treated wastewater (final effluent) discharged from wastewater treatment facilities
                             complies with the conditions outlined in the Water Use License (WUL), or defaults to a
                             General Authorisation (GA) in the absence of WUL. It is aligned with the DWS Green
                             Drop Certification Program, and assesses compliance with microbiological, chemical,
                             and physical standards mandated to protect water resources, public health, and
                             ecosystems.
Purpose                      Ensure wastewater treatment facilities meet WUL or authorised conditions, protecting
                             public health, ecosystems, and water resources.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria:
                             - Microbiological Compliance: E. coli and total coliforms within specified WUL limits or
                             GA limits.
                             - Chemical Compliance: Acceptable levels of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD),
                             ammonia, nitrates, and phosphates.
                             - Physical Compliance: pH, turbidity, and suspended solids within regulatory
                             thresholds.
                             Data Sources: Laboratory analyses, monitoring plans, and compliance reports.
                             Assessment Methodology: Regular effluent sampling at discharge points as mandated
                             by WUL or GA limits and Green Drop monitoring protocols.
Calculation Formula          Effluent Compliance (%) = (Number of Compliant Samples / Total Samples Collected) ×
                             100.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 90–100%: Excellent performance; fully compliant with WUL / GA.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve and maintain >90% compliance with WUL or GA conditions as verified through
                             routine monitoring and Green Drop assessments.
Benefits                     •   Regulatory Compliance: Ensures alignment with WUL or GA and Green Drop
                                 standards.
                             •   Environmental Protection: Safeguards water resources and reduces pollution.
                             •   Operational Optimization: Identifies process inefficiencies, guiding investments
                                 and upgrades.
                             •   Public Health Protection: Reduces risks of waterborne diseases linked to poor
                                 effluent quality.




                                                                                                                        Page | 66
Indicator No & Name          W5 Frequency of water mains failures per 100 km of pipeline
Performance Area             Water Network Performance.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 WS3.2.
Definition                   The number of water mains failures per 100km of mains pipe per year is a performance
                             indicator that has been developed to evaluate the efficiency and functionality of water
                             distribution systems, particularly in managing the number of mains failures.
Purpose                      Benchmarking and promoting high standards in water network performance, service
                             quality and infrastructure asset management.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: failure of metro owned water transmission and distribution pipes,
                             valves and fitting, excluding repairs under active leakage control
                             Data Sources: telephonic and social media logging systems, workflow systems and
                             records and worksheets.
                             Assessment Methodology: Repairs undertaken annually.
Calculation Formula          Number of water mains failures per 100km of mains pipe per year: Number of mains
                             failures per year (including failures of valves and fittings) / 100kms mains length,
                             length, as per IWA methodology
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = <50/100km Excellent network performance; full compliance with best
                             practices.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve a Score of <50/100km, demonstrating compliance with best practices and
                             network performance standards for sustainable municipal water service provision.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Facilitates comparisons and encourages achievement/adherence to
                                 excellent water network performance standards.
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust by demonstrating commitment to continuous safe
                                 drinking water supply.
                             •   Service Quality: Assists utilities in meeting water network service quality standards
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Identifies and addresses gaps in water network
                                 performance and infrastructure asset management.


Indicator No & Name          W6 Frequency of sewer blockages per 100 km of pipeline
Performance Area             Sewer Network Performance.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 WS3.1.
Definition                   The number of sewer blockages per 100km of sewer length per year is a performance
                             indicator that has been developed to evaluate the efficiency and functionality of sewer
                             network systems, particularly in the management of blockages.
Purpose                      Benchmarking and promoting high standards in sewer network performance, service
                             quality and infrastructure asset management.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: blockages in metro owned sewer pipes, excluding pumping
                             station blockages, where blockages are defined as reported or logged blockages that
                             result in an obstruction of system flow which may be caused by roots, obstructive items
                             or other pipeline disruptions
                             Data Sources: telephonic and social media logging systems, workflow systems and
                             records and worksheets.
                             Assessment Methodology: Blockages repaired annually.


                                                                                                                         Page | 67
Indicator No & Name          W6 Frequency of sewer blockages per 100 km of pipeline
Calculation Formula          Number of sewer blockages per 100km of sewer length per year: Number of sewer
                             blockages per year / 100kms sewer length, as per IWA methodology.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = <50/100km Excellent sewer network performance; full compliance with
                             best practices.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve a Score <50/100km, demonstrating compliance with best practices and
                             network performance standards for sustainable municipal wastewater/sanitation
                             service provision.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Facilitates comparisons and encourages achievement/adherence to
                                 excellent sewer network performance standards.
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust by demonstrating commitment to ensuring
                                 continuous safe sanitation practices by reducing sewer spills.
                             •   Service Quality: Assists utilities in meeting sewer network service quality standards
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Identifies and addresses gaps in sewer network
                                 performance and infrastructure asset management.


Indicator No & Name          W7 Physical Water Loss - Infrastructure Leakage Index
Performance Area             Physical Water Loss.
                             Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 WS5.21, DWS No Drop, and proxy indictor for
Indicator Cross Reference
                             Resilience.
Definition                   The ILI is a performance indicator developed by the International Water Association
                             (IWA) to evaluate the operational efficiency of water distribution systems, particularly
                             in managing water losses. It is the ratio of the Current Annual Real Losses (CARL) to the
                             Unavoidable Annual Real Losses (UARL).
Purpose                      Evaluate and improve the operational efficiency of water distribution systems by
                             managing water losses effectively.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Leakage performance as a ratio of actual to unavoidable losses.
                             Identification of operational inefficiencies and improvement areas.
                             Data Sources: Water balance analyses, flow, and pressure monitoring records.
                             Assessment Methodology: Regular evaluation of leakage metrics. Integration of
                             operational and environmental conditions into loss assessments.
Calculation Formula          Infrastructure Leakage Index (ILI) = CARL / UARL
                             - CARL (Current Annual Real Losses): Volume of water lost annually due to leaks,
                             breaks, and overflows.
                             - UARL (Unavoidable Annual Real Losses): Minimum leakage volume achievable under
                             optimal conditions.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = < 2: Excellent performance; very low losses.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve an ILI of <2, indicating efficient water loss management.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Comparison across systems and regions.
                             •   Resource Allocation: Prioritize investment in leak detection and network upgrades.
                             •   Environmental Protection: Reduce unnecessary water wastage.

                                                                                                                         Page | 68
Indicator No & Name          W7 Physical Water Loss - Infrastructure Leakage Index
                             •   Public Confidence: Build trust through operational transparency.
                             •   Water Conservation: Improved water use efficiency and resilience.


Indicator No & Name          W8 Water Complaints % Response within 48 hours
Performance Area             Water Service Complaints Response.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 WS3.21.
Definition                   The percentage of water callouts responded to within 48 hrs is a performance indicator
                             that has been developed to evaluate quality of service provision and is a proxy indicator
                             for customer care. (Where “responded to” refers to “complaint logged, someone was
                             on site, and has appraised the matter, and a process has been initiated to resolve the
                             matter within 48 hours”).
Purpose                      Benchmarking and promoting high standards in service quality and customer care
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: complaints logged, callouts responded to
                             Data Sources: telephonic and social media callout logging systems, workflow systems
                             and worksheets.
                             Assessment Methodology: Annual or periodic customer satisfaction surveys and
                             regular quality control assessments.
Calculation Formula          Water Service Complaints Response: (Number of water callouts responded to within
                             48 hours/Total number water callouts received and logged within 48 hours) x 100.
                             (Notes: 1. Responded to = logged, appraised and responded to, but not necessarily
                             resolved. 2. Multiple complaints on the same fault that are logged separately, are to be
                             treated as one callout only).
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 90–100%: Excellent service; full compliance with best practices.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: implementation.
Definition of Success        Achieve a Score >90%, demonstrating compliance with best practices and regulatory
                             standards for sustainable municipal water service provision.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Facilitates comparisons and encourages achievement/adherence to
                                 high standards.
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust by demonstrating commitment to safe drinking
                                 water.
                             •   Service Quality: Assists utilities in meeting service quality standards
                             •   Customer Care: Assists utilities in meeting customer care standards.
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Identifies and addresses gaps in water service quality
                                 and infrastructure asset management.


Indicator No & Name          W9 Sewer Complaints % Response within 48 hours
Performance Area             Sewer Service Complaints Response.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 WS3.11.
Definition                   The percentage of sewer callouts that are responded to within 48 hrs is a performance
                             indicator that has been developed to evaluate quality of service provision and is a proxy
                             indicator for customer care. (Where “responded to” refers to “complaint logged,



                                                                                                                         Page | 69
Indicator No & Name          W9 Sewer Complaints % Response within 48 hours
                             someone was on site, and has appraised the matter, and a process has been initiated to
                             resolve the matter within 48 hours”).
Purpose                      Benchmarking and promoting high standards in service quality and customer care.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: complaints logged, callouts appraised, and responded to
                             Data Sources: telephonic and social media callout logging systems, workflow systems
                             and worksheets.
                             Assessment Methodology: Annual or periodic customer satisfaction surveys and
                             regular quality control assessments.
Calculation Formula          Sewer Service Complaints Response: (Number of sewer callouts responded to within
                             48 hours/Total number sewer callouts received and logged within 48 hours) x 100.
                             (Notes: 1. Responded to = logged, appraised and responded to, but not necessarily
                             resolved. 2. Multiple complaints on the same fault that are logged separately, are to be
                             treated as one callout only).
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = 90–100%: Excellent service; full compliance with best practices.
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve a Score >90%, demonstrating compliance with best practices and regulatory
                             standards for sustainable municipal water service provision.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Facilitates comparisons and encourages achievement/adherence to
                                 high standards.
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust by demonstrating commitment to safe sanitation.
                             •   Service Quality: Assists utilities in meeting service quality standards
                             •   Customer Care: Assists utilities in meeting customer care standards.
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Identifies and addresses gaps in sewer service quality
                                 and infrastructure asset management.


Indicator No & Name          W10 Non-Revenue Water (NRW)
Performance Area             Water delivery performance.
Indicator Cross Reference    Similar to existing National Treasury C88 WS5.1, alignment will be resolved.
Definition                   NRW is a performance indicator included as a part of the No Drop Certification Program
                             to measure the percentage of the treated volume of water supplied to a distribution
                             system that does not generate revenue. NRW includes:
                             Real Losses: Physical water losses (leaks, bursts, overflows).
                             Apparent Losses: Unauthorized consumption, customer metering inaccuracies.
                             Unbilled Authorized Consumption: Unbilled metered consumption and unbilled
                             unmetered consumption (Water used for firefighting, municipal services, informal
                             settlements).
Purpose                      To evaluate and improve the efficiency of water utilities in reducing water revenue
                             losses, enhancing operational sustainability, and protecting financial revenue streams.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: Real (Physical) water losses, Apparent losses, Authorised
                             consumption including Unauthorised consumption.
                             Data Sources: Meter readings (bulk and customer), leakage assessments, billing
                             records, operational adjustments for extraordinary events.
                             Assessment Methodology: As per the No-Drop guidelines for the preparation of an
                             IWA Water Balance for South Africa.

                                                                                                                        Page | 70
Indicator No & Name          W10 Non-Revenue Water (NRW)
Calculation Formula          NRW % = ((System Input Volume−Billed Authorized Consumption) / System Input
                             Volume) × 100
                             Where:
                             • System Input Volume = Total treated water supplied to the distribution network
                                 from the utilities own sources.
                             • Billed Authorized Consumption = Authorized volume of water billed to customers
                                 (this includes billed metered and billed unmetered volumes and the Free Basic
                                 Water volume).
Unit of Measurement          Percentage (%).
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = <25%: Good performance. indicating good management of real and
                             apparent water losses and operational efficiency
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: implementation.
Benefits                     •   Performance Benchmarking: Enables utilities to compare and improve water loss
                                 levels.
                             •   Operational Efficiency: Identifies priorities like leak detection and infrastructure
                                 upgrades.
                             •   Revenue Protection: Minimizes financial losses from apparent losses and unbilled
                                 consumption.
                             •   Sustainability: Promotes water conservation and efficient resource use.


Indicator No & Name          W11 Metering Performance
Performance Area             Metering Performance.
Indicator Name               Percentage of all water connections metered and billed on actual monthly readings.
Indicator Cross Reference    To be considered: amendments to existing National Treasury C88 indicator (WS5.31),
                             percentage of total water connections metered.
Definition                   The percentage of water connections metered and billed monthly on actual monthly
                             readings. This indicator evaluates the financial sustainability and water use efficiency of
                             municipalities by tracking accurate metering, and billing practices.
Purpose                      Assess the financial and operational efficiency of municipalities, promote sustainable
                             water use, reduce metering and billing inaccuracies, and reduce financial losses.
Key Components               Measurement Scope: Includes billed metered water connections (residential,
                             commercial, industrial and free basic water).
                             Target Scope: Total connections (billed metered + billed unmetered).
                             Data Sources: Billing records, meter reading logs, water supply records.
Calculation Formula          Percentage = (Number of connections metered and billed on actual readings monthly /
                             Total number of connections (metered + unmetered)) × 100.
Assessment Methodology       The calculation is performed on a rolling 12-month basis to account for seasonal
                             variations.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark: >98%: Ideal performance; accurate metering and billing practices,
                             improved revenue, reduced NRW
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: implementation.


                                                                                                                           Page | 71
Indicator No & Name          W11 Metering Performance
Definition of Success        Achieve a target of >98% connections metered and billed on actual monthly readings.
Benefits                     •   Financial Sustainability: Increased revenue from accurate billing.
                             •   Water Use Efficiency: Promotes responsible water consumption.
                             •   Customer Satisfaction: Builds trust through fair billing.
                             •   Compliance: Aligns with National Treasury’s performance indicators.



                                     OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
                                             ELECTRICITY & ENERGY

Indicator No & Name          E1 Bulk Commercial Metering Performance
Performance Area             Industrial (bulk) and commercial user meterage.
                             New indicator to be considered for inclusion in future amendments to National
Indicator Cross Reference
                             Treasury C88.
Definition                   It measures the progress and maturity of the billing part of the revenue cycle that is
                             active and in operation that should migrate to a perfect (100%) score. Technologies
                             are available in the AMR/ AMI space to enhance this metering and collection (e.g.
                             automated billing).
Purpose                      Bulk (LPU), and commercial metering generate the most revenue for metros and are
                             crucial for achieving financial turnaround and maintaining performance. It supports
                             accurate metering (and billing) as part of the revenue management process and is seen
                             as the critical starting point or where all metros need to focus attention to.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: AMR/ AMI metering to all customers in these two categories.
                             Progress towards full automated billing, cloud access to all customers. Percentage of
                             Bulk(LPU)) and Commercial Customers Metered active and operational.
                             Data Sources: Information is automatically obtained from AMI data sources.
                             Operational Adjustments: Temporary variations are allowed under extraordinary
                             conditions, such as system replacements and upgrades.
Calculation Formula          Bulk (LPU) & commercial meterage: Total bulk (LPU) and commercial meters in full
                             billing operation/ Total bulk and commercial customers.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = >98%
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieving >98% full billing operation. Progress towards automated billing in Y5/Y6.
Benefits                     •   Resource Management: Promotes accurate metering and billing for revenue and
                                 financial turnaround in focussing utility actions on most critical element.
                             •   Risk Mitigation: Guides corrective action to enhance revenue management.
                             •   Performance Benchmarking: Enables comparisons across municipalities and
                                 utilities.
                             •   Stakeholder Engagement: Ensure more rigorous engagement and advance
                                 customer action to most critical part of customer base.
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust through transparency, accuracy and better
                                 information availability.


                                                                                                                      Page | 72
Indicator No & Name          E2 Vending Efficiency % of metering operational
Performance Area             Vending efficiency.
                             New indicator to be considered for inclusion in future amendments to National
Indicator Cross Reference
                             Treasury C88.
Definition                   Measure the wholistic performance of the vending/ prepayment system ability to sell
                             tokens continuously when customers require energy. It has two components namely
                             uptime to the master system and the number of active meters in the system. A
                             downward trend (or below 100% indicator) shows inefficiencies in managing the
                             system.
Purpose                      Vending involves the prepayment master system and satellite stations managing and
                             issuing tokens to customers for electricity purchases. Metros have vending systems in
                             place but for various reasons the management and operations of prepayment metering
                             is sometime only partly in service or functional. The system vending operation, which
                             involves selling tokens, must operate at 100% efficiency to enable customers to make
                             continuous purchases seamlessly. Indicator is seeking to encourage 100% continuous
                             vending of prepayment sales.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria:
                             a) Measure the uptime whether the complete master system (with it satellite stations)
                             is operational and is vending to customers.
                             b) Measure the number of active prepayment meters in the system to the total number
                             of prepayment meters that needs to purchase pre-payment electricity.
                             Data Sources: Vending system management reports, maintenance logs, audits.
                             Assessment Methodology: Annual or periodic assessments by regulatory authorities.
Calculation Formula          Vending efficiency 1) Total monthly active customers / total number of prepayment
                             customers and/or 2) Uptime of system as available hours against total system hours.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark for both uptime and active meters in the system= >98%
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Downward trend but a 100% figure achieved not later than in year 2.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Against other utilities and indicative of wrong business processes
                                 and managerial trends in the utility.
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust by demonstrating commitment to have all systems
                                 in place. Deter theft and meter bypassing if the token system is fully available. safe
                                 drinking water.
                             •   Regulatory Compliance: Assists utilities in meeting electricity performance
                                 standards.
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Identifies gaps in electricity business processes and
                                 systems.


Indicator No & Name          E3 Automated Meter Reading Coverage
Performance Area             Automated meter reading coverage.
Indicator Cross Reference    New indicator to be considered for inclusion in future amendments to National
                             Treasury C88.
Definition                   Automated meter reading (AMR) as a percentage of Advanced metering infrastructure
                             (AMI) that is operating operational, within each customer category of bulk( industrial)
                             and commercial customers.

                                                                                                                          Page | 73
Indicator No & Name          E3 Automated Meter Reading Coverage
Purpose                      This indicator evaluates the deployment and rollout of advanced metering and
                             available technologies and the integration back into the main system to enhance the
                             billing process for customer categories that contribute significantly to the utility's
                             revenue. It highlights the need for technological advancements, often linked to SMART
                             metering projects. The first deals primarily with a hardware rollout while the second
                             part of the indicator deals with software integration.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: 1) Automated meters as a percentage of total meters in both bulk
                             and commercial customer categories (measured separately).
                             2) Percentage of employed meters integrated into main systems and fully functional as
                             a smart system.
                             Data Sources: Meter statistics from utility records.
Calculation Formula          Automated metering as % total bulk (LPU) metering; Automated metering (smart)
                             deployment as % of total 1) bulk ( LPU), 2) commercial metering, 3) % of Integration of
                             bulk, and 4) commercial against total meters.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = better than NERSA benchmark
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Internal increasing trend of meter coverage.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Comparison of performance across utilities but indicative of the
                                 maturity of metering using advance processes and systems.
                             •   Public Confidence: Transparency in the availability of data for customer usages.
                                 Builds trust through transparency and accountability.


Indicator No & Name          E4 Repairs Efficiency
Performance Area             Repairs Efficiency.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing NERSA Indicator.
Definition                    Inadequate investment in repairs and maintenance of networks need to be pursued to
                             improve the reliability of the networks. The indicator measured how much as a
                             percentage of operation is spend on repairs and maintenance.
Purpose                      Investing in repairs and maintenance is essential to improve network reliability.
                             Utilities must meet or exceed regulatory benchmark levels.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria:
                              Total operational maintenance (both planned and unplanned- mostly planned) need
                             to achieve a set benchmark for the utilities. It needs to be guided by an asset
                             management strategy (AMS) and process, based on long-term operational and
                             refurbishment plans. It is informed by the needs of the utility business from work
                             management systems and other internal data sources based on infrastructure
                             assessments.
                             Data Sources and Assessment Methodology: Continuous information from AMS and
                             processes and outage records.
Calculation Formula          Repairs efficiency: = Toal operational spend on repairs and maintenance / total
                             operational costs (revenue).
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = better than NERSA benchmark
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark

                                                                                                                       Page | 74
Indicator No & Name          E4 Repairs Efficiency
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Achieve and exceed regularly benchmark and NT benchmark of 6% and 8% annually.
Benefits                     •   Regulatory Compliance: Ensures alignment with NERSA and NT standards.
                             •   Operational Optimization: Improve network performance and safety standard and
                                 customers supplies.


Indicator No & Name          E5 Total Electricity losses as % of electricity purchased
Performance Area             Loss Reduction.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 EE4.4 and NERSA.
Definition                   Losses consist of technical losses and non-technical losses. The first is mostly a
                             characteristic of the network, but the second is an indicator of how good the utility
                             deals with commercial and collection issues to get cash in the bank. It reflects the total
                             sales against what is purchases and is an indicator of what is not available to sell to end
                             customers and have a direct bearing on revenue.
Purpose                      This definition focus to trend the losses and the efforts of the utility to curtail this and
                             benchmarking against other utilities. Many utilities in SA have serious issues with
                             losses and it is one of the main reasons for non-sustainability challenges. As a trend
                             over time, it reflects the success of the utility in achieving efficiencies (optimise) in
                             purchases versus sales.
Key Components               •   Assessment Criteria: Driving down of losses over time at least below the regulatory
                                 benchmark of 12%
                             •   Data Sources: All purchases metering data versus total metering sales data
                                 consisting of the complete revenue management and losses value chain.
                                 Assessment Methodology: Measured annually but done on a continuous basis.
                                 Total kWh sales from all customer meters plus estimates for non- metered items
                                 such as streetlights/ own consumption and departmental sales against total
                                 purchases from all sales that can consist of bulk (LPU) purchases, wheeled energy
                                 and DER purchases.
Calculation Formula          (Electricity Purchases in kWh - Electricity sales in kWh) / Electricity Purchases in kWh.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = better than NERSA benchmark
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Downwards trend realistic from business perspective, achieving regulatory benchmark
                             in prescribed time.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Improves utility financial sustainability and having more funds
                                 availed for critical network operations and investments. Efficiency benchmark
                                 against other utilities
                             •   Public Confidence: Builds trust by demonstrating commitment to continuous safe
                                 drinking water supply.
                             •   Service Quality: Assists utilities in having funds available for own investments in
                                 infrastructure.
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Measures utility efforts and performance to improve on
                                 efficiency and performance.



                                                                                                                            Page | 75
Indicator No & Name          E6 Network Effectiveness ASIFI
Performance Area             Network Effectiveness.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 EE3.6, NRS 048 – 6, IEEE 1366.
Definition                   ASIFI (Average System Interruption Frequency Index) or SAIFI (System Average
                             Interruption Frequency Index).
Purpose                      This definition focuses on the calculation of the average number of interruptions that a
                             connected load or customer would experience in a year. Calculation of reliability
                             indices on a consistent approach can deliver the benefit of valuable performance data
                             to plan and execute maintenance better and reduce interruptions which reduce
                             revenue to Utilities.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: The ratio of the total kVA affected by the outage (i) over the total
                             connected kVA on the distribution network. Total kVA is the kVA installed in the MV/LV
                             distribution transformers or subscribed capacity in kVA for MV customers.
                             Data Sources: Total number of outages / interruptions (n)
                             Assessment Methodology: Summation of the ratio over an annual period.
                                                       𝒏𝒏
Calculation Formula                                           𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻 𝒌𝒌𝒌𝒌𝒌𝒌 𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂 𝒃𝒃𝒃𝒃 𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕 𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐 (𝒊𝒊)
                                            𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨𝑨 = �
                                                                            𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻 𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄 𝒌𝒌𝒌𝒌𝒌𝒌
                                                      𝒊𝒊=𝟏𝟏
                             Calculation must be for 12 month rolling period.
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = better than NERSA benchmark
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Downwards trend realistic from business perspective, achieving regulatory benchmark
                             in prescribed time.
Benefits                     Benchmarking: Provide insights to distribution businesses based on national and
                             international benchmarking.
                             Public Confidence: Provide the regulator with consistent and comparable performance
                             metrics to regulate license conditions.
                             Service Quality: Provide customers with quality of supply information they can use in
                             their investment and planning process.
                             Continuous Improvement: Provide the distribution business with valuable performance
                             data to plan and execute maintenance better, and reduce interruptions which reduce
                             revenue to Utilities.


Indicator No.                E7 Network Effectiveness ASIDI
Performance Area             Network Effectiveness.
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, National Treasury C88 EE3.5, NRS 048 – 6, IEEE 1366.
Definition                   ASIDI (Average System Interruption Duration Index) or SAIDI (System Average
                             Interruption Duration Index).
Purpose                      This definition focuses on the calculation of the average outage duration that a
                             connected load or customer would experience in a year. Calculation of reliability
                             indices on a consistent approach can deliver the benefit of valuable performance data
                             to plan and execute maintenance better and reduce interruptions which reduce
                             revenue to Utilities.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: The ratio of the multiple of the duration of the outage (i) and the
                             total kVA affected by the outage (i) over the total connected kVA on the distribution

                                                                                                                                 Page | 76
Indicator No.                E7 Network Effectiveness ASIDI
                             network. Total kVA is the kVA installed in the MV/LV distribution transformers or
                             subscribed capacity in kVA for MV customers.
                             Data Sources: Total number of outages / interruptions (n)
                             Assessment Methodology: Summation of the ratio over an annual period.
                                        𝑛𝑛
Calculation Formula                           𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (𝑖𝑖) × 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (𝑖𝑖)
                             𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 = �
                                                                                     𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘
                                       𝑖𝑖=1
                             Calculation must be for 12 month rolling period
Performance Interpretation   Benchmark = better than NERSA benchmark
                             Y0: n /a
                             Y1: Plan with targets to approach / reach benchmark
                             Y2–Y6: percentage achievement of targets.
Definition of Success        Downwards trend realistic from business perspective, achieving regulatory benchmark
                             in prescribed time.
Benefits                     •   Benchmarking: Provide insights to distribution businesses based on national and
                                 international benchmarking.
                                 Public Confidence: Provide the regulator with consistent and comparable
                                 performance metrics to regulate license conditions.
                             •   Service Quality: Provide customers with quality of supply information they can use
                                 in their investment and planning process.
                             •   Continuous Improvement: Provide the distribution business with valuable
                                 performance data to plan and execute maintenance better, and reduce
                                 interruptions which reduce revenue to Utilities.


                        OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT

Indicator No. & Name         S1 Service Collection Coverage
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, C88 ENV3.1, 3.11
                             Tracks the percentage of households in formal areas receiving regular curbside waste
Definition                   collection and recognized informal settlements with weekly collection (active) or access
                             to passive collection points (e.g., skips, containers) within a 3km radius.
                             Ensure service quality, by measuring that all formal and informal areas have access to
Purpose                      basic waste collection services, reducing illegal dumping and promoting environmental
                             cleanliness.
                             Assessment Criteria: Percentage of households receiving scheduled, formal waste
                             collection services in formal areas, as well as the percentage of residents in informal
                             settlements located within 3km of metro-serviced passive waste collection points (e.g.
                             skips, trailers).
                             Data Sources: Municipal waste collection reports, GPS data on locations of passive
Key Components
                             collection points, supplemented by household surveys and records from waste service
                             providers
                             Assessment Methodology: Regular monitoring of waste collection routes and
                             customer service data to ensure coverage. GIS mapping of passive waste collection
                             points and population distribution, validated through field surveys.
Calculation Formula          % of Formal Residential Properties (HH) receiving weekly collection



                                                                                                                                                                Page | 77
Indicator No. & Name         S1 Service Collection Coverage
                             % of Informal Areas (Recognised Informal Settlements) receiving weekly collection
                             (active) or equipped with collection units (passive) with 3km radius (max) & serviced
                             weekly
                             Quarterly GIS assessments and reporting based on collection data and population
Frequency
                             surveys.
                              Achieve and maintain >98% coverage of waste collection services in formal areas, and
Performance Interpretation   ensure that >98% of residents in informal settlements live within 3km of metro-
                             serviced waste collection infrastructure.
                             Achieve and maintain >98% coverage of waste collection services in formal areas, and
Definition of Success        ensure that >98% of residents in informal settlements live within 3km of metro-
                             serviced waste collection infrastructure.
                             Environmental Protection: Reduces illegal dumping and littering, improving cleanliness
                             in urban areas.
                             Public Health Protection: Mitigates health risks from uncollected waste, especially in
                             informal settlements.
Benefits
                             Equity in Service Delivery: Promotes fair access to waste services across all socio-
                             economic areas.
                             Operational Efficiency: Identifies gaps in service provision, helping municipalities
                             optimize routes and infrastructure investments.


Indicator No. & Name         S2 Service Reliability
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, C88 ENV3 2.1, 2.3, 3.2
                             Evaluates waste collection service reliability by tracking adherence to scheduled
                             collections and delays in service provision. Without a functioning weighbridge system,
                             service quality cannot be assured, leading to inefficiencies, data manipulation, and
Definition
                             malpractice. This indicator relies on automated integration with weighbridges and
                             vehicle telemetry to verify the accuracy of service records, ensuring compliance with
                             operational standards and preventing fraudulent reporting.
                             Ensures waste collection services are delivered on time and at optimal fleet capacity,
                             reducing service disruptions that contribute to waste accumulation, environmental
Purpose                      hazards, public health risks, and customer dissatisfaction. The absence of weighbridges
                             enables malpractice, including false reporting and inefficient service delivery, making
                             automated monitoring essential for accountability.
                             Assessment Criteria: Monitoring of waste collection vehicles via weighbridge and/or
                             telemetry vehicle tracking system, providing real-time data on on-time performance in
                             relation to published schedules.
                             Data Sources: Automated fleet tracking data (GIS/Weighbridge systems)—can be
Key Components
                             supplemented by municipal waste collection service records, and user satisfaction
                             surveys.
                             Assessment Methodology: Automatic reporting is produced via the integration of
                             telemetry vehicle tracking data as well as from weighbridge data.
                             1- Weighbridge Tracking System:
                             Number of Incoming RELs to LS & RTS where they >X% Full (as per LOS) / Expected Trips
                             per LOS recommendations. (Result = %)
Calculation Formula
                             AND/OR
                             2- Vehicle Tracking System:
                             % of Deviation rate from scheduled optimisation strategy, as per LOS.


                                                                                                                       Page | 78
Indicator No. & Name         S2 Service Reliability
Frequency                    Automated, cloud based reporting systems. Real-time, remote access.
                             1- Weighbridge Tracking System:
                             >90% of planned visits to LS & RTS per LOS recommendations.
Performance Interpretation
                             2. Vehicle Tracking System
                             <10% km driven per predetermined route / km deviation from route.
                             1- Weighbridge Tracking System:
                             >90% of planned visits to LS & RTS per LOS recommendations.
Definition of Success
                             2. Vehicle Tracking System
                             <10% km driven per predetermined route / km deviation from route.
                             Operational Efficiency: Improves waste collection scheduling, routing, and fleet
                             management through real-time data.
                             Customer Satisfaction: Enhances public trust and satisfaction by delivering consistent,
                             reliable services.
Benefits                     Public Health and Environmental Protection: Reduces the risks associated with
                             uncollected waste, ensuring timely removal of waste from residential and commercial
                             areas.
                             Resource Optimization: Identifies inefficiencies in waste collection routes and service
                             schedules, guiding future investments and operational changes.


Indicator No. & Name         S3 Asset Maintenance & Operations
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, C88 ENV3 2.1, 2.2, 2.3
                             Tracks the functionality and calibration of weighbridges at landfill sites and transfer
                             stations, ensuring accurate waste volume recording and compliance with SAWIS
Definition
                             reporting standards. This indicator measures operational uptime, automated data
                             accuracy, and the use of analytics to validate reporting and track waste diversion.
                             Enhance data accuracy for landfill operations and improve operational efficiency
Purpose
                             through the use of automated systems.
                             Assessment Criteria: weighbridge uptime, automated record-keeping, and weighbridge
                             software analytics.
                             Data Sources: weighbridge operational logs and maintenance records, automated
                             landfill data records (weighbridge software), compliance reports from landfill
                             management, and weighbridge analytics reports.
Key Components
                             Assessment Methodology: monitoring operational status and downtime of
                             weighbridges through maintenance and performance logs; reviewing the percentage of
                             waste tonnage data automatically captured by the weighbridge system, analyzing the
                             weighbridge software-generated reports for data accuracy, trends, and compliance
                             tracking.
                             No. of Days each WB operational / (No of LS & RTS) x 365
Calculation Formula
                             No. of Quarterly uploads to SAWIS / No of expected Quarterly Uploads to SAWIS
Frequency                    Automated, cloud based reporting systems. Real-time, remote access.
                             >90% downtime for weighbridge & waste recording system
Performance Interpretation
                             >95% of data for sites uploaded to SAWIS on quarterly basis
                             >90% downtime for weighbridge & waste recording system
Definition of Success
                             >95% of data for sites uploaded to SAWIS on quarterly basis
                             Regulatory Compliance: Ensures adherence to waste management regulations through
Benefits
                             accurate data and automated reporting.

                                                                                                                       Page | 79
Indicator No. & Name         S3 Asset Maintenance & Operations
                             Operational Efficiency: Reduces manual data entry and entry points for corrupt and
                             manipulative practice, improves weighbridge uptime, and optimizes landfill security
                             and access control.
                             Data Accuracy: Enhances the quality and reliability of landfill data for better waste
                             management planning.
                             Resource Optimization: Guides landfill management decisions by providing insights
                             through software analytics, improving overall performance.


Indicator No. & Name         S4 Waste Minimisation
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, # C88 ENV2.2; NEMWA (Section 18/EPR)
                             Tracks the solid waste tonnage diverted from landfilling from registered and recognized
Definition                   waste facilities or initiatives, as well as direct Metro diversion activities, divided by the
                             population.
                             Promote waste recovery, recycling, composting, and other circular waste treatment
                             options to reduce the volume of waste disposed of in general landfills. This indicator
Purpose                      encourages municipalities to minimize waste sent to landfills, support the transition to a
                             circular economy, and achieve waste diversion targets following national and local
                             waste management policies.
                             Assessment Criteria: waste diversion rates via government sanctioned or PPP based
                             facilities used for waste processing/treatment.
                             Data Sources: weighbridge or scale data from metro-sanctioned waste recovery and
Key Components
                             treatment sites. In addition, monthly and annual reports from waste treatment facilities
                             on quantities diverted.
                             Assessment Methodology: Improvement measured against a baseline diversion rate.
                             Waste Diversion (tonnes) = Total tonnes of waste diverted from landfill to treatment
Calculation Formula
                             facilities.
                             Quarterly reporting of waste diversion tonnage, with annual reviews against established
Frequency
                             baselines and national targets.
Performance Interpretation   Agreed improvement as per baseline
Definition of Success        Agreed improvement as per baseline
                             EPR: Encourages alignment with the EPR, for recycling, composting, and recovery of
                             materials, promoting resource efficiency and waste minimization.
                             Regulatory Compliance: Ensures alignment with national waste diversion targets and
                             supports compliance with the NWMS.
Benefits
                             Operational Optimization: Identifies opportunities to enhance the efficiency of waste
                             collection and treatment infrastructure.
                             Public Engagement: This activity raises awareness of waste minimization practices,
                             encouraging residents and businesses to participate in waste reduction initiatives.


Indicator No. & Name         S5 Environmental compliance
                             NEM:WA: Section 51 Contents of WML, requiring auditing
Indicator Cross Reference
                             N&S GNR 926: Norms & Standards for the Storage of Waste
                             Measures the compliance of waste management facilities with relevant environmental
Definition                   regulations, including the NEM:WA, GNR635, and Waste Classification and
                             Management Regulations. The indicator provides a facility compliance rating that


                                                                                                                             Page | 80
Indicator No. & Name         S5 Environmental compliance
                             reflects adherence to applicable licenses and permits, where licensed facilities are
                             rated based on fulfilling their license conditions. Non-licensed facilities are assigned a
                             score of zero to incentivize the pursuit of proper licensing and registration. The
                             indicator ensures facilities responsibly manage, treat, and dispose of waste according
                             to the latest waste regulations and by-laws.
                             Ensure all waste management facilities operate within the legal framework set by
Purpose                      national and local regulations, promoting safe, environmentally responsible, and
                             sustainable waste management practices.
                             Assessment Criteria: license status and conditions, applicable waste management
                             regulations, and weighting of license conditions.
                             Data Sources: facility compliance audit reports (internal and external), waste
Key Components               management license documentation and conditions, and audit records detailing
                             adherence to by-laws, regulations, and NWMS standards.
                             Assessment Methodology: facility compliance rating, weighting of conditions, review
                             of audit reports.
                             Compliance Rating (%) = (Weighted Score of Compliant License Conditions / Total
Calculation Formula          Weighted Conditions) × 100
                             Unlicensed Facilities = Automatic zero compliance rating
Frequency                    Annual compliance audits for all licensed and unlicensed waste management facilities.
Performance Interpretation   Compliant or Non-Compliant
                             NEM:WA: Section 51 Contents of WML, requiring auditing
Definition of Success
                             N&S GNR 926: Norms & Standards for the Storage of Waste
                             Regulatory Alignment: Ensures waste management facilities comply with NEM:WA,
                             GNR635, and other relevant waste regulations.
                             Operational Accountability: Facilitates the identification of regulatory gaps and
                             operational inefficiencies, prompting improvements in facility management.
                             Incentivizes Licensing: It assigns zero scores to unlicensed facilities to encourage them
Benefits
                             to obtain proper registration and operate within the legal framework.
                             Public Health and Safety: Enhances protection of public health through better
                             compliance with waste handling and disposal regulations.
                             Continuous Improvement: Drives facilities to improve their compliance performance
                             and maintain high standards in waste management.


Indicator No. & Name         S6 Cost Efficiency
                             C88: Budget Reporting
Indicator Cross Reference
                             MSCOA: Collection & Disposal
                             Measures the annual operating cost of waste collection and disposal services per ton of
                             waste disposed. It evaluates the financial performance of waste management services
                             by tracking the costs specifically related to collection and disposal, separately from
Definition
                             other public cleansing and support functions. This indicator helps to identify areas
                             where cost reductions can be made while maintaining adequate service delivery and
                             assesses the overall efficiency of revenue-generating waste services.
                             Ensure that waste collection and disposal services are delivered cost-effectively,
Purpose
                             optimizing resource use while minimizing operational expenses.
Key Components               Assessment Criteria: operating cost per ton, separation of costs, and budget reporting.



                                                                                                                          Page | 81
Indicator No. & Name         S6 Cost Efficiency
                             Data Sources: annual budget reports for waste management services, C88 financial
                             reporting, waste disposal tonnage data from weighbridge systems or other verified
                             sources, and operating expense breakdowns for collection, disposal, public cleansing,
                             and support functions.
                             Total Expenditure from Statement of Financial Performance for Sub-Functions 4402
Calculation Formula          (Collection) and 4403 (Disposal) / Total Mass of Waste Recorded at LS weighbridges for
                             disposal, including MSW sent to private landfills.
Frequency                    Annual reporting based on fiscal year budget data and C88 reporting.
                              Significant Improvement (Reduction): Demonstrates a substantial reduction in
                              operating costs per ton compared to the baseline, indicating improved cost efficiency.
                              Moderate Improvement: A moderate decrease in operating costs per ton indicates
                              progress toward cost efficiency goals.
Performance Interpretation
                              No Change: No significant change in operating costs, suggesting stable but not
                              improved cost efficiency.
                              Cost Increase: Indicates rising costs per ton, highlighting the need for cost control
                              measures and operational improvements.
                             Achieve an agreed improvement (reduction) in the annual operating cost of waste
                             collection and disposal services per ton of waste disposed, as compared to the baseline
Definition of Success
                             or previous reporting period. Success is measured by reducing costs without
                             compromising service quality or operational effectiveness.
                             Financial Sustainability: Ensures that waste management services are delivered cost-
                             efficiently, optimizing budget allocations and reducing unnecessary expenditures.
                             Informed Decision-Making: Provides data-driven insights for budget planning, cost
                             control, and investment in waste management infrastructure.
                             Operational Accountability: Highlights areas where cost inefficiencies may exist,
Benefits
                             allowing for targeted interventions to improve resource allocation.
                             Increased Competitiveness: A more cost-efficient waste management system can lead
                             to better service pricing, benefiting both the municipality and its residents.
                             Transparency: Enhances financial transparency by clearly separating costs related to
                             different functions within waste management services.


Indicator No. & Name         S7 Climate Change Mitigation
Indicator Cross Reference    Existing indicator, # C88 ENV5.1. Aligned with IPCC GHG Reporting Guidelines.
                             This indicator tracks the annual reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, specifically
                             CO₂e (carbon dioxide equivalent) and CH₄ (methane), from waste management
                             operations. This includes emissions reductions achieved through fleet and route
Definition                   optimization, waste diversion from landfills, and methane flaring and management at
                             landfills. The indicator tracks improvements in emission reductions and climate
                             resilience strategies that contribute to mitigating the environmental impact of waste
                             management activities.
                             Improve waste management systems' environmental sustainability and climate
Purpose
                             resilience by minimizing carbon and methane emissions.
                             Assessment Criteria: CO₂e reduction rate, CH₄ reduction rate, emission offset value,
                             landfill gas management, odor, and air quality monitoring.
Key Components               Data Sources: metro internal records on fleet operations, route optimization, and
                             waste diversion data; contractor reporting on landfill gas management activities and
                             emissions measurements; IPCC values for CO₂e (for emission conversions); metered

                                                                                                                       Page | 82
Indicator No. & Name         S7 Climate Change Mitigation
                             readings for methane (CH₄) emissions from landfill sites; and dour and air quality
                             monitoring systems.
                             Assessment Methodology: CO₂e emission reduction calculation, methane emission
                             reduction calculation, waste diversion contribution, landfill gas management, and
                             financial viability of emission reduction initiatives.
                             CO₂e Reduction = (Total CO₂e Avoided from Fleet Optimization + Total CO₂e Avoided
                             from Waste Diversion)
Calculation Formula
                             CH₄ Reduction = (Total Methane Captured and Treated through Landfill Gas
                             Management) × IPCC Methane Equivalency Factor (CO₂e Conversion)
                             Annual reporting based on fleet optimization, waste diversion, and landfill gas
Frequency
                             management data.
                              Significant Reduction: Achieves a significant reduction in CO₂e and CH₄ emissions
                              compared to the baseline, demonstrating effective climate resilience strategies.
                              Moderate Reduction: Shows a moderate decrease in emissions, indicating progress
                              toward emission reduction and climate resilience goals.
Performance Interpretation
                              No Change: Little or no change in emissions, suggesting that further interventions or
                              improvements are needed.
                              Emission Increase: Indicates rising emissions, requiring immediate corrective
                              measures to address inefficiencies in waste management practices.
                             Agreed improvement (reduction) in annual CO₂e and CH₄ emissions compared to the
Definition of Success
                             baseline, aligned with national climate targets and waste management strategies.
                             GHG Emission Reduction: Helps reduce the contribution of waste management
                             operations to global greenhouse gas emissions, mitigating climate change impacts.
                             Financial Savings: Demonstrates the financial viability of emission reduction strategies,
                             including potential revenue generation from methane capture or carbon credits.
Benefits                     Operational Efficiency: Optimizes waste collection and disposal processes, leading to
                             cost savings in fuel consumption and landfill space management.
                             Compliance with Climate Policies: Aligns with international and national climate
                             resilience and greenhouse gas reduction frameworks, contributing to achieving
                             sustainability targets.


Indicator No. & Name         S8 Asset Creation: Landfill Airspace
Indicator Cross Reference    N/A
                             Measures landfill operations' efficiency and future airspace availability by ensuring that
                             metros perform annual airspace and topography assessments of their landfills for
                             licensing purposes. It assesses the operational efficiency of current landfill cells, slopes,
Definition
                             and operations and maintenance (O&M) practices. Additionally, the indicator evaluates
                             long-term planning by calculating future airspace availability based on current usage
                             trends and projections.
                             Ensure efficient use of landfill airspace and maintain compliance with landfill licensing
Purpose
                             conditions.
                             Assessment Criteria: operational efficiency, future airspace projections, O&M
                             practices, and license compliance.
Key Components
                             Data Sources: Metro airspace measurement reports, operational reports from landfill
                             operators, and waste tonnage data from weighbridge records.




                                                                                                                             Page | 83
Indicator No. & Name         S8 Asset Creation: Landfill Airspace
                             Assessment Methodology: Review license conditions, calculate used and available
                             airspace and review the efflandfill’s operations, such as compaction, slope stability, and
                             O&M practices.
                             Remaining Useful Life = Available Airspace (as per modelled Final Profile) / Airspace
Calculation Formula          Consumption Rate (as per monthly consumption – requires either weighbridge data or
                             topographical surveys)
                             Annual reporting on airspace measurements, operational efficiency, and license
Frequency
                             reviews.
                              Efficient Use: Airspace is used efficiently, with operational practices maximizing
                              landfill capacity while ensuring compliance with license conditions.
                              Sufficient Future Airspace: Based on current and projected waste volumes, landfills
                              should have a minimum of 8 years of available airspace.
Performance Interpretation    License Compliance: Landfill operations fully comply with regulatory requirements
                              and best practices.
                              Inefficient Use or Insufficient Airspace: Operational inefficiencies or insufficient
                              airspace are identified, requiring corrective actions such as improved compaction,
                              waste diversion strategies, or the identification of new landfill capacity.
                             Annual Topographical Surveys / Airspace Reporting submitted and approved to HoD for
Definition of Success        all Metro owned landfills to quantify remaining airspace and weighbridge data to
                             determine airspace consumption rate and calculate remaining useful life.
                             Operational Efficiency: Ensures that landfill operations are optimized for efficient use
                             of airspace, reducing the need for premature expansions or new landfills.
                             Cost Savings: This strategy maximizes the lifespan of current landfills, delaying the
                             need for costly new infrastructure and reducing operational costs associated with
Benefits                     inefficient practices.
                             Regulatory Compliance: Ensures landfill operations comply with regulatory
                             requirements and license conditions, avoiding penalties and enforcement actions.
                             Sustainability: Supports long-term waste management planning by ensuring adequate
                             airspace to meet future needs.


Indicator No. & Name         S9 Access Control/Security
Indicator Cross Reference    N/A
                             Tracks the effectiveness of security measures implemented at landfill sites, preventing
                             unauthorized access, vandalism, and theft. It includes developing and updating a
                             security plan annually, coupled with incident reporting, to determine whether a site
Definition
                             qualifies for necessary structural upgrades, such as landfill gas (LFG) systems or
                             weighbridge installations. Security measures ensure the integrity of critical
                             infrastructure and safe operations at the landfill.
                             Ensure that landfill sites are adequately protected against theft, vandalism, and other
Purpose
                             security threats that could compromise operations or damage critical infrastructure.
                             Assessment Criteria: security plan, incident report card, infrastructure protection,
                             upgrade recommendations, risk management, and security improvement plan.
                             Data Sources: Metro security plans and policies, incident report cards documenting
Key Components               security breaches, and contractor reports detailing security status and improvement
                             recommendations.
                             Assessment Methodology: review of security plan, incident monitoring, and
                             vulnerability assessment.

                                                                                                                          Page | 84
Indicator No. & Name         S9 Access Control/Security
Calculation Formula          Incident Frequency = (Total Incidents Reported / Number of Landfill Sites) × 100
                             Annual update of security plans and incident report cards and continuous monitoring
Frequency
                             of incidents with quarterly reviews.
                             Metro developed Security & Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EP&RP),
                             updated annually, per LS & RTS.
                             As per NEM:WA:
Performance Interpretation       • Perimeter wall and access control
                                 • Metros record incidents that are unexpected occurrences like major
                                     emissions, fires, vandalism, theft, or explosions, as well as those that pose a
                                     risk to public health or the environment, captured in incident reports.
                             Submission of Security & EP&RP
                             Implementation of Plan
Definition of Success        LSs & RTSs to maintain access control and a 1.8m perimeter wall around the waste
                             facility.
                             Metro to provide evidence of monitoring and reporting incidents.
                             Asset Protection: This ensures that critical infrastructure, such as LFG systems and
                             weighbridges, is protected from theft and vandalism, reducing operational disruptions
                             and financial losses.
                             Cost Savings: Reduces the cost of repairing or replacing damaged infrastructure due to
                             vandalism or theft, leading to improved cost efficiency.
Benefits                     Operational Continuity: Maintains uninterrupted waste management operations by
                             preventing security breaches that could compromise landfill operations.
                             Compliance: Ensures that landfill sites meet security requirements outlined in metro
                             policies and that incident reports guide decision-making on infrastructure upgrades.
                             Risk Mitigation: Reduces the risk of security incidents through proactive planning and
                             response measures, ensuring long-term site safety and integrity.




                                                                                                                       Page | 85
