Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Nile Civil Society For Climate Resilience Project (P505581)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                        (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 12/05/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04653




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 13, 2024                                                                          Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society For Climate Resilience Project (P505581)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                     Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505581                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)          NCSCR                      2025

                     Operation Name            Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries               Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Burundi, Congo, Democratic Republic         EASTERN AND                Water
                     Africa                    of, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, South          SOUTHERN AFRICA
                                               Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                    Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Nile Basin Discourse      Nile Basin Discourse                        18-Nov-2024                29-Nov-2024


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     31-Oct-2024               3,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The development objective for the project is to strengthen community engagement for climate resilience in
                     transboundary water cooperation in the Nile Basin. This will be achieved through strengthening the capacity of the NBD
                     to engage communities and stakeholders in the Basin. Over the long term, the project is expected to contribute to
                     equitable, sustainable, and climate resilient growth in the region by providing a platform for citizen engagement in
                     riparian dialogue, learning on climate risk management and resilience building strategies, and promoting awareness of
                     the benefits of Nile Basin cooperation.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project will provide support to strengthen communities’ engagement in the development and
                     management of transboundary water projects and becoming more resilient to climate change, improve the collection

                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society For Climate Resilience Project (P505581)



                     and dissemination of information on environmental conditions and natural hazards, and improve the capacity of the
                     NBD and its stakeholders to deliver on its mandate. The first key component on Community Engagements and Capacity
                     Building will support (i) a program of citizen led data management on issues of water quality, water flows, land
                     degradation, soil erosion, wetland degradation, and climate-related hazards with the aim of influencing policy, resource
                     allocations, and behavior of citizens, (ii) community consultations with respect to select transboundary development
                     projects, (iii) capacity building of the NDFs, and (iv) activities to strengthen communities’ resilience to climate change.
                     The second key component on Innovative Platforms for Stakeholder Dialogue and Action will strengthen the NBD and its
                     stakeholders through (i) Women’s empowerment and youth engagement in dialogues on Nile cooperation and
                     transboundary water management (ii) Leveraging platforms for transboundary dialogue and knowledge exchange and
                     (c) Scaling up the internship program through recruiting women and youth with expertise in specialized areas—water
                     resources management, climate adaptation and resilience, data generation and management—to serve as interns.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Nile Basin is a network of connected ecosystems and shared by 257 million people across 11 countries: Burundi,
                     Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda .
                     The NBD will be the direct beneficiary of this project and, through it, the Nile River Basin CSOs and their members,
                     governments, and communities adjacent to the Nile Basin will be beneficiaries. Relevant project activities that include (i)
                     Community Engagements and Capacity Building, and (ii) the establishment of an innovative platform for stakeholder
                     Dialogue and action will be implemented in all countries with settings that include urban and rural areas, FCV, and
                     presence of Indigenous Peoples and other minorities/members of vulnerable groups. They are expected to have limited



Public Disclosure
                     E&S impacts as no civil works are planned under the project. Moreover, no water use and water allocation decisions by
                     the stakeholders is anticipated in the project. The proposed project activities are meant to strengthen areas under
                     ESS10, citizen engagement, and gender.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Nile Basin Discourse (NBD) is a civil society institution established with the support of donors, including the World
                     Bank, in 2003 to strengthen civil society participation in Nile Basin developmental processes and programs. Member
                     organizations are local and national nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) working on a range of issues to promote
                     Nile cooperation, including environmental conservation, gender equity, livelihoods, and poverty reduction. The NGOs
                     are members of national level Nile Discourse Forums (NDFs) established in ten of the eleven riparian states, and the
                     NDFs are in turn members of the NBD coordinated by a regional secretariat based in Entebbe, Uganda. The NBD
                     Secretariat currently has five technical experts—regional manager, regional monitoring and evaluation specialist,
                     regional finance and administrative specialist, regional procurement specialist, regional ICT and social media specialist—
                     and three NBD Secretariat support staff but no E&S specialists, particularly one with a strong background in
                     Stakeholder/citizen engagement. The project will recruit such an expert prior to implementation and additional ESF
                     capacity building will be provided to NBD.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Moderate




                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society For Climate Resilience Project (P505581)



                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Moderate
                     The activities to be financed by the project are technical assistance and capacity building activities without any civil
                     works with potential negative environmental risks or impacts. Neither health nor safety concerns are anticipated
                     because of the project activities. Environmental risk is rated Moderate, as activities like support for
                     wetland/watershed management plans require consideration of and compliance with relevant ESF requirements,
                     which will be covered in the Project Operation Manual (POM).
                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project's development objective is to strengthen community engagement for climate resilience in the affected
                     communities, which in itself is a mitigation measure to the risk of potential exclusion of certain stakeholders. The
                     main social risks associated with the proposed activities are (i) the potential exclusion of certain individuals or groups
                     (like Indigenous Peoples, women, youth, and members of other vulnerable groups) from the proposed capacity
                     building activities, particularly during the identification and selection of beneficiaries and intended dialogues, as well
                     as during the participatory processes to be implemented; (ii). potential intensification of local tensions associated
                     with the use or planned use of water resources, considering the sensitivity of the sector in the project’s area and the
                     existence of potentially diverging interests among stakeholders; (iii) potential downstream risks associated with the
                     technical assistance activities, particularly in terms of their consistency with the ESF; and (iv) SEA/SH risks during the
                     project activities (explained in section A.3). These risks are not expected to be particularly significant and to address
                     them, the Project Operation Manual (POM), along with the project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                     (ESCP), will include guidelines and/or provisions for the engagement/inclusion of stakeholders and vulnerable groups,
                     and for the establishment of a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) with SEA/SH elements. The POM will also include



Public Disclosure
                     clear selection criteria for beneficiaries, with provisions to promote the inclusion of vulnerable groups. The project
                     will ensure that all Terms of Reference for relevant activities are consistent with the ESF. Guidelines for the
                     management of labor under the project, including the establishment of workers' GRM and signature of codes of
                     conduct will also be included in the POM, along with provisions in the ESCP.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      This project will not have any significant adverse environmental and social risks and impacts as no civil works will be
                      financed. The main risk under this standard is that technical assistance activities, such as the elaboration of gender
                      action plans, and wetland/watershed management plans, are not carried out in accordance with the ESF or the
                      measures indicated in the borrower’s E&S framework. To address this risk, guidelines for (i) the
                      engagement/inclusion of these groups, including the establishment of a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) and (iii)
                      clear selection criteria for beneficiaries will be included in the POM and ESCP. The project will ensure that all Terms of
                      Reference for relevant activities are consistent with the ESF. The ESCP will also require that the development of any
                      legal, regulatory or operational frameworks as part of the project at the national level will need to be undertaken in
                      line with ESF requirements.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant


                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society For Climate Resilience Project (P505581)



                      The project's development objective is to strengthen community engagement for climate resilience in transboundary
                      water cooperation in the Nile Basin by strengthening the capacity of the NBD to engage communities and
                      stakeholders in the Basin. The client will carry out stakeholder engagement measures during preparation, which will
                      inform the design of the project in an inclusive way. The ESCP and POM will include stakeholder engagement
                      elements, defining the expectations, timing of activities throughout the life of the project, and provisions for the
                      project's GRM. The project will also prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which will guide the engagement
                      with stakeholders, promote the disclosure of timely, relevant, understandable and accessible information, and make
                      sure that consultations are carried out in a culturally appropriate manner, free of manipulation and intimidation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The project will employ a range of personnel that might include civil servants, service providers, individual
                      consultants, community members and etc. The labor risks associated with these workers, however, is expected to be
                      low. Accordingly, to manage these risks, guidelines for the labor management procedures to be adopted by the
                      project, including the establishment of a workers' grievance redress mechanism with provisions for cases of SEA/SH,
                      will be included in the Project's Operation Manual. The project’s ESCP will also include labor management elements.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                Not Currently Relevant

                      The project activities are not anticipated to lead to generation of pollutants. Furthermore, they will not lead to an
                      increased consumption of resources including water, energy and raw materials. This standard is therefore not
                      currently relevant.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The main risk posed to the targeted communities' health and safety are related to the interactions with the personnel
                      that will be recruited under the project to carry out stakeholder engagement and other activities. They will involve
                      exposure to SEA/SH incidents for vulnerable individuals or groups meant to benefit from these activities. The POM
                      and ESCP will include guidelines and measures to mitigate this risk, which will include signature of codes of conducts,
                      sensitization of workers/communities, establishment of a grievance redress mechanism sensible to SEA/SH, etc.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The project's activities will not cause physical and/or economic displacement

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project activities are not anticipated to have any adverse impacts on biodiversity and living natural resources as
                      no physical investments will be financed. ESS6 is relevant as TA and capacity building activities will cover elaboration
                      of wetland/watershed management plans and support to their implementation.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities




                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society For Climate Resilience Project (P505581)



                      Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities (IPs/SSAHUTLC) are
                      present in some of the benefiting countries and will likely be impacted by project activities. Accordingly, the project’s
                      activities will need to be consistent with ESS7 and be respectful of IPs/SSAHUTLC worldviews and cultural heritage.
                      The Project will ensure that the approach in the planned engagements respects and recognizes the rights, language
                      use, cultural practices, and religious and spiritual beliefs of these groups. Measures to address these risks, including
                      clear guidelines for relevant project personnel (PIU included) to engage these communities during project activities
                      will be included in the Project Operation Manual (POM). In addition, the SEP will also outline the approach for the
                      engagement with IP/SSAHUTLC in a culturally appropriate manner.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant

                      No adverse impacts on cultural heritage are anticipated as no civil works will be financed. This standard is therefore
                      not currently relevant.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      No FI are involved in the project



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No




Public Disclosure
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No
                       N/A


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     -Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a grievance mechanism and provisions for the culturally-
                     appropriate engagement with IP/SSAHUTLC.

                     -Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), including labor management elements and SEA/SH provisions.
                     -POM which includes ESF provisions

                     During project implementation, the project will ensure that the TOR of the project activities are consistent with the ESF.


                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Nile Civil Society For Climate Resilience Project (P505581)




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:        Shyam KC                               Title:           Sr Water Resources Mgmt. Spec.

                      Email:                   skc@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:             Ai-Ju Huang                            Job Title:       Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                   ahuang@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                                    Shyam KC, Ai-Ju Huang

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                           Tamene Tiruneh Matebe

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                                  Boyenge Isasi Dieng




                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                    Page 7 of 7
