Public Disclosure Authorized




                                      GEF Restoring Ecosystems for



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                 Marine Pollution Prevention Project
                                               (Moldova ReMaP)
                                                     (P505546)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                               Draft prepared by the PIU under the Ministry of Environment
                                                    30 October 2024
Table of Contents
1.      INTRODUCTION......................................................................................................................... 4
        1.1         Brief Project Description .................................................................................................. 4
        1.2         Project Location ................................................................................................................ 7
        1.3 Potential E&S risks and impacts and proposed mitigations ................................................. 9
2.      DESCRIPTION OF THE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN ................................. 10
3.      STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS ...................................................... 10
        3.1 Methodology .......................................................................................................................... 10
        3.2. Affected parties and other interested parties ..................................................................... 11
        3.3. Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups ................................................................ 16
4.      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM ................................................................... 17
        4.1 Summary of Stakeholder engagement done during the project preparation ..................... 17
        4.2     Summary of project stakeholders needs and methods, tools and techniques for
        stakeholder engagement ............................................................................................................. 19
        4.3         Stakeholder engagement plan ....................................................................................... 21
        4.4         Reporting back to stakeholders ..................................................................................... 25
5. RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES ......................................................................................................... 26
        5.1. Resources............................................................................................................................... 26
        5.2. Management functions and responsibilities ........................................................................ 27
6.      GRIEVANCE MECHANISM ................................................................................................... 28
        6.1. Description of GM ................................................................................................................. 28
7.MONITORING AND REPORTING ............................................................................................. 33
        7.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported ............................ 33
        7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups ................................................................................. 34
8.ANNEXES ........................................................................................................................................ 35
     Annex nr. 1. List of Key Stakeholders Met during the WB and implementing agencies mission in
         Moldova, September 2-13, 2024 ............................................................................................. 36
     Annex nr. 2 GRM forms..................................................................................................................... 37
     Annex nr. 3 List of NGOs ................................................................................................................... 39
     Annex nr. 4 List of Mass media ......................................................................................................... 43
     Annex 5. Public consultation on SEP – 4 October 2024 List of participants ..................................... 45




                                                                           2
                                   ACRONYMS

AAM           Agency Apele Moldovei

ATU           Administrative-territorial Units

ES            Ecosystem Services

EU            European Union

NDC           Nationally Determined Contribution

DHC           Dniester Hydro Energetic Complex

GB Institut   Gradina Botanica Institute

GBF           Global Biodiversity Framework

GEF           Global Environment Facility

GoM           Government of Moldova

GRM           Grievance Redress Mechanism

IEG           Institute of Ecology and Geography (within State University of Moldova)

IP            Implementation Progress

HBDR          Hydrological Basin of Dniester River

LPAs          Local Public Authorities

LRPs          landscape restoration plans

MAFI          Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry

MoE           Ministry of Environment

NBS           Nature Based solutions

NEN           National Ecological Network

NGO           Non-governmental association

NOEPI         National Office for Environmental Project Implementation

NR            Nature Reserve

OIPs          Other Interested Parties

PA            Protected Area

PAPs          Project-Affected Parties

PDO           Project development objective

PIU           Project Implementation Unit

SEP           Stakeholder Engagement Plan

WB            World Bank



                                           3
    1. INTRODUCTION
This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) was prepared for “Restoring Ecosystems for Marine
Pollution Prevention” (Moldova ReMaP P505546) project, supported by GEF and that will be
implemented by the National Office for Environmental Project Implementation (NOEPI), subordinated
to the Ministry of Environment (MoE).

SEP identifies the main project-affected and interested stakeholders of the Project and describes their
interests and engagement needs in relation to the project. The SEP identifies the context under which
relevant national law and World Bank requirements for stakeholder engagement and information
disclosure are to be applied, and it also proposes actionable engagement measures to be undertaken
during project implementation.

The SEP also describes a project-level Grievance Mechanism designed to facilitate receipt and
response to feedback and concerns associated with the project. The SEP may be periodically updated
during project implementation to ensure that information is consistent, that methods of engagement
remain appropriate and effective, and that any major changes to project activities and schedule are
reflected.

        1.1     Brief Project Description

The project is part of the GEF – 8 Clean and Healthy Ocean Integrated Program (CHOIP) which has as
the objective to address marine hypoxic zones by curbing coastal pollution from agriculture,
industrial and municipal sources through policy and regulatory measures and infrastructure
investments combined with NBS.

The Project Development Objective (PDO)

The project addresses marine pollution through enhanced adaptive capacity for river basin
ecosystem restoration (at landscape level), all following the EU directives and the Dniester River
Agreement between Moldova and Ukraine. The proposed Project’s design consists of three
components: (i) Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community Engagement; (ii)
Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management and (iii) Component 3: Project
Management, Monitoring and Communication.

Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community Engagement (US$1 million)
Subcomponent 1.1: Policy Development and Harmonization. This component will focus on
developing and harmonizing policy framework and enforcement mechanisms for effective nutrient
pollution reduction in Dniester River Basin through NBS. The project will finance analysis and revisions
of existing policy, legal, frameworks for marine pollution management, forest and wetland
restoration, afforestation/reforestation, ecological reconstruction, and watershed management to
help align these with EU and international obligations including NDC commitments.

Subcomponent 1.2: Modernizing the nutrient pollution management of Dniester River' through NBS
this sub-component will finance improving institutional capacity with better technology, system
development and staff skills. related to marine Pollution Management, NBS, Landscape Restoration,
Watershed Management, Forest/Wetland Conservation, etc. This could include purchasing of
equipment, developing training materials, organizing study tours (for mayors and other government
officials), hiring of experts for system development, feasibility studies for modernization etc.


                                                   4
Subcomponent 1.3: Community Benefits and Engagement. This project supports local communities
in implementing restoration activities that improve downstream marine pollution management
through NBS in the upstream Dniester River Basin. Community engagement includes involvement in
the design and implementation of specific river restoration activities, including tree planting, wetland
revitalization, habitat restoration, disturbance control, and clean-up efforts. The communities will
benefit economically from increased agroforestry products, and resilient and sustainable food
production. They will also benefit from better and healthy ecosystem services, clean water, enhanced
and functional landscapes.

Subcomponent 1.4: Establishing Centre of Excellence for Climate Resilience and NBS. A Climate
Resilience Center of Excellence (CiRCE) in the State University of Moldova will be established to serve
as hub for start-ups, national expertise, and bringing together top talent and specialized knowledge
in nature restoration, wetland management, climate resilience, and green economy in general. The
services of CiRCE could include the followings: (i) Startup Acceleration: the Centre will have intensive
mentorship and training program to support early-stage startups in the development of successful
high-growth climate smart businesses through mentorship, education, networking, and partnerships,
(ii) Capacity and Workforce Development: providing training and credit schemes for individuals
involved in nature restoration, climate resilience activities or interested in pursuing careers in the
green industry. (iii) Technical Guidance and Standards Development: this includes the development
and application of standards in nature restoration, and climate smart products. (iv) Technical and
Research-based support for Innovation and Sustainability.

Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management (US$6.5 million)
This component aims at enhancing water quality through healthier and functionally restored
ecosystems that will contribute to creating more resilient communities. It has three interconnected
subcomponents. The first subcomponent focuses on improving conditions of forest ecosystems that
involves restoring degraded forest landscapes to a healthier state using different approaches. The
second subcomponent aims at enhancing river/rivulet networks that link different habitats, primarily
wetland remnants and smaller rivers. The third subcomponent will support silvopastoral management
planning process by involving three livelihood-sensitive natural resources for local communities
(pasture, forest, water), thus raising it to the level of Landscape Restoration Planning. Proposed NBS
methods will range from rehabilitation and revegetation to disturbance control techniques or
ecological reconstruction that envisage the interlinked key natural components (forests, wetlands,
meadows/pastures, and water bodies) at macro-ecosystemic level.

Subcomponent 2.1: Improved forest ecosystem condition. In highly agriculturalized Moldova, forests
are the best preserved out of the rest types of ecosystems. Hydrographic systems and forested
landscapes are intrinsically interconnected. However, because of poor and un-adapted to climate
change management their ‘natural-purification’ capacity is reduced. Spatial overlaps in forest and
wetland (and wet meadow) ecosystems exemplify powerful synergies for sustainable landscape
management aimed to ensure that vital ecosystem services (ES) generated to human activity are not
compromised. The expected outcome from this subcomponent is the removal of different pollutants
(nutrients, sediment, coliforms, pesticides, heavy metals) from agricultural landscapes through
restored forest ecosystems’ functionality within the whole Dniester River Basin. The proposed
activities will be conducted in publicly owned land: either by state (mainly by Moldsilva’s entities) or
non-state owners (LPAs); and none of them are located in a protected area (PA), all have forest
management plans (active or under re-management cycle) and are fully aligned with provisions set in
Land Code and Forest Code. All landowners must ensure the sustainability of the investment



                                                   5
undertaken with assistance from the project by taking a range of appropriate measures for a
successful implementation. For this subcomponent, the project will support only silvicultural
interventions that respect NBS principles, such as (i) reforestation by filling operations especially in
torrent protection forests along water/wetland bodies, (ii) forest rehabilitation in forests or
shelterbelts (hygienic/sanitary operations for improved functionality), (iii) ecological reconstruction
through species substitution (stands/sites that lost viability because of invaded exotic or inappropriate
species, thus promoting suitable native species/stands), and (iv) afforestation of newly forests or
shelterbelts (especially in critically areas).

Subcomponent 2.2: Riverbed and Wetland Protection. This sub-component aims at protecting
riverbed landscapes that harbor aquatic and wetland habitats (permanent or temporarily flooded) in
selected tributaries along Dniester River. Most of the Dniester river’s tributaries are severely affected
by direct human encroachment (river dams, altered riverbed courses) and unsustainable farming
(abusive grazing, vegetation removal) or waste pollution (which is a recently growing problem). Since
last century large wetland areas have disappeared in many parts of the country because the riverbeds
of smaller rivulets were modified through channelized watercourses. Existing wetlands are poorly
managed (or not managed at all), they are small and scattered along water bodies and often subject
to abusive grazing. Moldovan authorities (led by Agency Apele Moldovei) have plans to restore some
wetlands through bringing water back into old riverbed by following the paths of old river courses,
thus re-meandering the former wetland landscapes. All lands under this subcomponent are public-
owned properties either managed by communities (village/commune or district levels) or by the state
(Agency Apele Moldovei or Agency Moldsilva). The lands for the project would be selected based on
their (i) significance for reducing nutrient pollution from nearby agricultural fields, (ii) role in landscape
functionality and connectivity, and (iii) sustainability of investments. Specific activities to restore
degraded wetlands include: (a) development of the short-term and long-term goals for the selected
sites with regard to biodiversity conservation, that is, the list of indigenous species that are expected
to return after restoration of the habitat; (b) delineation of boundaries of ‘wetland-type’ habitats,
especially within LPA lands (to ensure future conservation measures including establishing protection
vegetation buffer zones along or around wetlands (through planting/replanting, enhancing ecological
corridors; (c) design of the wetland to be restored, considering the habitat requirements of the
targeted biodiversity, water plants to be sawed, and potential for carbon sequestration; (d) revision
of the water supply and identification of the sources of seeds of the water plants; (e) ecological
reconstruction including construction works and sawing of the selected water plant species; and (f)
monitoring of the biodiversity recovery in the restored ecosystems (g) modeling of the benefits of the
wetlands’ restoration including carbon sequestration;

Subcomponent 2.3: Promoting silvopastoral agroforestry systems. This sub-component targets the
improvement of community-owned lands through sustainable agroforestry systems (integrated
tree/shrub with crops) and silvopastoral practices (combining trees/shrubs with grazing). Both
pasturelands and forests are the most sensitive to local communities (being also of high livelihood
interest for vulnerable groups) and believed to be important measures to reduce nutrient runoff and
enhance erosion control, as well as to lower local budget inputs for flood mitigation (thus improving
local public administrations’ effective response). The sub-component also includes demonstration of
integrated nutrient management and implementation of landscape restoration strategies focusing on
agroforestry/silvopastoral practices and other innovative NBS for nutrient pollution reduction.
Communities for SPMP process will be selected based on criteria that meet specific conditions such
as (i) close location to river/rivulet landscape (districts that are part of the Dniester River basin), (ii) at
least 10-15 percent of pastureland is covered by natural or artificial forest vegetation, (iii) the property
has at least 50 ha in size, (iv) participation through decision-taking process (proved by the decision of
LPA’s local councils), and (v) ensuring subsequent actions for the implementation of produced
planning documents. Silvo-Pastoral Management Planning (SPMP) will be undertaken in areas where



                                                      6
there is not any management plan. The project will also support the implementation of selected
SMPMP in certain areas as a pilot program focusing on restoring degraded ecosystems. The pilot
ecological reconstruction could include revegetation, planting trees, wetland restoration, enhancing
riverbeds and supporting the communities depending on the nature of the SPMP and the interest of
the communities. The community support activities will focus on ensuring the sustainability and
scaling up of the pilot program which includes providing equipment (such as seeding equipment), and
materials as well as capacity development so that the community can continue implementing the
SPMP in a longer term.


Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring and Communication (US$0.4 million)
This component will finance the operational costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in the MOE
-NOEPI, to carry out project management functions. Support will be provided for procurement,
financial management (FM), management of environmental and social risks, coordination, and
communication activities. It will also support the reporting and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
functions. The introduced system of monitoring of bioindicators of forests, grasslands, and wetlands
will become an additional tool for the M&E process. The communication activities will also focus on
promoting interactions through policy consultation, dissemination of information, and outreach
activities on marine pollution management through applying NBS in the Dniester River Basin.

        1.2     Project Location

The Dniester River forms the border between the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine over a distance of
142.5 km. The surface of the Dniester basin (within the borders of the Republic of Moldova) is
19,232.79 km². The basin is asymmetrically distributed with respect to the main axis of the Dniester
valley, so that the left surface of the basin (within the borders of the Republic of Moldova) is 3514.79
km² (18.27%), and the right one is 15718.0 km² (81.73%).

The hydrographic network of Hydrological Basin of Dniester River (HBDR) is represented by about
3000 surface water courses, of which 1591 rivers, including 5 with a length of about 100 km and other
153 rivers with a length of about 10 km, 51 reservoirs with a volume of about 1 million m3 each and
approx. 1700 small water reservoirs. The longest rivers in HBDR are Răut, Bîc and Botna. According to
Agency Apele Moldovei, nearly 80 percent of all in-land system of small rivers (which are primary or
secondary/tertiary tributaries of the Dniester river) are dried out during summer seasons, many are
vanishing and at risk of total disappearance.

The target project area includes only the right side of the Dniester River. All administrative districts
in the eastern Moldova bordering Dniester’s hydrological network are considered for project activities
as the selected sites for both forest/wetland improvement and agroforestry/silvopasture promotion
are scattered across the whole basin ranging from the northern districts (Donduseni, Drochia, Soroca,
Floresti) and central districts (Soldanesti, Rezina, Orhei, Criuleni, Ialoveni, Anenii-Noi, Dubasari) to
southern districts (Causeni and Stefan Voda).




                                                   7
Figure 1. Preliminary Project Map (with planned interventions)




                                              8
        1.3 Potential E&S risks and impacts and proposed mitigations

E&S risks and impacts: While the proposed project will generate significant environmental benefits
to the country through the ecosystem restoration, it could also entail potential E&S risks and impacts
(the World Bank classifies the project as “moderate” E&S risks), which are mainly related to minor
physical works for wetland restoration, rehabilitation of small rivers beds and
afforestation/reforestation activities. The areas of intervention will not interfere with special
conservation zones as the Ramsar sites or other PA categories. Project interventions will take place
only on public land (state or community) and no land acquisition and physical and economic
resettlement are anticipated. Any involuntary restrictions to land use or natural resources (for
example, site-specific temporary access restrictions at reforestation sites) will be appropriately
avoided, minimized and mitigated through close engagement with key stakeholders. While the project
will engage different types of workers (including civil servants, direct workers, contracted workers and
local community volunteers), labor and working conditions and occupational health and safety (OHS)
risks will be managed through appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures, including appropriate
use of personal protective equipment (PPE). Social tensions and exclusion risks could potentially arise
from site selection processes and beneficiaries having access to project benefits and resources
(including jobs opportunities and access to forests and pastures), if the criteria are not sufficiently
consulted and disseminated with a wide range of stakeholders and beneficiaries. To address such risks,
the project design includes activities/components to strengthen community engagement and
participation as well as provide job opportunities (temporary or permanent) to support income for
local families.

E&S staffing and instruments: While no permanent E&S risk management staff is available in the
project implementing agencies, one environmental consultant and one social consultant with
adequate expertise will have been engaged for the project. Given the “Moderate" E&S risk
classification of the project, the E&S instruments have been prepared in a streamlined/simplified
manner. The preparation of an E&S Commitment Plan (ESCP), a SEP (this document) and a simplified
and integrated E&S Management Framework (ESMF) (including a section on the Labor Management
Procedures (LMP)) are currently under underway. A Gender Action Plan will be also prepared.




                                                   9
    2. DESCRIPTION OF THE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public
information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP outlines the ways
in which the project team will communicate with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which
people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project activities or any
activities related to the project.

The main objectives of the SEP are the following:

        •   To understand the stakeholder engagement requirements of the Moldovan legislation
        •   To identify key stakeholders that are affected, and/or able to influence the Project
            and its activities, including vulnerable groups that may be at risk of being left out of
            project benefits, particularly women, the elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced
            persons, and migrant workers and communities, and the cultural sensitivities of
            diverse ethnic groups.
         • To develop a stakeholder’s engagement process that gives stakeholders the
            opportunity toparticipate and influence project design and implementation
         • To define the information disclosure provisions under the project
         • To establish a formal Grievance Redress Mechanism under the project
         • To define roles and responsibilities for the implementation of the SEP
         • To define the monitoring arrangements to ensure that the SEP remains an effective
            and up-to-datetool for stakeholder engagement
Communicating early, often and clearly with stakeholders, helps manage expectations and avoid risks,
potential conflict, and project delays. The involvement of the local population is essential to the
success of the project in order to ensure smooth collaboration between project staff and local
communities and to minimize and mitigate environmental and social risks related to the proposed
project.



    3. STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS
        3.1 Methodology
In order to meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for
stakeholder engagement:
• Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the project will be arranged during the
  whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference,
  coercion, or intimidation.
• Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed among
  all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating
  stakeholder feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns.
• Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
  communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects is
  inclusive. All stakeholders at all times are encouraged to be involved in the consultation process.
  Equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the
  key principle underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special attention is given to
  vulnerable groups that may be at risk of being left out of project benefits, particularly women, the
  elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers and communities, and the
  cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.



                                                  10
• Flexibility: If social distancing, cultural context (for example, particular gender dynamics), or
  governance factors (for example, high risk of retaliation) inhibits traditional forms of face-to-face
  engagement, the methodology should adapt to other forms of engagement, including various forms
  of internet- or phone-based communication.

For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project(s) can
be divided into the following core categories: Affected parties, Other interested parties, and
disadvantaged individuals or groups.
Engagement with all identified stakeholders will help ensure the greatest possible contribution from
the stakeholder parties toward the successful implementation of the project(s) and will enable the
project(s) to draw on their pre-existing expertise, networks, and agendas. It will also facilitate both
the community’s and institutional endorsement of the project(s) by various parties. Access to the local
knowledge and experience also becomes possible through the active involvement of stakeholders.

        3.2. Affected parties and other interested parties

Affected Parties: persons, groups, and other entities within the Project Area of Influence that are
directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified as most
susceptible to change associated with the project, and who need to be closely engaged in identifying
impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation and management measures.

The population of the Dniester River basin district is approx. 2,635.0 thousand inhabitants, of which
1,400.0 thousand inhabitants (53 %) live in the urban environment, and 1,235.0 thousand inhabitants
(47 %) are concentrated in the rural environment.

713 thousand people or 1/3 of the actual population present in HBDR live in the riparian region of the
Dniester River. The average population density is 137 people/km2, higher (over 200 people/km2) in
the central part of the HBDR in the vicinity of Chisinau (Străseni, Orhei, Criuleni, Ialoveni, Anenii Noi
districts and Chisinau municipality), in Nisporeni districts, Drochia, Singerei, as well as in the south of
the Transnistrian region. Low population density values are recorded on the left side of the Dniester,
the central-northern part of HBDR.

The table below identifies institutions, authorities, groups, local communities, and other stakeholders
that may be directly or indirectly affected by the project, positively or negatively.



 Affected Parties             Relevance to the project

 Communities and local The communities and local citizens in the direct project areas,
 citizens living in the including vulnerable groups such as women, elderly, migrants, will
 project areas          benefit economically from increased agroforestry products, and
                        resilient and sustainable food production. They will also benefit from
                        better and more ecosystem services, clean water, and enhanced
                        protected area system. The potential adverse impacts on the local
                        communities and local citizens include disruption to their agriculture
                        and pastoral activities which could be caused by temporary access
                        restrictions to project sites (such as during forestation and civil work).
                        The population shall be involved through implementation of sustainable
                        agricultural practices and restoration activities, river restoration
                        activities and clean-up efforts as well as close coordination and


                                                    11
                         communication to avoid any potential adverse impacts. It is expected
                         that in order to address the specific needs of vulnerable groups the local
                         Civic Initiative Groups and/ or local NGOs shall be the key actors to
                         support the community mobilization activities and information sessions.
                         It is also worth mentioning, that seasonal workers for Agency Moldsilva
                         are usually local citizens.

                         Local inhabitants around the project areas will be also affected by and
                         benefit from the proposed activities. The population will benefit from
                         wetland reconstruction and environmental restoration. The particular
                         focus shall be made on the fact that wetland reconstruction improves
                         biodiversity by providing habitats for various species, and contributes to
                         water purification and the maintenance of water quality, assist with
                         flood control, helps to prevent erosion, and store carbon, which plays a
                         significant role in reducing climate change impacts.

                         The entire population of the Dniester River basin will benefit from the
                         results of removal of different pollutants (nutrients, sediment,
                         coliforms, pesticides, heavy metals to in at least 2,700 hectares of
                         restored landscape and of improvement of nearly 19,000 hectares of
                         landscapes through sustainable agroforestry systems and silvopastoral
                         practices.

Land owners              Land owners (LPAs, business and local population) will benefit from
                         both restored local ecosystems and SPMP work (including pilot
                         demonstration sites) focusing on innovative NBS-filled practices for
                         nutrient pollution prevention and reduction of at nearly 12,800 hectares
                         of landscapes. Separate consultations shall be done with LPAs and local
                         inhabitants prior restoration work in order to ensure that the actions on
                         planting do not interfere with current areas used for pasture of cattle,
                         or to provide an alternative for local population/private landowners.

Local            public Local public administration shall be trained to provide operational and
administration          technical work that will contribute to activities at local / regional level
                        related to related to marine Pollution Management, NBS, Landscape
                        Restoration, Watershed Management, Forest/Wetland Conservation,
                        and community engagement etc. Whereas referring to LPA, it shall be
                        mentioned that both level I (mayoralty) and level II (district councils)
                        shall be involved.

                         In addition, LPAs shall assume the relevant responsibilities, according to
                         legislation in force related to land management within the post
                         implementation phase of project, based on achieved results, and will
                         secure that the works that were undertaken by the project are
                         sustainable and in compliance with recommended measures, included
                         the reception of works acts.




                                               12
Other Interested Parties: individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts from the
Project but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected by the project and/or who could
affect the project and the process of its implementation in some way, reflected in Table below.

   Other Interested Parties                               Interest in the Project
                               Government of the Republic of Moldova
 Ministry of Environment          Central environmental authority responsible drafting and
                                  enforcing of policy and legal framework related to protection,
                                  restoration and promoting of sustainable use of wetlands and
                                  terrestrial ecosystems. The Ministry shall contribute to
                                  formulation of norms and actions needed for institutional
                                  framework analysis, elaboration of regulations and secondary
                                  regulatory framework, elaboration of guidance documents needed
                                  for river basin pollution management, etc. All the policy and legal
                                  documents developed within the project shall be consulted in
                                  accordance with the main stages of ensuring transparency in the
                                  decision-making process established by the provisions of Law no.
                                  239/2008 on transparency in the decision-making process.

 Agency Moldsilva; Agency         Technical staff of Agency Apele Moldovei, Forestry Agency
 Apele Moldovei, State            Moldsilva, ICAS, State Forestry Enterprises, and other interested
 Hydrometeorological              parties shall be involved in activities and will apply knowledge and
 Service, Forest Research and     skills related to proper planning and implementation of activities
 Management institute;            such as wetland restoration, afforestation/reforestation and
 Environmental Protection         riverbank revegetation. Staff of these environmental authorities
 Inspectorate.                    shall as well benefit of capacity building and knowledge
                                  enhancement programs on NBS and marine pollution reduction.

 Ministry of Agriculture and      Central state authority responsible for policy and legislation
 Food Industry                    development in the areas of its competence according to approved
                                  regulation on functioning. Competences related to present project
                                  include production of products of plant and animal origin; selection
                                  and breeding in animal husbandry; food safety; development and
                                  organization of agricultural and agri-food markets; rural
                                  development programs; agricultural consultancy; land
                                  improvements and land fund. Policy and normative activities
                                  under component 1,1 shall be reviewed and consulted, where
                                  applicable, with the Ministry, according to legal documents
                                  endorsement procedure
 Ministry of Infrastructure       Central state authority, responsible for policy and legislation
 and Regional Development         development in the areas of its competence, according to
                                  approved regulation on functioning, competences related to
                                  present project include development of the field of land use and
                                  urban planning, strengthening the capacity of water supply and
                                  sewerage service providers, Increasing investments in water
                                  supply and sanitation infrastructure, sewerage and wastewater
                                  treatment in small towns. Regional infrastructure development.
                                  Policy and normative activities under component 1.1 shall be
                                  reviewed and consulted, where applicable, with the Ministry,
                                  according to legal documents endorsement procedure.



                                                  13
Geodesy, Cartography and Central administrative authority that ensures the implementation
Cadastre Agency          of state policy in the assigned fields of activity: geodesy,
                         cartography, geoinformatics and remote sensing, spatial data
                         infrastructure, real estate cadastre and real estate valuation.
                         Agency shall be involved in any activities related to change of land
                         status, cartography and spatial data, if needed for activities under
                         the project component 1 and 2.



National Food Safety Agency        Central public authority, that ensures the implementation of state
                                   policy in the assigned fields, more particularly for phytosanitary
                                   and plant protection control and regulation. Agency shall be
                                   involved as the key actor under the project component related to
                                   control over the nutrient pollution
                               Research and applied science Institutions
Institute for Ecology and          Leading institute on Science, Research and Monitoring of
Geography within State             Environmental Protection and geography related issues. The
University of Moldova              institute can provide data and perform necessary research and
                                   environmental monitoring and pollutants monitoring within the
                                   project area. Also, the institute has the database related to
                                   protected areas, habitat, endangered species, etc
Institute Gradina Botanica         Leading research institutions on plants species, can provide
Institute      of     Genetics, expertise necessary to afforestation and restoration of biodiversity
Physiology        and       Plant (plants and vegetation) activities within specific project
Protection within State components.
University of Moldova
Institute of Zoology within Research activities in the zoology sphere, that can provide
State University of Moldova expertise and necessary data related to impact upon animal
                                   regnum, particularly on the impacts associated to restoration of
                                   pasture and silvopastoral activities, within the Component 2.2
Universities and colleges The higher education institutions, that prepare the environmental,
with faculty / departments agriculture, and forestry /silviculture specialists will be involved
that prepare environmental, in project related activities on both educational, research, but also
agriculture, and forestry in the implementation of activities on spot, in order to train and
/silviculture specialists          educate the pool of future specialists in the fields connected to
                                   project. It is planned that colleges from regions of Moldova will be
                                   part of these interventions as well.
                     Civil society associations, donors and business associations
Congress of Local Public           Association of Local Public Authorities (CALM), interested in
Authorities (CALM) /               implementation of similar initiatives nationally, supporting the
Regional Public Authorities        mainstreaming of the biodiversity conservation, pollutant
associations                       reduction and water quality improvement activities for the benefit
                                   of local communities. Important actor in the process of
                                   transparency procedure on policy and normative document
                                   formulation, cooperation with local mayors.
Associations of water users In accordance with the Law of Associations of Water Users for
for irrigation (AUAI)              Irrigation (hereinafter Law no. 171/2010), AUAI is established for
                                   the purpose of administration, exploitation and maintenance, in
                                   the public interest and in the interest of its members, of the
                                   irrigation system, which was at the basis of its formation. The



                                                  14
                                 project shall consult particularly and involve members of
                                 associations in the process of implementation of the component
                                 2.1. The list of associations can be found here
                                 https://www.apelemoldovei.gov.md/pageview.php?l=ro&idc=147
Municipal                        The municipal enterprises, where existing, shall be involved in
enterprises/facilities     on    project activities related to wetland restoration, the nitrate
wastewater          /sewerage    pollution monitoring and shall contribute to the project activities
treatment                        with expertise and supporting of some of civil works.
Association of rural farmers /   Associations shall be involved in decision-making process and can
association of agricultural      potentially with the view of landscape restoration activities,
producers                        sustainable land management and agriculture-related project
                                 interventions. As well the association will be involved in project
                                 component related to wetland restoration and can potentially
                                 provide services and necessary equipment needed for various civil
                                 works, included in project design.
Non-governmental                 The variety of national and local associations, working in
organizations                    environmental protection, sustainable and community
                                 development and other connected areas are viewed as important
                                 players, that influence decision-makers towards environmentally
                                 friendly solutions and also inspire and motivate society to act and
                                 demand meaningful environmental protection, consistent to
                                 protection of interest of vulnerable groups and local communities.
                                 General interest in the implementation success of project
                                 activities; policy and technical implementation input/feedback;
                                 interest in representing local community interest or act as
                                 contractors. The preliminary list of potential NGOs can be found in
                                 annex to present SEP.
National and local media         Interest in reflecting project implementation and keeping the
                                 general public up to date on investment project progress. Also
                                 mass media, particularly regional one shall be the channel for
                                 communication (both written press and online platforms). The list
                                 of potential mass -media agencies can be found in the annex to
                                 present SEP, yet it shall be updated based on those who have
                                 broadcast license.
Bilateral and International      Ministry of Environment hosts an environment and climate change
Donors                           donor coordination councils, created based on Minister Decree nr.
                                 45 dated 12 March 2024, that regularly meets and discussed the
                                 priorities, synergies and potential cooperations among various
                                 donors. The project interventions shall be presented as a part of
                                 Information and coordination activity in order to maximize
                                 development impacts.




                                                15
       3.3. Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups
Within the Project, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include but are not limited and to the
following: persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the
project(s) as compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status and that may require
special engagement efforts to ensure their equal representation in the consultation and decision-
making process associated with the project(s).


The table below describes vulnerable or disadvantaged groups within Project Area of Influence:
 Vulnerable/Disadvantaged Groups         Barriers to Accessing Information or Project Benefits
 Persons with Disabilities and           Physical accessibility barriers for notifications (audio, visual,
 Caretakers                              assistive technologies), communication challenges, and stigma
 Elderly People                          Limited digital literacy, limited mobility, hearing impairments
 Low-Income Communities                  Limited access to technology, lack of awareness about project
                                         benefits
 Remote Rural Communities                Remote rural communities, with low density of population,
                                         mainly only elderly inhabitants, with limited access to
                                         technology and information, restricted internet, and mobile
                                         network coverage
 Roma communities and other              Language barriers, cultural differences
 minorities
 Women-Headed Households                 Limited access to resources, potential gender-based
                                         discrimination
 Children                                Limited understanding of risks, dependence on caregivers for
                                         information
 Refugees and foreigners                 Limited familiarity with local context, potential language and
                                         cultural barriers, weak integration within local communities
 Sexual and Gender Minorities            Social stigma, potential discrimination, and limited awareness
 Farmers                                 Potential loss of land access due to project activities and as a
                                         result potential loss of seasonal income, limited awareness of
                                         project benefits
 Forest resource users                   Potential restrictions on access to forested areas, and lack of
                                         representation in decision-making about resource management


Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the Project may be added, further confirmed,
and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate.




                                                 16
    4. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM
        4.1 Summary of Stakeholder engagement done during the project
        preparation

During its preparatory phase the project concept has been consulted with a broad variety of key
national stakeholders (including the representatives of authorities, subordinated agencies, local
public authorities, research/academia, business, and civil society institutions and community
representatives).
At the same time, during the period of September 2-13, 2024, the implementing agencies and the
World Bank team conducted site visits and met with key stakeholders, including Local Public
Administration officials (mayors and officers in potential project sites), State Forestry Enterprises, local
business representatives (local winery and cement factory), Forest Research and Management
Institute (ICAS Chisinau), non-governmental organizations (NGOs), as well as local community
members (local forest rangers, farmers, shepherds and other villagers) (see Annex 1 for the list of key
stakeholders met). Stakeholders expressed broader support to the project. Key feedback relevant to
E&S issues from stakeholders are summarized as follows, which will be incorporated and considered
in the project design and implementation.
a)      Capacity of Agency Moldsilva and other relevant state agencies: Stakeholders see the strong
need for capacity building of Agency Moldsilva, AAM and other relevant agencies (including their local
branches) to fill the gaps in their budgetary and human resources and technical expertise in
restoration of degraded ecosystems exacerbated by climate change.
b)       Coordination with local administration, local pastoral and agricultural activities: While a
significant percentage of forests, pastoral areas and wetlands are under the control/ownership of local
administration, stakeholders highlighted the importance of collaboration with local administration.
Also, mayors requested close coordination with local farmers to minimize potential conflict with their
pastoral and agricultural activities (such as potential disruption to grazing activities and potential
damages to forestation caused by cattle).
c)      Community awareness and engagement: One of the Mayors informed that her local
communities understand the long-term value of reforestation for future generations, which is one of
the key local development strategies. She said that the local communities and businesses will fully
support such activities through providing workforce, volunteer works (cleaning, maintenance,
monitoring, etc) and awareness raising.
d)      Equipment and OHS: Mayors highlighted the need for equipment to facilitate such activities
(such as tractors, trimmers for weeds and branches), which would also require PPE and relevant risk
mitigations.
e)      Local GRM: Mayors informed that the local administration offices have a functional grievance
mechanism with different uptake channels to address grievances of the local communities, including
electronic platform, website, email and facebook account.
f)      Private sector participation: A Mayor promised to discuss with the local cement company (as
a shareholder) regarding their support and financial and in-kind contribution to the project's execution
(such as workforce, community volunteer, provision of food/tea services, awareness-raising). While a
local winery owner highlighted the significant adverse impact of climate change on wine harvest
(reduction of 50% in 2024 compared to 2023), he expressed strong support to the project. He
requested the project to consider the timing of project activities to avoid busy seasons for winery
workers.




                                                    17
g)      Engagement of NGOs: While NGOs are playing key role in community engagement (including
tree planting, wetland revitalization, support to school education/tree planting by children,
knowledge-sharing/study tours, and other community awareness/engagement), their
budgetary/human resources are limited. They see strong need for buy-in and commitment of local
mayors and robust awareness raising of community members to make the project more sustainable
and inclusive (their forestation activities are not always supported/participated by local leaders and
communities). They also highlighted the need for promoting free market for seedling.
Additionally, the Ministry of Environment, in collaboration with Moldsilva, regularly holds
consultations with the community representatives to actively involve them in the selection of project
sites designated for river restoration activities under the Project.Next, the Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP) for “Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention” (Moldova ReMaP P505546)
project public consultation meeting was organized by the Ministry of Environment of the Republic of
Moldova in hybrid format on October 4th, 2024.

Chaired by Aliona Rusnac, State Secretary for Environment, the meeting gathered the
representatives of central public authority on Environment (division on water resources, division on
biodiversity), the subordinated agencies, representatives of local public authorities (at district level),
NGO representatives, project experts and the World Bank team.

Iordanca-Rodica Iordanov, project lead expert has presented the summary of key project
components, including the detailed description of sub-components, the proposed indicators, both
qualitative and quantitative ones. She has also pointed out that proposed interventions shall benefit
of ha of improved land management, and also shall also secure the project activities are consistent
with other key policy documents provisions and Governmental interventions within the connected
areas, that are envisaged to be synergistic to the present project.

Next, Tatiana Echim, project expert has presented the purpose of SEP, that has been shared with all
the invited participants prior the event. She has pointed out that SEP identifies the main project-
affected and interested stakeholders of the Project and describes their interests and engagement
needs in relation to the project. The SEP identifies the context under which relevant national law and
World Bank requirements for stakeholder engagement and information disclosure are to be applied,
and it also proposes actionable engagement measures to be undertaken during project
implementation.

A special focus has as well been provided on the project-level Grievance Mechanism designed to
facilitate receipt and response to feedback and concerns associated with the project.

Major questions were raised on components related to land selection, post-implementation
measures, the nitrate pollution and data on fertilizers use.

At the end it was concluded that SEP shall be modified accordingly and will include the following
additional information:

    -   Affected parties and interested parties- to supplement the list with National Food Safety
        Agency with its specific functions related to fertilizers import / production control and
        Educational institutions (higher and college level), with their particular roles under training
        and capacity building activities.
    -   At SEP Action plan – to specify the monitoring and post-implementation of interventions
        measures and obligations that the land owners (public sector will have)




                                                   18
        4.2 Summary of project stakeholders needs and methods, tools and
            techniques for stakeholder engagement

The project intends to utilize various engagement methods as part of its continuous interaction with
stakeholders. To ensure effectiveness and meaningfulness, a range of techniques tailored to identified
stakeholder groups will be applied. Methods for consulting with officials may differ from those used
for liaising with local communities.

Every consultation activity should meet general accessibility requirements, such as being held at easily
reachable venues without long commutes. They should also be culturally appropriate, respecting local
customs and norms, and inclusive of all segments of society, including disabled persons, the elderly,
minorities, and other vulnerable individuals. If necessary, logistical assistance should be provided to
enable participation from remote areas, individuals with limited physical abilities, and those with
insufficient financial or transportation means to attend public meetings scheduled by the project.

Ensuring the participation of vulnerable individuals and groups in project consultations may require
the implementation of tailored techniques. Since their vulnerable status may lead to diffidence,
reluctance, or physical incapacity to participate in large-scale community meetings, visiting them at
home or holding separate small group discussions at an easily accessible venue can help reach out to
groups who may otherwise be insufficiently represented at community gatherings.

The suggested methods would be used to communicate and consult with the stakeholders:
    •   Online Platform. A dedicated webpage/online platform will be created for the project to
        enable users to find all the information about the project. The goal of the platform is to
        provide core information about the project and to ensure accessible online feedback from
        project direct and indirect beneficiaries, stakeholders, interested parties. The platform shall
        support as well citizen engagement activities. The platform will also be used to publish the
        project documents for specific project components and activities, and other relevant
        information related to project implementation. The platform will be used to support face-to-
        face consultations through digital feedback surveys at regular intervals, and will provide a
        dedicated portal for the identified sub-projects to inform the population and engage them in
        providing feedback and support monitoring through the implementation cycle. All public
        consultations events will be advertised through this platform. The platform’s outreach will be
        guaranteed by ensuring that links with various websites of relevant entities (Ministry of
        Environment, subordinated environmental agencies, LPA) are developed and outreach will be
        done through social media to make sure citizens can easily find and access the platform.

    •   Public Consultations / virtual consultations. Consultations have been and will continue to be
        organized during the project design stage and the project implementation. Public
        consultations will be organized for any documents that request such procedure. Moreover,
        public consultations will be held on an ongoing basis as part of the citizen engagement process
        during the project cycle.


    •   Seminars, Trainings and Workshops. The technical workshops/trainings with experts and
        relevant staff and beneficiaries will be organized as a part of capacity building project activities
        on a range of topics, related to river basin Pollution Management, NBS, Landscape
        Restoration, Watershed Management, Forest and Wetland Conservation, etc. The developed



                                                    19
    training modules will be formalized and provided to the suitable departments and structural
    units of the Ministry of Environment, and the appropriate personnel of the Ministry will be
    trained as well. The seminars and working meetings with various authorities and interested
    parties will be held to consult on the revision and development of new policies and normative
    documents, as a part of project component 1. Also several workshops with local stakeholders
    will be carried out. Other topics relevant for these workshops will be identified during project
    implementation.

•   On-spot job trainings – component envisaged to provide skill and knowledge necessary for
    some small-scale works under the Component 1 and 2, mainly directed towards additional
    workers and volunteers from local communities.


•   Beneficiary Surveys The surveys/opinion polls will be advertised and conducted regularly
    through the online platform. The local snapshots will accompany the survey, aim to reach
    those who are not able to provide online feedback and consist of phone conversations, focus
    groups and door-to-door visits conducted by contracted company.
•   In-depth interviews with relevant experts. Expert’s views and recommendations on various
    project issues and challenges are valuable and have been conducted as part of various project
    activities.
•   Leaflets/ informative notes. Leaflets with information that might present more interest for
    affected parties, such as the benefits of proposed investments, will be developed and distributed
    in the meetings/ public consultations/ public institutions
•   Information boards. Establish Information Boards in each sub-Project area, in the communities
    that will benefits by investments. On these information boards will be placed the information
    related to the Project, relevant for every phase of Project implementation.
•   Letters. The letters will be an instrument used in order to facilitate the Project implementation
    process through good collaboration between the implementing entities and other stakeholders.
•   Reports. The regular reports will be prepared and used to monitor the Project implementation
    and to keep informed the main stakeholders of the Project.
•   E-mails. To facilitate communication.
•   GRM. GRM will be established in line with the World Bank’s ESS-10 requirements. A dedicated
    grievance mechanism will be set up for the Project. The stakeholders will be able to raise
    grievances anonymously by phone or online or using the project digital platform.
•   Grievance Log - where grievances, including those delivered through the online platform, are
    registered (including grievance delivered by letter mail or in writing) and maintained, followed
    up and resolved through a database.




                                              20
     4.3 Stakeholder engagement plan


Project Stage    Estimated Date/Time               Topic of Consultation/ Message                    Method Used               Target Stakeholders        Responsibilities
                        Period

Preparatory         Prior to project        Overall project design, implementation                   Focus groups/                       All              CAPMU
   stage               appraisal            arrangements, issues with current status of      interviews/workshops/ public                                 NOEPI
                                            project documents; defining of the                     consultations/field                                    Ministry of
                                            geographical project areas of intervention;      visits/announcement at MoE                                   Environment
                                            proposed project improvements,                              website
                                            accessibility and mobility in the project area

                                                                                             Emails, letters to stakeholders             All              CAPMU
                As soon as each             Stakeholder consultation on all draft
                                                                                             with appropriate background                                  NOEPI
                individual deliverable is   documents:
                                                                                              information and SEP, posting                                Ministry of
                completed/ the
                                            ESCP                                             on the Platform/ MoE website                                 Environment
                documents are
                                            SEP (including GRM)                                       for feedback
                elaborated
                The documents will be
                available to the public
                for a period of 15 days
                to provide comments
                and suggestions
                                                                                                    Focus groups/                Communities and          Ministry of
                During preparation          Consultations with stakeholders for
                                                                                                  interviews/ public           local citizens living in   Environment
                stage                       selection project sites
                                                                                                  consultations/field            the project areas        Moldsilva
                                                                                                     visits/letters                 NGOs, CSOs
                                                                                               Meetings/ official letters      World Bank, Agency CAPMU
                Before Project              Presentation of the results from a socio-
                                                                                                                                Moldsilva; Agency  NOEPI
                implementation              economic survey, along with a discussion on
                                                                                                                                 Apele Moldovei,   Ministry of
                                            enhancing stakeholder engagement and
                                                                                                                                       State       Environment
                                            environmental and social management
                                                                                                                               Hydrometeorological
                                            based on the findings.
                                                                                                                                  Service, Forest



                                                                                    21
 Project Stage    Estimated Date/Time              Topic of Consultation/ Message                  Method Used            Target Stakeholders      Responsibilities
                         Period

                                                                                                                              Research and
                                                                                                                              Management
                                                                                                                                 institute;
                                                                                                                             Environmental
                                                                                                                                Protection
                                                                                                                              Inspectorate.
Project          As soon as each             Public outreach       and  communications Emails, letters for background     MoE, its                 NOEPI
implementation   individual deliverable is   consultancy;                              information; meetings;             subordinated             Ministry of
Stage            completed (ESMP, SEP        Beneficiary feedback survey               deliverable                        institutions and         Environment
                 including GRM)                                                        presentations/workshops;           others relevant
                                             ESMP                                      presentation on the dedicated      National Authorities
                                             SEP (including GRM)                       project website/Facebook           (MAFI, Ministry of
                                                                                       page                               Infrastructure and
                                             Seek common understanding/agreement                                          Regional
                                             on the component deliverables by direct                                      Development,
                                             beneficiaries/stakeholders                                                   Cadastre, etc
                                             Understand and comments on                                                   LPA (I) and LPA (II)
                                             environmental and social impacts                                             NGOs;
                                                                                                                          Mass-media
                                             Land related process (land status; wetland,                                  general public from
                                             GIS measurements, livelihood restoration)                                    localities involved in
                                                                                                                          the project
                                             Health & Safety issues.
                                             Employment opportunities;
                                             Project status.
                                             GRM mechanism.
                 Annually                    Citizen satisfaction with the level of        Online survey (via Platform)   LPA, /residents of       NOEPI, MoE
                                             engagement                                                                   the project area/
                                                                                           In-depth   interviews/   focus
                                                                                                                          business owners/
                                                                                           groups
                                                                                                                          /NGOs representing




                                                                                      22
Project Stage   Estimated Date/Time             Topic of Consultation/ Message                      Method Used            Target Stakeholders     Responsibilities
                       Period

                                                                                            Beneficiary feedback survey    the vulnerable
                                                                                                                           groups and
                                                                                                                           representatives of
                                                                                                                           the vulnerable
                                                                                                                           groups
                Month 9/year 1            Content of draft manual and training              Workshops / expert meetings/   Research institutions   NOEPI, MoE
                                          curriculum on NBS                                 / Emails, letters used to      Technical staff of
                                          Technical specifications for                      provide background             MoE, ICAS, SAAP,
                                          procurement of installation of                    information;                   LPAs reps
                                          necessary tools, software, and
                                                                                                                           Equipment final
                                          equipment. Provision of cost-effective            Meetings / Emails
                                                                                                                           beneficiaries
                                          solutions, identification of priority list
                Throughout project life   Sustainable agricultural practices and            Online platform; Surveys & Local community             NOEPI, MoE
                                          restoration activities. Community                 Questionnaire                  representatives,
                                          involvement in the selection of project                                          LPAs
                                                                                            Public    hearings/      Press
                                          sites, design and implementation of                                              NGOs
                                                                                            releases;
                                                                                                                           Vulnerable and
                                          the river restoration activities including
                                          in reforestation and afforestation                Information   boards      with disadvantaged
                                                                                            brochures/posters/leaflets;    groups
                                          activities, wetland revitalization, habitat
                                          restoration, and clean-up efforts                 Public meetings;

                                          Developing the mechanism for
                                          identification and targeting of
                                          disadvantaged /most affected community
                                          representatives
                Throughout project life   Planning of activities such as wetland Online platform; Surveys & ICAS, SAAM,            NOEPI, MoE
                                          restoration, riverbank revegetation, Questionnaire                research institutions,
                                                                                                                           Local community
                                                                                                                           representatives,



                                                                                       23
Project Stage   Estimated Date/Time          Topic of Consultation/ Message                  Method Used           Target Stakeholders   Responsibilities
                       Period

                                       afforestation     and      small       river Public      hearings/    Press LPAs
                                       revitalization.                              releases;                      NGOs

                                       Content and approach towards Testing/piloting of activities
                                       elaboration     of       comprehensive Video tutorials
                                       landscape restoration plans (LRPs)
                                       based on NBS principles.               Information     boards with
                                                                                    brochures/posters/leaflets;
                                       Citizen satisfaction with the level of
                                                                              Public meetings;
                                       engagement and

                                       GRM

                                       Community health and safety measures
                                       during operation phase;

                Throughout project life Particularities and approach to be taken Online platform; Surveys & ICAS, SAAM,                   NOEPI, MoE
                                        for sustainable agroforestry systems and Questionnaire                     research institutions,
                                        silvopastoral practices as a part of Public                                Local community
                                                                                            hearings/        Press
                                        measures to reduce nutrient runoff and releases;                           representatives,
                                                                                                                   LPAs
                                        enhance erosion control, as well as to
                                                                                 Testing/piloting of activities    NGOs
                                       lower local budget inputs for flood
                                       mitigation                          Video tutorials

                                       Demonstration of integrated nutrient Information boards with
                                       management        plans     and      the brochures/posters/leaflets;
                                       implementation        of      landscape Public meetings;
                                       restoration strategies focusing on
                                       agroforestry/silvopastoral practices and




                                                                           24
  Project Stage    Estimated Date/Time        Topic of Consultation/ Message                   Method Used             Target Stakeholders   Responsibilities
                          Period

                                         other innovative Nature Based Solution
                                         for nutrient pollution reduction.

                  After project          Importance of maintenance of project Public meetings                          Local communities     NOEPI, MoE
 Post
                  completion             outcomes                                                                      Local business and
 implementation
                                                                               Review of reporting under the           farmers
 phase                                   Implementation of integrated nutrient strategy implementation
                                         management        plans       and     the
                                         implementation         of       landscape Monitoring visits
                                         restoration strategies
                                                                                       Face-to face discussions with
                                         Benefits to local communities and local local communities
                                         business/job opportunities

                  After project          Importance of stipulating both technical and Monitoring visits                LPAs                  MoE
                  completion             legal measures for proper public land
                                         management and maintenance of achieved
                                         results under the works within the reception
                                         of works acts.

                                         Securing the monitoring         of    post-
                                         implementation of project



       4.4 Reporting back to stakeholders

Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops, including reporting on project environmental and social performance and implementation of the
stakeholder engagement plan and Grievance Mechanism, and on the project’s overall implementation progress.




                                                                              25
    5. RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING
       STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
5.1. Resources

The NOEPI will be in charge of stakeholder engagement activities. A part of the costs related to staff,
responsible for SEP implementation, along with associated costs (such as local travel, communication,
etc) shall be included under the main project budget.

The preliminary budget for the SEP implementation is US$$244,950 and is included in project
components.
Budget Category                 Quantity   Unit Costs Times/Years Total Costs               Remarks

2. Events
2a. Project launch event           1        $6000          1 year    $6000        Kick-off event of the project

2b. Community consultation        20        $1000          4 years   $20,000    Meetings to gather community
meetings                                                                              input and feedback
2c. Beneficiary survey             2        $1500     Year 2/Year    $3000      Working seminars to present the
presentation                                               4                    mid and final project beneficiary
                                                                                         survey results
2d. Focus group discussions        2        $1800          4 years   $9000         In-depth discussions with
                                                                                  targeted groups for detailed
                                                                                            insights
2e. Closing event                  1        $8000          4 year    $8000      Event to mark the conclusion of
                                                                                        project activities
3. Communication
campaigns
3a. Posters and flyers           2500        $10           4 years   $25,000        Design and distribution of
campaign                                                                           promotional materials/info
                                                                                        materials/boards
3b. Social media campaign         10         $800          4 years   $8000      Online promotion through social
                                                                                         media platforms
3c. Video spots/ reels            20        $1000          4 years   $20,000    Video reels and spots to promote
                                                                                  via online platform and social
                                                                                              media
4. Trainings
4a. Trainings under                3        $10,000    1-2 year      $30,000     Training sessions for relevant
component 1                                                                      stakeholders on component 1
4b. Training on component 2        6        $10,000    2-3 year      $60,000     Training sessions for relevant
                                                                                 stakeholders on component 2
4c. Training on component 3        2        $5,000     1-2 year      $10,000     Training sessions for relevant
                                                                                 stakeholders on component 3
5. Beneficiary surveys
5a. Mid-project perception         1        $20,000    1 survey      $20,000    Costs for conducting mid-project
survey                                                                                  perception survey
5b. End-of-project perception      1        $25,000    1 survey      $25,000      Costs for conducting end-of-
survey                                                                             project perception survey
6. Grievance Mechanism




                                                      26
6b. Suggestion/petition        30         $15          4 years      $450       Costs for procuring and installing
boxes                                                                                  suggestion boxes
6c. GM communication           1          $500         4 years      $500       Costs for designing and printing
materials                                                                           Grievance Mechanism
                                                                                  communication materials
TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:                              $244,950



5.2. Management functions and responsibilities

The entities responsible for carrying out stakeholder engagement activities are
    i)       National Office for Environmental Projects Implementation (NOEPI)
    ii)      Steering committee
    iii)     Contractors/Sub-contractors/Service Providers engaged by the project

The table below summarizes the key functions of various actors in the implementation of the SEP.
   Actor/ Consultant                                      Responsibilities
 MOE and the Project      • Overall project management
 Steering Committee       • Coordination across ministries and agencies
 (PSC)

 NOEPI Director           • Ensure proper implementation and follow up of the SEP.
                          • Ensure NOEPI employees are informed and trained on the SEP.
                          • Ensure the NOEPI ESS team reports on time and with the expected and agreed
                            points.
                          • Provide resources to ensure that interests of stakeholders are represented
                            and taken into consideration during implementation of SEP activities.

 Component Team           • Being responsible that the current SEP is implemented accordingly, and the
 Leaders                    stakeholders are involved at all levels. Additionally, upon necessity and
                            possibility additional stakeholders will be involved in the process of project
                            implementation; To collaborate with environmental and local authorities, to
                            present and consult the deliverables

 Project Environmental    As the primary interface between the Project and stakeholders, including the
 Specialist and Social    local community, the Environmental and Social Specialist will:
 Specialist
                          • Lead the SEP Plan design and implementation and coordinate the results and
                            actions to be taken with the Environmental Specialist and later with the
                            Subcontractor Team
                          • Review the SEP viability with the Environmental Specialist
                          • Lead day-to-day implementation of the SEP and Community Grievance
                            Mechanism, including proactively maintaining regular contact with affected
                            communities through regular community visits to monitor opinions and
                            provide updates on Project activities, and ensuring communication with
                            vulnerable groups.
                          • Produce stakeholder engagement monitoring reports and submit to Project
                            Implementation Team
                          • Supervise/monitor and coordinate activities with the Project management
                            Team to ensure that staff and all sub-contractors comply with the SEP.
                          • Manage the day-to-day working, utilization, implementation of SEP by all
                            parties engaged on the Program.
                          • Review the SEP ensuring compliance in terms of Environmental, Occupational
                            Health and Safety requirements and provide feedback to Social Development
                            Specialist




                                                  27
   Actor/ Consultant                                     Responsibilities
                            • Maintain the project Grievance Redress Mechanism and ensuring that it
                              functions throughout the project cycle

    Contractors/Subcontr    • Comply with requirements stated under this document - Non-compliance will
    actors/Service            be treated as a disciplinary matter.
    Providers engaged by    • Provide assistance if needed to ensure compliance with this plan.
    the project             • Perform assigned tasks towards meeting SEP objectives.
                            • Communicate concerns, questions or views to their supervisor or the MOER
                              Social Development and Environmental Specialist.
                            • Provide data related to SEP performance/monitoring as required.

 Project-Affected Parties   • Provide feedback/comments on the implementation arrangements and on the
 and Other interested         stakeholder engagement process through the SEP and GRM in particular.
 parties



The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through regular reports.


        6. GRIEVANCE MECHANISM
The main objective of a GM is to assist to resolve complaints and grievances in a timely, effective,
and efficient manner that satisfies all parties involved.

6.1. Description of GM

Addressing grievances raised by individual affected by World Bank-funded projects is an important
component of managing project risks and for mitigation strategies. The GRM can serve as an effective
tool for early identification, assessment and resolution of grievances and therefore for strengthening
accountability to beneficiaries. The GRM is an important feedback mechanism that can improve
project impact and respond to concerns and grievances of project-affected parties related to the
environmental and social performance of the project in a timely manner. With restrictions on
movement, it is important that, where possible, staff managing grievances can access systems and
work remotely to enable processes to work effectively.
The SEP will keep the local communities and other stakeholders informed about the project’s
activities. The grievance mechanism for project workers required under ESS2 will be provided
separately.


 Step                               Description of Process                    Time      Responsibility
                                                                             Frame
 GM                    The GRM will be established at 3 levels:             Regularly      NOEPI,
 implementation        Level 1. Local level.                                             responsible
 structure             The ESSS within NOEPI will be responsible for                        staff
                       collecting the grievance from local residents.
                       Technical supervisor within NOEPI will be
                       responsible for collecting the grievance from
                       Contractor`s employees.




                                                   28
Step                Description of Process                   Time   Responsibility
                                                            Frame
       The channels for grievance submission will be
       disclosed.
       For local citizens the petition boxes within LPAs
       mayoralty offices shall be used, along with
       written submission and online notification.

       For Contractor, special grievance box and e-mail
       will be available for submitting grievances
       (including anonymous). The technical supervisor
       will responsible for collecting grievances from
       community members and Contractor`s
       personnel.
       The GRM will be also accessible on the online
       Platform and linked with NOEPI web site
       www.onipm.gov.md.

       Level 2. Project implementation unit within
       NOEPI. the complainant will be able to submit
       grievance to PIU on:
       online Platform: - link
       e-mail: cancelaria@onipm.gov.md
       postal address:
       Str. Gheorghe Tudor 5, etajul 4, mun. Chisinau,
       MD-2028
       Tel.: 068 222 249

       Level 3. Ministry of Environment
       Complainants may fill in online form following
       the provided platform link or fill in the template
       (Annex 4) and send to:
       online Platform: - link
       e-mail: cancelaria@mediu.gov.md
       postal address: MD-2004 mun. Chişinău,
       Bd. Ștefan Cel Mare Și Sfânt 162
       Tel:(022) 204-587;

       The term of response will not exceed 10 working
       days. PIU will coordinate and monitor the
       responses to all complaints. The NOEPI will be
       able to extend the term of addressing grievance
       up to 20 working days (the complainant will be
       informed about extension).




                                   29
Step                            Description of Process                    Time     Responsibility
                                                                         Frame
Grievance uptake   Grievances can be submitted via the following                      NOEPI,
                   channels:                                                        responsible
                   • telephone                                                         staff
                   • E-mail
                   • Letter to Grievance focal points at local level
                         / LPA petition boxes
                   • Complaint form to be lodged via any of the
                         above channels
                   All the responsible personnel for GRM have to
                   fill the Grievance/inquiry template record Annex
                   2 for GRM Log.

Sorting,           Any complaint received is forwarded to legal         Upon       Local
processing         department of ONIPM, and categorized                 receipt of grievance
                   according                                            complaint focal points
Acknowledgment     The person receiving the complaint will              Within 2   Local
and follow-up      complete a grievance form and will record the        days of    grievance
                   complaint in the Register of Complaints, kept        receipt    focal points
                   under NOEPI. Then, the complaint is to be
                   submitted immediately to NOEPI Director.                        NOEPI
                   Once the investigation process has been                         responsible
                   established, the person responsible for                         staff
                   managing the GRM records enters this data into
                   the Register of Complaints, and informs the
                   complainant that his/her grievance was received
                   and the timeframe expected for the response.
                   The information provided to complainant would
                   also include, if required, the likely procedure if
                   complaints had to be escalated outside the unit
                   and the estimated timeline for each stage

                   Within one week of receiving the complaint,
                   NOEPI Executive Director must have forwarded
                   the complaint to the department/individual
                   expected to address it. In consultation with the
                   Project Coordinator, NOEPI Director is
                   responsible for determining who to direct the
                   complaint to, whether a complaint requires an
                   investigation (or not), and the timeframe to
                   respond to it.




                                               30
Step                          Description of Process                    Time      Responsibility
                                                                       Frame
                 When determining who will be the investigating
                 officer, the NOEPI Director should ensure that
                 there is no conflict of interest, i.e. all persons
                 involved in the investigation process should not
                 have any material, personal, or professional
                 interest in the outcome and no personal or
                 professional connection with complainants or
                 witnesses.
Verification,    This step involves gathering information about       Within 30   Complaint
investigation,   the grievance to determine the facts                 working     Committee
action           surrounding the issue and verifying the              days        established
                 complaint’s validity, and then developing a                      according to
                 proposed resolution. It is expected that many or                 NOEPI
                 most grievances would be resolved at this stage.                 regulation
                 All activities taken during this and the other
                 steps will be fully documented, and any
                 resolution logged in the register.
                 According to the National Law on complaints no.
                 190 dated July 19, 1994, with further
                 amendments, the complaints shall be examined
                 within 30 working days of the receipt of the
                 grievance. The person responsible for
                 investigating the complaint will gather facts in
                 order to generate a clear picture of the
                 circumstances surrounding the grievance. The
                 investigation/follow-up can include site visits,
                 review of documents and a meeting with those
                 who could resolve the issue.
                 The results of investigation and the proposed
                 response to the complainant will be presented
                 for consideration to EQIP’s Project Coordinator
                 who will decide on the course of action. Once a
                 decision has been made and the complainant
                 informed, the investigating specialist describes
                 the actions to be taken in the grievance form
                 (see Annex A), along with the details of the
                 investigation and the findings, and submits the
                 response to the corresponding NOEPI Director
                 for signing.




                                             31
Step                           Description of Process                     Time     Responsibility
                                                                         Frame
Monitoring and   Policies, procedures and regular updates on the                       NOEPI
evaluation       GRM system will be made available for all                          responsible
                 stakeholders. The NOEPI will regularly track and                       staff
                 monitor the status of complaints to ensure that
                 all grievances are resolved within the
                 established time-frame. The PIU will also
                 provide and publish reports available to the
                 World Bank team, and all stakeholders that
                 would contain the following information:

                 •       Status of establishment of the GRM
                 (procedures, staffing, awareness building, etc.);
                 •       Quantitative data on the number of
                 complaints received, the number that were
                 relevant, and the number resolved;
                 •       Qualitative data on the type of
                 complaints and answers provided, issues that
                 are unresolved;
                 •       Time taken to resolve complaints;
                 •       Any issues faced with the
                 procedures/staffing or use;
                 •       Factors that may be affecting the use of
                 the GRM/beneficiary feedback system;
                 •       Any corrective measures
                 suggested/adopted.
Provision of     This step involves informing those who have               30          NOEPI
feedback         raised complaints, concerns or grievances the           working    responsible
                 resolutions to the issues they have raised.              days          staff
                 Whenever possible, complainants should be
                 informed of the proposed resolution in person,
                 which gives them the opportunity ask follow-up
                 questions. If the complainant is not satisfied
                 with the resolution, he or she will be informed
                 of further options

                 The complainant will be informed about the
                 results of verification via letter, email or by post,
                 as received. The response shall be based on the
                 materials of the investigation and, if
                 appropriate, shall contain references to the
                 national legislation.




                                               32
 Step                              Description of Process                    Time     Responsibility
                                                                            Frame
                     The deadline for investigating the complaint
                     may be extended by 30 working days by the
                     corresponding Executive Director, and the
                     complainant is to be informed about this fact,
                     whether:

                     a)      additional consultations are needed to
                     provide response to the complaint;
                     b)      the complaint refers to a complex
                     volume of information and it is necessary to
                     study additional materials for the response.
 Training            Training needs for staff/consultants in the PIU,                    NOEPI,
                     Contractors, and Supervision Consultants will be                   Ministry of
                     done by NOPEI                                                     Environment
 If relevant,        Based on NOEPI internal regulation on payment                       NOEPI,
 payment of          reparation and national legislation at force.                      Ministry of
 reparations                                                                           Environment
 following
 complaint
 resolution

The GM provides an appeals process with three levels as described above if the complainant is not
satisfied with the proposed resolution of the complaint. Once all possible means to resolve the
complaint have been proposed and if the complainant is still not satisfied, then they should be advised
of their right to legal recourse.

The project will also have relevant measures in place to handle sensitive and confidential complaints,
including those related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment (SEA/SH) in line with the World
Bank ESF Good Practice Note on SEA/SH. The E&S specialists of the PIU will be trained to handle such
cases.

The World Bank and the Borrower do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against project
stakeholders who share their views about Bank-financed projects.



    7.MONITORING AND REPORTING
7.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported

The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary during the Project implementation to
ensure that the information presented remains consistent and up to date. The identified methods of
engagement will also be reviewed to ensure their appropriateness and effectiveness in the project
context and specific phases of development. Any major changes to project activities or schedule will
be reflected in the SEP.



                                                  33
Information on public engagement activities conducted by the Project throughout the year will be
shared with stakeholders through dedicated websites/platforms. This will include a summary of all
engagement activities, including details such as location, number of participants, and key points raised
during the meetings. Additionally NOEPI will provide recommended measures to address any issues
raised during these engagements.

Reports on stakeholder engagement activities will be prepared by the ESSS/NOEPI and will be shared
through email and/or physical versions to specific groups. Monthly summaries and internal reports on
public complaints, inquiries and incidents, together with the status of implementation of the
correction/prevention associated with the actions will be compiled by the responsible staff and sent
to the NOEPI. Monthly summaries will inform the number and nature of complaints and requests for
information, as well as the project's ability to address them in a timely and effective manner. The
quarterly report on stakeholder engagement will be prepared by the Social and Environmental
Specialist and submit it to the World Bank. In addition, these quarterly reports will be transmitted to
stakeholders in two possible ways:

•       Publication of an annual report on the project's interaction with stakeholders;
•       Regularly monitoring of some key SEP performance indicators as follows.


The SEP includes Key Performance Indicators (KPIs):

•      Number of community meetings. Indicator: the frequency and number of community
meetings held to discuss project progress, updates, and gather feedback.
•      Information boards and materials. Indicator: the number and visibility of information boards,
pamphlets, brochures, and other materials displayed in the community to disseminate project-related
information.
•      Level of stakeholder satisfaction. Indicator: stakeholder/beneficiary satisfaction surveys and
assessments to gauge overall satisfaction with the engagement process and perceived benefits.

The SEP includes Key monitoring activities.

•       A regular reporting schedule outlining the frequency and format of progress reports,
summarizing engagement activities, and highlighting key outcomes.
•       Conducting periodic surveys and interviews with stakeholders to gather in-depth insights into
their experiences, concerns, and suggestions regarding the project and engagement activities.
•       Conducting spot checks and site visits to assess the visibility and effectiveness of information
boards, community outreach materials, and the overall impact of engagement efforts.
•       Regular reviews and assessments by the project team to evaluate the implementation of the
Stakeholder Engagement Plan and identify areas for improvement.
•       Establishing stakeholder committees or advisory groups that actively participate in monitoring
and reviewing engagement activities, providing valuable input to enhance the engagement plan.

7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups

The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary in the course of project implementation.
[insert Quarterly or other] summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related
incidents, together with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventive actions, will
be collated by responsible staff and referred to the senior management of the project. The [quarterly
or other] summaries will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and nature of
complaints and requests for information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a timely



                                                  34
and effective manner. Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project during
the year may be conveyed to the stakeholders in various ways, that shall be additionally defined during
the project inception period.

To enhance transparency and accountability, minutes from all stakeholder consultations will be made
publicly available. These minutes will include detailed records of the discussions, issues raised by
participants, and the responses provided by the project team. By making this information public, we
ensure that stakeholders are aware of how their input is being considered and addressed, fostering
trust and collaboration.


    8.ANNEXES
Annex nr. 1 List of Key Stakeholders met during the World Bank and implementing
agencies mission in Moldova, September 2-13, 2024
Annex nr. 2 GRM forms
Annex nr. 3 List of NGOs
Annex nr. 4 List of Mass media
Annex nr. 5 Public consultation on SEP – 4 October 2024 List of participants




                                                  35
Annex nr. 1. List of Key Stakeholders met during the World Bank and
implementing agencies mission in Moldova, September 2-13, 2024
Ministry of Environment
   • Sergiu Lazarencu, Minister
   • Aliona Rusnac, State Secretary
   • Elena Boboc, Head of minister cabinet
   • Victoria Gratii, Head DPIWR
   • Vitalie Dragan, Head DPNCB
   • Iordanca-Rodica Iordanov, Associated expert/ Independent Consultant
   • Marius Cat, Head permitting department, Environmental Agency
   • Iulian Mamai, Deputy Director of Agency Moldsilva
   • Liviu Gumovschi, Executive Director, MACP/UCIMPA

NOEPI
   • Nicolae Arnaut, Interim Director
   • Veronica Ursu, Financial manager
   • Victoria Covali, Project manager (Prut river restoration)
   • Cristian Zestrea, Legal specialist

Agency Moldsilva and Agency Apele Moldovei
   • Radu Cazacu, deputy director AAM
   • Catalin Burghelea, Main Specialist, AAM

Forest Research and Management Institute (ICAS)
    • Ion Talmaci, Director, ICAS
    • Ghenardie Cojocaru, Division Chief, Moldsilva
    • Dumitru Galupa, Former Director/Leader researcher, ICAS

Local government and business representatives
    • Simion Tatarov, Mayor of Buciusca Village, Rezina District
    • Petrasca Aliona, Acting Mayor of Boscana Village, Criuleni District
    • Petru Cigoreanu, Mayor of Horesti Village, Ialoveni District
    • Andrei Braca, Mayor of Cirnatenii Noi Village, Causeni District
    • Liliana Bacal, Mayor of Salcuta Village, Causeni District
    • Ion Berzoi, Mayor of Bulboaca, Anenii Noi District
    • Sergiu Pislaru, Salcuta Winery Owner, Causeni District
    • Grigore and Vera Chirtoco, Local Moldsilva Enterprise, Solonceni Village, Rezina District

NGOs/CSOs
   • Gabriel Margineanu, SE Biotica
   • Alexandru Sainsus, Arboretum
   • Dorin Gritcan, 100 Frontieres




                                                 36
Annex nr. 2 GRM forms
     Grievance Registration Form

 Reference No:
 Note: you can remain anonymous if you prefer or request not to disclose your identity to the third
 parties without your consent. In case of anonymous grievances, the decision will be disclosed at the
 online Platform
 First Name _________________________________________
 Last Name __________________________________________


 ❏ I wish to raise my grievance anonymously

 ❏ I request not to disclose my identity without my consent
 ❏ Contact Information
 Please mark how you wish to be contacted (telephone, e-mail).
  ❏ By Telephone: _______________________________________________
  ❏ By E‑mail _______________________________________________
  ❏ I will follow up the resolution at the website as I want to remain anonymous
    Preferred Language for communication:             ❏ Romanian        ❏ Other (indicate)


 Description of Incident or Grievance (What happened? Where did it happen? Whom did it happen
 to? What is the result of the problem? Date of Incident/ Grievance)


 ❏ One-time incident/grievance (date _______________)
 ❏ Happened more than once (how many times? _____)


 Signature: _______________________________ Date: _______________________________
 Please return this form to: ONIPM, Str. Gheorghe Tudor 5, mun. Chișinău


Grievance/inquiry record

                                         GRIEVANCE/INQUIRY RECORD
                                                 (Form A)

 Instructions: This form is to be completed by staff receiving the inquiry or grievance and kept in the
 Project’s file. Attach any supporting documentation/letters as relevant.
 Date Grievance Received:                                        Name of Staff Completing Form:

 Grievance Received (check √):



                                                       37
□ National□ Oblast□ Rayon□ Village

Mode of Filing Inquiry or Grievance (check √):

 □ In person □ Telephone □ E-mail□ Phone Text Message □ Website



 □ Grievance/Suggestion box □ Community meeting □ Public consultation □ Other
Name of Person Raising Grievance: (information is optional and always treated as confidential)



Gender: □ Male □ Female
Address or contact information for Person Raising Grievance: (information is optional and confidential)


Location where grievance/problem occurred [write in]
National:                  Regional:             Rayon:                    Village:



Brief Description of Grievance or Inquiry: (Provide as much detail and facts as possible)


        Category 1           Social Safeguards

        Category 2           Environmental Safeguards

        Category 3           Grievances regarding violations of policies, guidelines and procedures

        Category 4           Grievances regarding contract violations

        Category 5           Grievances regarding the misuse of funds/lack of transparency, or other financial
                             management concerns

        Category 6           Grievances regarding abuse of power/intervention by project or government officials

        Category 7           Grievances regarding PIU staff performance

        Category 8           Reports of force majeure

        Category 9           Grievance about project interventions

        Category 10          Other
 Who should handle and follow up on the grievance:



 Progress in resolving the grievance (e.g answered, being resolved, settled):




                                                        38
       Annex nr. 3 List of NGOs


    Name of association                 Area of Interest/Mission                         Contact Information

                                               Environmental NGOs

PA EcoContact – Aarhus       EcoContact – Aarhus Center for Information         Mail: office@ecocontact.md
Center for Information and   and Consultation was registered on 2 August        Phone +373 (0)22 996 162
Consultation                 2010. The main areas of activity are: Public
                             participation and access to information on
                             environmental issues; waste management,
                             toxic waste (obsolete pesticides); water; soil
                             remediation; disaster risk reduction and
                             vulnerability ; support in drafting and
                             promoting of policy documents on the
                             environment at local and national levels,
                             drafting and implementation of environmental
                             legislation and laws for civil society

PA Biotica                   BIOTICA Ecological Society has been registered     E-mail: biotica.md@gmail.com
                             as a national NGO on April 2, 1993. BIOTICA has
                             three main areas of activity:                      Phone: +373 (22) 49 88 37
                             i)Biodiversity Conservation
                             ii)Development of «third sector»
                             iii) Environmental Law and Policy

                             Among the most important projects there are
                             the development of management plans
                             for Ramsar Sites in Moldova, the work towards
                             development of National Ecological Network of
                             Moldova, development of tourist routes in
                             Ramsar Sites, the assessment of the actual
                             state of the habitats along the Dniester;
                             publication of three books related to the
                             biodiversity conservation of this river

PA Eco-Tiras                 Eco-TIRAS International Environmental              Mail: ilyatrom@mail.ru
                             Association of River Keepers is created by
                             environmental NGOs of the Dniester River           Tel. 069121726
                             basin, shared by Moldova and Ukraine, to help
                             and advice authorities and population to
                             manage the river in sustainable way, using
                             Integrated River Basin Management Approach.
                             In present it unites 51 NGOs-members.
PA Ecovisio                  Grassroots non-profit organization from            Email: info@ecovisio.org
                             Moldova, founded in 1999. Mission: Creating a      Phone: +373 (0)79395303
                             vibrant community of changemakers by
                             connecting more and more people who want to
                             work on a prosperous future for the region

                             Focused on climate, agrifood, community
                             development, education and entrepreneurship
PA National Environmental    is a civil society public association founded on   E-mail cnm@environment.md
Center                       March 18, 2010, with the purpose of combining      Phone +373 (0)79 812 721



                                                         39
                                   the efforts of all stakeholders to address
                                   environment and climate change related issues.
                                   We aim to raise public awareness about these
                                   topics and, through a joint effort of all the
                                   actors in society, to mobilize citizens and to
                                   transform the classic development paradigm
                                   into the triad model of sustainability: balanced
                                   decision-making between economic, social, and
                                   environmental factors. We believe we can
                                   achieve this only by acting united. Therefore,
                                   we work together with partner NGOs, the
                                   media, educational institutions, local and
                                   municipal public authorities, central public
                                   authorities, and development partners.
Arboretum / LURENOM                Activities related to forest restoration, nursery    office@arboretum.live

                                                                                        +373 (68) 099958

Women’s Association for the        A national non-profit, Association that              E-mail mediu.afpmdd@gmail.com
Environment Protection and         contributes to promotion of sustainable              Phone +373 (0)78 001 026
        Sustainable                development in the social and economic areas;
  Development (AFPMDD)             helps to develop cooperation between
                                   Moldova and other countries in the
                                   environmental protection field.

PA Agenția pentru Dezvoltare       AO ADR "Habitat" is Rezina based, a non-profit       E-mail: adr.habitat@gmail.com
Regională (AO ADR)”Habitat”        Public Association established on December 18,
                                                                                        habitatvr@gmail.com
                                   2001, specialized in providing services of public
                                   interest for the sustainable development of          Tel +373 254 21360
                                   localities in the rural area of the Dniester river
                                   basin region.

PA Societatea Pentru               The Society for the Protection of Birds and          https://sppn.md/
Protecția Păsărilor și a Naturii   Nature (SPPN) is a non-governmental and non-
                                                                                        Email: sppn.moldova@gmail.com
                                   profit organization, established in 2015. The
                                   organization is focused on the study and
                                   protection of wild bird species in the Republic
                                   of Moldova, their habitats and biodiversity.

AO Societatea                      The Public Association of the Society of             Tel: 079638311
Ecotoxicologilor a Republicii      Ecotoxicologists from the Republic of Moldova
                                   ECOTOX was founded in 1999, with the aim of:         Email: ecotox@yahoo.com ;
Moldova ECOTOX
                                   - the development of ecotoxicological,
                                                                                        elzubcov@mail.ru
                                   hydrochemical, hydrobiological, ichthyological
                                   science and the implementation of scientific
                                   results in the national economy;
                                   - the integration of scientific research within
                                   the targeted fields of academic and higher
                                   education institutions;
                                   - ecological education;


PA "Eco-Sor"                       Public environmental association, promoting          E-mail: ecosor2019@gmail.com
                                   the environmental protection, river protection       valentina.jamba@gmail.com
                                   and conservation, based in Soroca.
                                                                                        Phone: 069774926




                                                                40
AO Asociația de Dezvoltare a     Public association working in the field of            office.adtm@gmail.com
Turismului în Moldova            sustainable tourism promotion, including the
                                 eco-tourism                                           viorelmiron7@yahoo.com

                                                                                       079583345

Centrul Informațional Tighina    Information development in the South-East             Email: tcislaru@yahoo.com
                                 region of the Republic of Moldova (Căușeni,
                                 Ștefan Vodă and Anenii Noi districts)

                                               Social, gender and PwD NGOs

Alliance of Organizations for    The mission of AOPD is to improve the quality         Email: info@aopd.md
Persons with Disabilities        of life of people with disabilities in the Republic   Phone: +373 79 22 25 05
(AOPD)                           of Moldova by collaborating with the public
                                 authorities of the state in order to create an
                                 environment with equal opportunities to
                                 realize the potential for people with disabilities.
                                 Vision: People with disabilities socially
                                 integrated and with equal opportunities to
                                 realize their potential in the Republic of
                                 Moldova.

Roma National Center             Center dedicated to the promotion of Roma             Email: lepadatu.ana75@gmail.com
                                 rights
                                                                                       Telephone: +373 22 227099”

Roma Youth Union “Tărnă          Union of Roma youth dedicated to the                  Email: allamarin7@yahoo.com
Rom”                             promotion of Roma’s economic, social and
                                 human rights

Gender Center                    Gender equality promotion in society trough           E-mail:
                                 Information / Education / Communication               secretariat.platformadegen@gmail.com

                                 Secures secretariat to nationwide Platform of         Tel. +373 69182020
                                 Gender equality promotion associations
                                 Platforma de Gen

People in Need                   Assisting to local NGOs in Moldova to tackle          E-mail: mail@peopleinneed.net
                                 the wave of Ukrainian refugees

National Center for Studies      a public institution that aims to contribute to       Email: cpd@progen.md
and Information for Women's      the promotion of an integrative discourse on
                                                                                       Telefon/Fax:( +373 22 ) 20-71-58
Problems Partnership for         the issue of human genders, the status of
Development (CPD)                women and equal opportunities for women
                                 and men. NGO hosts a documentation,
                                 information and training center for specialized
                                 NGOs and initiative groups.

                   Associations representing interests of local public authorities and local communities

Congress of Local                CALM aims to become a modern organization,            Email: info@calm.md
Governments (CALM)               capable of representing all local authorities in
                                                                                       Phone +37322 22-35-09
                                 Moldova in relations with the Government, the
                                 public and other actors, protecting their
                                 interests and strengthening their capacities.
                                 CALM will seek to create effective local
                                 government as an essential foundation of


                                                               41
                                democracy by advocating for an improved
                                legal, financial and administrative environment,
                                by providing high quality services to its
                                members and by acting as an information and
                                communication platform.

Alianța Asociațiilor de         The Alliance of Native Associations is a national   Email: alianta@cudragpentru.md
Băștinași                       platform, created to represent and promote          Phone: 0781 46 880
                                the interests of its members, as well as to
                                strengthen the capacities of Native Associations
                                to get involved in the socio-economic
                                development of communities based on the
                                values of local democracy and the principles of
                                good governance.
                                The constitution of the Alliance took place on
                                May 5, 2023 through the consolidation of 65
                                Native Associations from the Republic of
                                Moldova.

                                           Agricultural and farming association
Federation of Agricultural      The foundations of Federation of Agricultural       Phone +373 22 23 56 98
Producers of Moldova ”FARM      Producers of Moldova ”FARM” were laid in the
                                                                                    Email Address farm@agrofarm.md
                                TACIS project ”Information Campaign on
                                Privatization and Restructuring in Agriculture”,
                                implemented in 1998-2001 and which involved
                                the creation of 10 information and consulting
                                centers. In 2000, at the initiative of 13 public
                                organizations from different regions of the
                                Republic of Moldova, the Federation of
                                Agricultural Producers of Moldova ”FARM” was
                                established, with the initial name of the
                                National Federation of Agricultural Producers
                                of Moldova AGROinform.

The National Agency for Rural   a non-governmental, non-profit and non-             e-mail: office@acsa.md
Development (ACSA)              political organization that carries out its
                                activities throughout the entire territory of the
                                Republic of Moldova. The mission of the
                                Agency is the reaching of a sustainable
                                development of rural communities through
                                setting up and creating a professional network
                                of information, consultancy and training service
                                providers for agricultural producers and rural
                                entrepreneurs.




                                                             42
Annex nr. 4 List of Mass media
                                      List of periodicals / newspapers

 Nr      Newspaper / corerage                         Contact
 1       Ziarul "Adevărul de Anenii Noi" (Anenii      or. Anenii Noi, str. N. Gribov nr. 2b
         Noi)                                         Telefoane de contact: 078319905, 067479905,
                                                      92-500.
                                                      E-mail: adevarul.aneniinoi@gmail.com

 2       Ziarul ”Gazeta Satelor” (national)           Chișinău, Str. Pușkin 22, et. 3, bir. 311, 313.
                                                      Tel: 022 23 75 39, 0697 123 01, 060 584 268.
                                                      e-mail: gazeta.satelor@gmail.com,
                                                      https://gazetasatelor.md/
 3       Ziarul „Căuşeni” (Căuşeni)                   or. Căuşeni, str. Păcii, 30

 4       Ziarul „Cuvântul” (Rezina)                   str. Păcii 38, Rezina
                                                      tel 0254 21 583
                                                      https://www.facebook.com/ZiarulCuvantul/
 5       Ziarul „Observatorul de Nord” (Soroca)       Or. Soroca, str. Independentei 75
                                                      Email: odn.soroca@gmail.com
                                                      https://observatorul.md/
 6       Revista „Natura”                             https://www.facebook.com/Natura.md
                                                      www.natura.md



                                        Mass -Media Associations
                    Name                                                Contacts
     Asociaţia Presei Independente (API)       Str. Armenească 13, Chișinău
                                               tel: 022 220 996
                                               www.api.md
 Centrul pentru Jurnalism Independent          Str. Alexei Şciusev 53, MD-2012, Chișinău
                                               tel 022 213 652
                                               https://cji.md/
     Asociaţia Radiodifuzorilor Regionali      www.canalregional.md
        „Meridian” / Canal Regional
     Asociația „Media Grup - MERIDIAN”         Radio „Eco FM”
                                               tel. (+37322) 00-94-87
                                                mob. (+373) 69155998
                                                email: ao.meridian@gmail.com , info@ecofm.md
      Asociația Jurnaliștilor de Mediu și      Chișinău, str. Serghei Lazo, 13, MD-2004
               Turism Ecologic                  E-mail: ajmtem@gmail.com
                                               https://www.facebook.com/AsociatiaJurnalistilordeMe
                                               diu
                                               https://www.ajmte.md/
        AO Proiectul Media „Cu Sens”           https://cusens.md/




                                                    43
                                   Web Portals with news

Unimedia.info                                  Mold-street.com
Vesti.md                                       Newsmaker.md

Stireazilei.md                                 Rise.md

Media-azi.md                                   Diez.md

Anticoruptie.md                                Tv8.md
Ziarulnational.md                              Curentul.md
Moldova.org                                    Stirilocale.md
Nordnews.md Bălți                              Replicamedia.md
Ecopresa.md                                    Proiectul media ”Rezina în Obiectiv”



                                       Press agencies

  1.   Agenţia de presă „INFOTAG”
  2.   Agenţia de presă „Info-Prim Neo”
  3.   Agenția de Presă „InfoMarket Media”
  4.   Agenţia „MONITOR MEDIA”
  5.   Agenţia de presă „DECA-Press”




                                             44
Annex 5. Public consultation on SEP – 4 October 2024 List of participants




                                       45
