Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                             REPUBLIC OF YEMEN


                               Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for
                                       Sustainability and Efficiency Project
                                               (I-WISE, P505562)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     Draft
                                     STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)


                                                      Collectively Prepared by:




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                           United Nations Development Program (UNDP);
                                          United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS);
                                    Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).

                               Funded and supported by the World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                 August 21, 2025




                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Contents
1.  Introduction/Project Description ............................................................................................ 1
  1.1.    Country and Sector context ........................................................................................... 1
  1.2.    Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................. 2
  1.3.    Project Description......................................................................................................... 4
2. Objective/Description of SEP................................................................................................... 9
3. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis ................................................................................ 10
  3.1.    Methodology ................................................................................................................ 10
  3.2.    Affected Parties............................................................................................................ 10
  3.3.    Other Interested Parties .............................................................................................. 11
  3.4.    Disadvantaged /Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ...................................................... 12
4. Stakeholder Engagement Program ....................................................................................... 12
  4.1.    Summary of Stakeholder Engagement Done During Project Preparation................... 14
  4.2.    Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for
  Stakeholder Engagement .......................................................................................................... 33
  4.3.    Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the Views of Vulnerable Groups ........................... 40
5. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement ....................... 40
  5.1.    Implementation Arrangements and Resources ........................................................... 40
6. Grievance Mechanism (GM) .................................................................................................. 42
  6.1.    Description of Grievance Mechanism .......................................................................... 42
  6.2.    Labor Grievance Mechanism ....................................................................................... 47
  6.3.    Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) ............................... 49
7. Monitoring and Reporting ..................................................................................................... 50
  7.1.    Summary of How SEP Will Be Monitored and Reported Upon ................................... 50
  7.2.    Reporting Back to Stakeholder Groups ........................................................................ 50
8. Annexes ................................................................................................................................. 51
  Annex 1: Template to Capture Consultation Minutes............................................................... 51
  Annex 2: SEP Budget Table ........................................................................................................ 51
  Annex 3: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP........................................................................ 52
  Annex 4: Project Map ................................................................................................................ 54
  Annex 5: Photo Documentation of Consultation Workshops ................................................... 55
  Annex 6: Media Coverage of Stakeholder Consultations .......................................................... 58
  Annex 7: Attendance sheet from Stakeholder Consultation..................................................... 58
  Annex 8: Stakeholder Consultation Summary........................................................................... 59


List of Tables
Table 1: Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation ........................ 14
Table 2: Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for
Stakeholder Engagement .............................................................................................................. 33
Table 3: Role and Responsibilities for SEP Implementation ........................................................... 41




                                                                      ii


                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
Abbreviation List
ACs         Agricultural Cooperatives
CCB         Climate Co-Benefits
CCDR        Country Climate and Development Report
CERC        Contingent Emergency Response Component
CFW         Cash for Work
CoC         Code of Conduct
CSOs        Civil Society Organizations
ESCP        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF         Environmental and Social Framework
ESIAs       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF        Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESRM        Environmental and Social Risk Management
ESS         Environmental and Social Standard
FAO         Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GARWSP      General Authority for Rural Water Supply Projects
GBV         Gender-Based Violence
GDP         Gross Domestic Product
GM          Grievance Mechanism
ICs         Irrigation Councils
IDPs        Internally Displaced Persons
IPF         Investment Project Financing
IPs         Implementing Partners
IRG         Internationally Recognized Government
I-WISE      Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and
            Efficiency Project
IWRM        Integrated Water Resources Management
LMP         Labor Management Procedures
LWSCs       Local Water and Sanitation Corporations
MEAL        Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning
MoAIF       Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Fisheries
MoPIC       Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
MoWE        Ministry of Water and Environment
NGOs        Non-Governmental Organizations
NWRA        National Water Resources Authority
OCHA        Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
OHS         Occupational Health and Safety
PDO         Project Development Objectives
PIU         Project Implementation Unit
PPE         Personal Protective Equipment
PWP         Public Works Project
SEA/SH      Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment
SEP         Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SFD         Social Fund for Development
SMP         Security Management Plan
STC         Southern Transitional Council
TPM         Third Party Monitoring
UNDP        United Nations Development Program


                                            iii


                                                                                    Official Use Only
UNOPS       United Nations Office for Project Services
UWS - PMU   Urban Water Supply - Project Management Unit
WASH        Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WRM         Water Resources Management
WSS         Water Supply and Sanitation
WUAs        Water User Associations




                                           iv


                                                           Official Use Only
1. Introduction/Project Description1

1.1. Country and Sector context
Yemen has long been the poorest country in the Middle East and North Africa and has been
experiencing one of the world’s most severe humanitarian crises. Socioeconomic conditions in
Yemen have deteriorated sharply over the past decade, due to declining remittances, trade
disruptions, electrical outages, severe fuel supply shortages, and reduced humanitarian
operations amidst the ongoing crisis. The economy has been devastated by the protracted conflict
that started in early 2015, leading to severe food insecurity and destroying critical infrastructure.
The impact of armed conflict has been exacerbated by multiple economic shocks and climate
hazards - including rising prices, droughts, floods, the COVID-19 pandemic, a cholera epidemic, a
locust invasion, and the escalation of conflict in the Red Sea in 2024. About 80 percent of Yemeni
households need humanitarian assistance (World Bank, 2023), with roughly half (15.3 million
people) requiring emergency support to access clean water and meet basic sanitation needs
(OCHA 2022). About 17.6 million people face acute food insecurity, with close to 74 percent of
the population below the national poverty line in 2022. Yemen’s public institutions are struggling
with services delivery, further complicated by the lack of regular salary payments to many public
workers for more than six years. Living conditions in Yemen are dire, especially for the many
people displaced by conflict. The latest Humanitarian Response Plan for Yemen suggests that an
estimated 4.5 million people, 14 percent of the population, are internally displaced. A World Bank
phone survey conducted in 2022 and 2023 in 21 governorates estimated that the level of
displaced households was around 25 percent. Over 89 percent of internally displaced people
(IDPs) have no source of income and are surviving on less than US$ 40 per month. Yemen's rapid
population growth, from 23.15 million in 2010 to 31.15 million in 2021, with a projected annual
increase of 3% through 2030, is intensifying the country's climate crisis vulnerabilities. In 2021,
41% of the population were children and youth, increasing demands on public services like water
and sanitation. Yemen also faces severe environmental challenges.

Yemen's political landscape is fragmented and unstable due to a decade-long conflict between
the Internationally Recognized Government (IRG) and the Houthi Movement (also known as
‘Ansar Allah’) based in Sana’a (North). Each faction controls its own institutions and monetary
systems, which has led to political and economic disparities and complicated efforts for lasting
peace. Fiscal and monetary challenges have increased, worsened by the Houthi blockade on IRG
oil exports and the collapse of the UN-sponsored truce in October 2022. While it is generally
recognized that there are four major conflicts over political control between national,
subnational, and international forces, there are two major conflicting parties. These are the
Houthi movement based in Sana’a, and the Internationally Recognized Government of Yemen
(IRG) based in Aden. The IRG shares power with the Southern Transitional Council (STC), with
other actors including the IRG-aligned Joint Resistance Forces and the Hadramawt Elite Forces.
These have resulted in a complex mosaic of territorial controls, the boundaries of which are
constantly shifting but which largely reflect the division of the country prior to unification in 1990
(International Crisis Group 2022). The Houthi controls an estimated one-third of the territory,
which is home to about two-thirds of the population and includes the mountainous areas with
the highest rainfall and upper reaches of the main water management areas.



1
    All project information presented in this section has been extracted from the Project Appraisal Document (PAD).

                                                           1


                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Public revenues are under immense stress, as the country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per
capita has shrunk by 54 percent between 2015 and 2023, and external shocks have added to
economic stress and food insecurity. The fiscal revenues of IRG, including grants, declined by over
30 percent in 2023 (World Bank, 2024). The economic impacts of the war in Ukraine are
compounding the already severe and lingering food insecurity impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The main impacts include: (i) sudden and significant increases in global food and fuel prices
starting in March 2022; (ii) steep reductions in food imports, especially imports of wheat (a major
staple food for the country); and (iii) recent and substantial financing gaps with regards to
humanitarian assistance, driven by increasing humanitarian priorities in other countries.

Climate change presents an additional challenge for Yemen, threatening its development
prospects by exacerbating existing vulnerabilities and hindering progress in key areas such as
water security. In the MENAAP Region, Yemen is country most vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change and is ranked 27th globally in vulnerability to climate change. It is also the least
prepared country in MENAAP to manage the impacts associated with climate change. Global
climate models forecast a future for Yemen which is characterized by warmer temperatures and
higher annual average precipitation, with more frequent, intense rainfall events resulting in flash
floods and longer dry periods. The anticipated additional rainfall can contribute to development,
but only if the country is able to make the needed investments to better cope with the increasing
variability. Modelling done as part of the Yemen Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR)
indicate that in a more optimistic scenario, Yemen could achieve GDP growth of 1.5 percent by
2040, while climate shocks could lead to a decline of 3.9 percent in GDP by 2040 in a pessimistic
scenario with limited investments.

Yemenis show remarkable resilience despite political, social, and economic challenges, due to
several factors: (a) adaptability to instability, allowing communities to cope and sustain
themselves; (b) decentralized governance and local institutions providing community-level
support; (c) social safety nets and cultural norms, including tribal structures, helping communities
endure hardships; (d) vibrant civil society advocating for social change and supporting vulnerable
populations; (e) women's and youth participation enhancing community resilience and fostering
innovation; (f) private sector contributions driving economic activity and providing jobs; and (g)
remittances and diaspora support bolstering the economy and offering family relief. These
elements collectively enable Yemenis to navigate and withstand multifaceted challenges.

1.2. Sectoral and Institutional Context
Overall water scarcity and limited water availability: Yemen's geographical location in an arid to
semi-arid zone has made water resources management a long-standing and critical constraint on
the country's social and economic development. The water use exceeds renewable resources, and
intense competition for limited water resources frequently exacerbates local conflicts. Yemen is
one of only four countries globally facing both low per capita income and experiencing absolute
water scarcity, with water security issues stemming from the complex interplay between
development, conflict, and climate change. Prior to the conflict, water-related disputes accounted
for 70 to 80 percent of rural conflicts (UNDP 2023; Heffez, Adams 2013). The Ministry of Interior
reports that violent land and water disputes result in as many as 4,000 deaths annually (Small
Arms Survey 2010). In 2020, water use is estimated to have been about 5.1 billion cubic meters
(BCM), up by 76 percent over the three decades since 1990, leaving a deficit of 2.6 BCM each


                                                2


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
year.2 Over 90 percent is used for agricultural activities, eight percent for the municipal water
supply sector, and two percent for the industrial sector. Several major cities are already bearing
the brunt of water scarcity: Ta’iz already experiences extreme water stress and in Sana’a on
average six deep wells are being closed each year. The coastal cities, including Aden and Al-
Hodeida - the economic and commercial hubs – are also facing lack of safe drinking water and
seawater intrusion is increasingly invading groundwater aquifers. In addition, the limited available
freshwater resources are at risk of contamination due to the seepage of untreated wastewater
from manholes, septic tanks, and non-operational wastewater treatment plants. The main
groundwater aquifers supplying some major cities, including the capital Sana’a, are at risk of being
fully depleted in the foreseeable future.

Lack of water and sanitation services: The scarcity of water resources is leading to widespread
lack of access to safe water and sanitation services, which is one of the lowest rates in the
MENAAP region. Water security has additional adverse impacts on women and girls who are the
ones primarily tasked with fetching and managing household water resources. Distances to fetch
water are increasing in many areas. In a household survey conducted in [month, year], 55 percent
of the respondents in both rural and urban areas reported that it took them more than one hour
to collect water, which often needed to be done several times a day. Women travel in groups to
water sources they consider to be threatening to personal security. The long trips to public taps
expose women and children to violence and abuse. Women in Sana’a, Aden, Dhale’e, Lahj and
Abyan reported frequent experiences of sexual harassment.
Water for agriculture and impact on food security: Water and food security are increasingly
under threat due to a combination of population growth, deteriorating infrastructure, limitations
in irrigation services and inefficient use of water for agriculture, breakdown of sanitation services,
and the adverse impact of climate change. Yemen has one of the world’s highest population
growth rates and one of the lowest levels of per capita water availability, estimated at 65 cubic
meters per person in 2020 and projected to decline further to 54, by 2050.3 With public water
utilities largely nonfunctional due to infrastructure damage, fuel shortage, power outages, and
inability to pay civil staff for over six years, many Yemenis are forced to rely on costly and often
unsafe alternatives such as private water trucking. Additionally, the number of sewage system
failures has risen, and has further intensified public health risks, contributing to one of the world’s
largest cholera outbreaks, with millions of suspected cases and thousands of deaths since 2016.
The agriculture sector faces compounding challenges, including a sharp expansion in qat
cultivation, which continues to divert both land and water resources away from food crops. This
has led to a significant decline in local food production and a corresponding increase in market
food prices, further straining household food access. Additionally, Yemen depends on imports for
over 85 percent of its food supply, making it highly vulnerable to global supply chain disruptions,
exchange rate volatility, and port closures, especially during periods of conflict or global crises
such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Climate change is exacerbating these structural weaknesses by
increasing the frequency and severity of droughts and floods. The increasing frequency and
intensity of drought has led to diminishing crop yields, pasture degradation, and acute water
scarcity, while flash floods, such as those recorded in 2020, 2021, and during July – September
2022 monsoon season, caused widespread infrastructure damage and displacement. These

2 World Bank. 2023. “Charting the Course - A Rapid Water Security Diagnostic for Yemen”. Washington, DC. World

Bank.
3
  World Bank. 2023. “Charting the Course - A Rapid Water Security Diagnostic for Yemen”. Washington, DC. World
Bank.

                                                        3


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
floods affected over 73,000 households across 182 districts in 18 governorates, including Al-
Hodeida, Hadramawt, Al Mahra, Socotra, Marib and Al Bayda governorates. The total direct
economic damage is estimated to range from US$ 336 million to US$ 811 million, equivalent to
approximately 2.7 percent of Yemen's GDP in 2021. These overlapping crises have not only
deepened the country’s food insecurity but have also undermined the coping capacity of rural
households, particularly those dependent on rainfed agriculture, small-scale livestock, and
subsistence farming. Malnutrition rates remain alarmingly high, with children and pregnant or
lactating women among the most affected.
Yemen's water sector faces significant operational cost challenges due to insufficient funding
for infrastructure maintenance, water treatment chemicals, and administrative needs. This
financial shortfall hampers the maintenance of water distribution systems and the provision of
basic services, further limiting the sector's functionality. The ongoing conflict exacerbates these
issues, with many facilities experiencing a high level of operational capacity shortfall. Financial
barriers restrict access to water services, as families struggle with costs due to an 80 percent loss
in purchasing power from currency collapse.
Yemen's water sector relies heavily on external aid due to domestic resource constraints from
the ongoing economic crisis. Public expenditure on water has significantly declined, representing
a small fraction of government spending compared to pre-conflict levels. External donors provide
substantial humanitarian funding aimed at improving access to water supply, but it is insufficient
to address infrastructure maintenance and essential service provision. Water security,
management and governance have been neglected since the start of the conflict in 2015 as the
limited donor funds focused on improving water access. The MoWE faces a significant funding
gap, highlighting the need for sustainable financing strategies. Strengthening domestic resource
mobilization and improving financial efficiency are crucial for long-term recovery.
1.3. Project Description
The project will be implemented in selected priority basins in Yemen, initially focusing on the
Aden–Tuban Basin and Wadi Hajer Basin, with the possibility of expansion to additional basins
based on progress achieved and available resources. The I-WISE Project aims to improve irrigation
service delivery and enhance access to climate-resilient water supply and sanitation services,
thereby strengthening community resilience to climate shocks, improving livelihoods, and
contributing to poverty reduction.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve irrigation services delivery, and
enhancing access to climate resilient water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.

The project will contribute to improved community livelihoods, strengthened resilience to
climate shocks and poverty alleviation (impact). Early results of SoP1, including strengthened
climate and water information management system, and improved mechanisms for coordination
among relevant stakeholders can be used to inform the design and implementations of
investments to be realized under SoP2. The design of the investments and capacity building
activities will also build on previous and ongoing operations in Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM), water supply and sanitation (WSS), food security, urban and health that
have been implemented throughout the country before and during the conflict.




                                                 4


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
The I-WISE project is structured into the following components:

   •   Component 1: Climate Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation Services
   •   Component 2: Resilient Water Supply & Sanitation Systems and WASH Services
   •   Component 3: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project
       Management
   •   Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
Implementing Entities:
The project is implemented jointly by United Nations Development Program (UNDP), Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS)With implementing partners Public Works Project (PWP), Social Fund for
Development (SFD), and Urban Water Supply Project Management Unit (UWS-PMU).
Project components:

Component 1: Climate Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation Services (Implemented
by UNDP in the Aden-Tuban Basin and FAO in Wadi Hajer Basin) This component is dedicated to
the financing of both the planning and execution of watershed management plans and activities
aimed at enhancing irrigation services. It encompasses investments, alongside training and
capacity-building initiatives for local institutions and beneficiaries.

Sub-component 1.1: Integrated Management of Aden-Tuban Basin, implemented by UNDP
   a) Watershed Management: Watershed management in arid and semi-arid regions like
      Yemen focuses on conserving water resources, enhancing agricultural productivity, and
      building community resilience against climate change and environmental degradation.
      Key activities include:
      • Water Harvesting and Soil Conservation: this includes the development of watershed
          management plans and the implementation of prioritized activities including, among
          other, measures for water harvesting (building reservoirs, ponds, and rainwater
          harvesting systems to capture and store water efficiently), stabilization of slopes and
          protection of land (planting vegetation, constructing retaining walls, etc),
          construction of check dams, weirs, embankments, etc, to protect riverbeds from
          erosion and degradation).
      • Erosion Control and Land Protection: interventions intend to protect basin banks
          from erosion using vegetative measures and gabion retaining walls to prevent land
          degradation and sustain agricultural productivity.
      • Community-Based Management and Institutional Support: involving Engagement
          with communities in managing irrigation and watershed activities and ensuring
          sustainable practices and local ownership. Strengthening institutions like the MoWE
          and MoAIF’s local offices at basin level, is vital for effective watershed management.
      • Groundwater depletion and quality deterioration: Addressing groundwater
          depletion, saline intrusion, and dried-up springs require integrated approaches that
          balance upstream and downstream interests. Adapting to climate change impacts,
          such as increased floods and droughts, is also crucial for effective watershed
          management.


                                              5


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
    b) Irrigation improvement at basin level: This sub-component represents a holistic
       approach to irrigation infrastructure development, integrating technological
       advancements and data-driven strategies to foster sustainable agricultural practices and
       address the challenges posed by climate change.

Sub-component 1.2: Integrated Management of Wadi Hajer Basin, implemented by FAO

The FAO-led activities under this sub-component focus on sustainable watershed management
and irrigation improvements within the Wadi Hajir Basin to enhance water and food security,
climate resilience, and natural resource conservation in Hadramout Governorate, Yemen. These
activities have been identified through a comprehensive and participatory planning process that
builds on a series of prior in-depth assessments and studies conducted by FAO. These assessments
evaluated hydrological conditions, water infrastructure status, irrigation practices, land tenure
and socio-economic factors affecting the basin’s water resources and communities.

The planning and prioritization of interventions involved extensive consultations with key
stakeholders, including local communities, Water User Associations (WUAs), government
agencies such as the Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE) and Ministry of Agriculture and
Irrigation (MoAIF), as well as development partners. This participatory approach ensured that the
interventions are both contextually relevant and responsive.

Planned Activities:

    a) Watershed Infrastructure Improvement and Climate-Resilient Investments
       • Water Infrastructure Rehabilitation: FAO will lead the rehabilitation and
          enhancement of critical water infrastructure components within the Wadi Hajir Basin.
          This includes canals, dams, and recharge dams that are vital for effective water
          retention and management. These rehabilitation efforts focus on reducing water
          losses from flash floods, improving groundwater recharge potential, and ensuring the
          resilience of infrastructure under changing climate conditions. The interventions will
          combine engineered and nature-based solutions to safeguard water storage capacity,
          support sustainable watershed conservation, and protect communities from climate-
          induced water risks.
       • Promote soil conservation and erosion control: FAO will actively promote soil
          conservation and erosion control measures to reduce land degradation and
          sedimentation that undermine watershed health and infrastructure functionality.
       • Community-based management approaches will be strengthened to empower local
          stakeholders in maintaining and sustaining these natural resource interventions. This
          participatory approach encourages local ownership and the sustainable use of land
          and water resources, fostering a stewardship ethic essential for lasting watershed
          resilience.
       • Promote the adoption of sustainable natural resource management practices: FAO
          will promote the adoption of sustainable natural resource management practices to
          improve watershed health and resilience. This includes farmer-led climate-smart
          practices such as salinity reduction, soil conservation, and enhanced water quality



                                               6


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
             management, aiming for at least 60% of farmers in the target areas to integrate these
             practices by project end.

    b)   Promotion of Climate-Resilient Water-Saving Irrigation Technologies and Structures
         • Modern water-saving irrigation technologies: To optimize agricultural water use and
            support climate adaptation, FAO will facilitate the introduction and scaling up of
            modern water-saving irrigation technologies. These technologies include efficient
            drip and sprinkler irrigation systems that minimize water wastage and increase crop
            productivity. Complementary tools—such as soil moisture sensors and improved
            irrigation scheduling—will be promoted to enhance water-use efficiency and help
            farmers adapt to climate variability.
         • Capacity building and institutional strengthening: Alongside technology
            dissemination, FAO will implement targeted capacity building and institutional
            strengthening activities. This includes training and technical assistance to government
            agencies (MoWE, MoAIF), basin management bodies (WBCs), Water User
            Associations (WUAs), Agricultural Cooperatives (ACs), Irrigation Committees (ICs),
            and approximately 7,425 farmer beneficiaries. These efforts aim to empower local
            institutions and communities to sustainably manage irrigation and water resources
            within the basin.
Component 2: Resilient Water Supply & Sanitation Systems and WASH Services implemented
by UNOPS: This component aims to improve access to resilient water supply and sanitation
services in the selected basins with the following three sub-components:
Sub-component 2.1: Restoring Access to and Improving Quality of WSS Services: This
subcomponent is dedicated to the restoration, enhancement, and expansion of access to Water
Supply and Sanitation (WSS) services, with a particular emphasis on addressing desalination and
sanitation needs in key urban and peri-urban areas. Key interventions include:

         •   Infrastructure Development: The project is designed to rehabilitate and construct
             medium to large-scale water supply and sanitation (WSS) facilities, with a focus on
             expanding pipelines and networks for efficient water distribution and sanitation
             services
         •   Efficiency and Sustainability: Efforts will be made to minimize water losses through
             improved infrastructure and management practices, ensuring that water resources
             are utilized effectively.
Sub-component 2.2: Capacity building for urban water utilities: The project will implement
capacity-building initiatives to enhance the management capabilities of urban water utilities,
improving their efficiency and effectiveness in service delivery and ensuring the sustainability of
Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) facilities. Key activities will include:

    •    Infrastructure Operation and Maintenance: Training programs will be developed to
         equip utility staff with the skills necessary for effective operation and maintenance of WSS
         infrastructure, including routine inspections, repairs, and upgrades to ensure optimal
         functionality and longevity.




                                                 7


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
    •   Advanced Metering Systems: The project will introduce advanced metering systems to
        improve the accuracy and efficiency of water usage tracking, facilitating better resource
        management and billing processes.
    •   Financial Management: Efforts will focus on enhancing the utilities' ability to manage
        water billing and collection processes, implementing efficient billing systems and
        strategies to ensure timely payments and reduce arrears.
    •   Sustainability and Efficiency: Training will be provided on optimizing resource use,
        including water conservation techniques and energy-efficient practices, contributing to
        the sustainability of WSS operations and reducing environmental impact.
Sub-component 2.3: Improving hygiene and quality of water supply of critical water and
sanitation systems for IDP, Refugees and marginalized communities: Very often, the WASH
(Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene) facilities in IDP, refugees’ camps and marginalized communities,
health centers, schools, and local markets are in poor condition, posing significant risks to public
health.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project Management
(implemented by UNDP, FAO, and UNOPS). This component aims to: (i) strengthen the
institutional capacity of local institutions to address climate challenges; (ii) support UN agencies
and local partners in project implementation; and (iii) oversee project administration,
management, and monitoring and evaluation activities to ensure satisfactory project
implementation through the set-up of dedicated PMUs and the hiring of a third-party monitoring
agency. The capacity-building will focus on: (i) strengthening local water and irrigation
institutions; (ii) training beneficiaries in land and water management for climate-resilient water
and food security (iii) enhancing technical and managerial skills of management staff; and (iv)
developing the capacity of WBCs, WUAs, ACs and service providers to ensure sustainability of
investment and services. Opportunities for female participation in these activities will be
prioritized.

Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (implemented by UNDP,
FAO, and UNOPS) This component is a zero-dollar Contingent Emergency Response Component
(CERC) whereby the Bank could authorize the reallocation of funds from other project
components in case of unforeseen events such as a natural disaster, epidemic or other
emergency. Disbursements under this component will be subject to the declaration of emergency
or equivalent by the Government, the international community, or the UN; submission of a
request to the Bank for support for an eligible emergency through the CERC, the preparation by
the Recipient of an acceptable Emergency Action Plan for the use of CERC funds, and the Bank’s
approval of such a Plan. The Bank would determine how to reallocate funds from other
components to address the emergency, in consultation with its implementing partners.

The I-WISE project is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Framework (ESF).




                                                8


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
2. Objective/Description of SEP

This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared for the I-WISE Project to guide
meaningful, inclusive, and continuous engagement with all stakeholders throughout the project
life cycle. The SEP is aligned with the requirements of the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Standard 10 (ESS10): Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, which underscores
the importance of open communication, timely disclosure of project information, and an effective
grievance redress system as core elements of good project management and sustainability. The
SEP describes how UNDP, UNOPS, and FAO, in collaboration with the Implementing Partners
(PWP, SFD, and UWS-PMU), will communicate and engage with stakeholders. It also establishes a
Grievance Mechanism (GM) through which stakeholders can raise concerns, provide feedback, or
submit complaints related to the project and its activities

The objectives of this SEP are to:
    1. Identify all relevant stakeholders, including project-affected people (PAPs), vulnerable
       and disadvantaged groups, local institutions, civil society organizations, government
       entities, and the private sector.
    2. Ensure that stakeholders are informed about the project’s objectives, components,
       implementation modalities, environmental and social risks, and related mitigation
       measures in a transparent and accessible manner.
    3. Establish an inclusive and culturally appropriate engagement process, tailored to the
       capacities and preferences of different stakeholder groups, particularly marginalized
       groups at risk of exclusion (e.g., women, persons with disabilities, and internally displaced
       persons)
    4. Facilitate meaningful consultation throughout the project cycle to incorporate
       stakeholder views, concerns, and suggestions into project design, implementation, and
       monitoring.
    5. Promote trust and collaboration between project stakeholders, the implementing
       agencies (UNDP, FAO, UNOPS), and implementing partners (PWP, SFD, UWS-PMU).
    6. Strengthen the social accountability mechanisms through effective communication,
       feedback loops, and information disclosure, particularly at the community level.
    7. Establish and operationalize a robust Grievance Mechanism (GM) that enables
       stakeholders to raise concerns and receive timely, fair, and confidential responses and
       resolutions.
    8. Monitor the effectiveness of stakeholder engagement activities and adjust the strategy
       as needed to improve inclusiveness, responsiveness, and project outcomes.

The SEP is a living document that will be updated as the project evolves, and as new stakeholders
or issues emerge. It will serve as a tool to ensure that stakeholder engagement remains dynamic,
transparent, and responsive to the needs and expectations of all parties involved.




                                                9


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
3. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis

3.1. Methodology
To align with best practice standards, the I-WISE Project will adopt the following stakeholder
engagement principles:

    •   Openness and life-cycle approach: Stakeholder engagement activities will occur openly
        and continuously from design to completion, free from manipulation or coercion.
    •   Informed participation and feedback: Information about the project will be provided in
        a timely manner, in accessible formats, and through culturally appropriate channels. All
        stakeholders will be given opportunities to express their views, raise concerns, and
        provide feedback, which will be considered in decision-making.
    •   Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification and engagement will promote
        effective communication and constructive relationships. Participation will be inclusive,
        ensuring the involvement of all stakeholder groups at every stage. Equal access to
        information will be guaranteed through methods tailored to stakeholder needs. Special
        attention will be given to vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, particularly women, the
        elderly, persons with disabilities, and IDPs, while respecting the cultural sensitivities of
        diverse ethnic and social groups in the project areas.
    •   Gender sensitivity and social inclusion: Consultations will be organized throughout the
        project cycle to ensure equal access and active participation for women, men, and
        persons with disabilities. Separate meetings and focus group discussions will be arranged,
        with facilitators of the same gender as participants, to encourage open participation.
        Additional support will be provided to enable the participation of caregivers.
    •   Sustainability and resilience: The project will consider stakeholder concerns regarding
        the sustainability of activities and outcomes beyond the project period. Project outputs
        are designed to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity in addressing social,
        environmental, and economic vulnerabilities and risks.

For the I-WISE, the following stakeholders have been identified and analyzed per project
component. These stakeholders include affected parties (as defined in section 3.2), other
interested parties (as defined in section 3.3) and disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups
(as defined in section 3.4).

3.2. Affected Parties

Affected parties include individuals, groups, and communities who are likely to be directly
impacted positively or negatively by the implementation of the I-WISE Project. These impacts may
result from infrastructure works, service provision, institutional reforms, or engagement
activities. The affected parties are grouped below according to the three main project
components:

Component 1 – Climate-Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation Services (Implemented
by UNDP in Tuban Basin and FAO in Wadi Hajer Basin)

    •   Smallholder Farmers and Agricultural Landowners, benefiting from rehabilitated
        irrigation systems, terrace stabilization, and integrated watershed management
        interventions.

                                                10


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
   •   Water User Associations (WUAs), Irrigation Councils (ICs), and Agricultural Cooperatives
       (ACs) involved in the operation, maintenance, and governance of rehabilitated schemes.
   •   Households in Adjacent Communities, residing near areas where erosion control, water
       harvesting structures, or land management activities are being implemented.
   •   Local Agricultural Laborers and Skilled Workers, who may be temporarily engaged in
       construction or rehabilitation works and impacted by labor conditions and occupational
       health and safety (OHS) risks.
   •   Pastoralists and Livestock Owners, who may benefit from enhanced access to water
       points and pasturelands as a result of improved catchment-level planning.

Component 2 – Resilient Water Supply and Sanitation Systems (Implemented by UNOPS)

   •   Water User Associations (WUAs) directly involved in the operation and maintenance of
       Water Supply and Sanitation Systems.
   •   Urban and Peri-Urban Households in targeted cities who will benefit from upgraded or
       new water supply and sanitation (WSS) services, including desalination and wastewater
       treatment facilities.
   •   Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and Marginalized Groups living in or near project
       service areas, many of whom face higher barriers to access and may require inclusive
       outreach strategies.
   •   Public Service Users, including students, teachers, healthcare workers, and patients,
       where WASH infrastructure is improved in schools and health facilities.
   •   Water Vendors and Local Private Operators, whose services may be affected (positively
       or negatively) by expanded public WSS infrastructure and revised tariff structures.
   •   Small Businesses and Market Vendors, particularly those operating in areas with poor
       sanitation and intermittent water access, who stand to benefit from improved conditions.

Component 3 – Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project Management
(Jointly implemented by UNDP, UNOPS, and FAO)

   •   Staff from the Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE), Ministry of Agriculture,
       Irrigation and Fisheries (MoAIF), and the National Water Resources Authority (NWRA)
       who will participate in institutional strengthening, policy development, and technical
       training.
   •   Local Water and Sanitation Corporations (LWSCs) and General Authority for Rural
       Water Supply Projects (GARWSP) branches involved in utility operations, planning, and
       performance improvement.
   •   Basin Committees and Technical Coordination Teams engaged in decentralized water
       governance and integrated basin-level planning.

3.3. Other Interested Parties
The projects’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities,
including:

   •   Government Ministries, Agencies, and Authorities such as the Ministry of Planning and
       International Cooperation (MoPIC), local governorate and district authorities.
   •   Other UN agencies and international donors support complementary initiatives or
       contributing technical and financial resources.
                                             11


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    •   National and international NGOs active in water, agriculture, WASH, and climate
        resilience sectors.
    •   Private Sector Stakeholders including suppliers, contractors, and service providers for
        civil works, equipment, and related services.

3.4. Disadvantaged /Vulnerable Individuals or Groups
Within the I-WISE Project, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include but are not limited
to the following:

    •   Women and female-headed households often have limited access to land, financial
        resources, and decision-making processes, and may face cultural or social barriers to
        participation.
    •   Children and Youth particularly susceptible to water-borne diseases and impacts of water
        scarcity. Youth may also lack opportunities for engagement in project planning and
        implementation.
    •   The elderly may face mobility constraints, limited access to information, or exclusion from
        decision-making.
    •   Persons with disabilities may require adapted communication and accessible meeting
        venues to participate effectively.
    •   Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and returnees often lack secure access to water,
        sanitation, and livelihoods, and may not be formally represented in governance
        structures.
    •   Marginalized communities and minority groups include rural poor, socially excluded
        groups, and those living in remote or underserved areas.
    •   Youth at risk include unemployed or underemployed young people with limited
        opportunities to engage in decision-making.

Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the project will be further confirmed and
consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate. Description of the methods of engagement
that will be undertaken by the project is provided in the following sections.

4. Stakeholder Engagement Program

As part of the preparation phase of the I-WISE Project, UNDP, FAO, and UNOPS carried out a series
of stakeholder consultations between July 14 and August 13, 2025, engaging approximately 273
participants from Aden, Hadramout, Lahj, Abyan, Taiz and other governorates. These
engagements included joint and agency-specific meetings with government institutions,
implementing partners (SFD, PWP, and UWS-PMU), local authorities, technical experts,
community-based organizations, Water User Associations (WUAs), Irrigation Councils (ICs),
Agricultural Cooperatives (ACs), and directly affected communities, including women’s groups.
The consultations aimed to introduce the project, gather feedback on the design and
implementation approach, identify potential risks, and promote inclusive participation. FAO,
UNDP, and UNOPS conducted a detailed session on the Grievance Mechanism (GM), presenting
its principles and commitments, including a zero-tolerance approach to SEA/SH, ethical conduct,
and protection of all project participants. The session outlined proactive measures to reduce
SEA/SH risks, such as awareness campaigns, staff training, and risk assessments. FAO, UNDP, and


                                               12


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
UNOPS explained clear and safe channels for stakeholders to report concerns or incidents
confidentially, emphasizing a survivor-centered approach that ensures sensitivity, dignity, and
confidentiality in managing complaints. The accountability of implementing partners in
preventing and responding to SEA/SH was clarified, and hands-on sessions with real-life examples
reinforced understanding of complaint handling and response measures. The briefing highlighted
UNDP, UNOPS and FAO’s commitment to maintaining a safe, ethical, and transparent project
environment, with training and stakeholder engagement to ensure effective grievance
management. A strong focus was placed on gender inclusion and safeguards: participants were
briefed on codes of conduct and protection from SEA/SH, and telephone consultations with
women beneficiaries identified barriers to participation and access to resources. Overall, the
consultations highlighted the importance of inclusive engagement, sustainable water
governance, adaptive farming, and transparent grievance mechanisms to support both
community resilience and women’s empowerment.
Key findings highlighted the importance of strengthened water governance, inclusive targeting of
beneficiaries (particularly vulnerable households and women), transparent and accessible
grievance mechanisms, SEA/SH risk mitigation, stronger environmental and social risk
management (including OHS and child labor), enhanced gender inclusion, capacity building for
local institutions and WUAs, and improved coordination mechanisms among stakeholders.
Feedback from stakeholders has been integrated into the design of project activities and the
preparation of the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) instruments. Table (1) summarizes
the main consultations conducted to date, highlighting stakeholder feedback and the
corresponding responses. summarizes the main consultations conducted to date, highlighting
stakeholder feedback and the corresponding responses.




                                              13


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
4.1. Summary of Stakeholder Engagement Done During Project Preparation
During project preparation, the following public consultation meetings were conducted.

Table 1: Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation
                               Main participants   No. of Participants            Key Issue
 Agency     Data     Venue                                                                           Stakeholder Feedback                   Response
                                    Group           Male      Female              Discussed
 UNOPS     14 July   Ramada    MoWE,       WUA       51         12       •        Present the      • Stakeholders       express • The        project       team
           2025      Hotel -   members, local                                     project            their interest to have       acknowledged the concerns
                     Mukalla   CSOs,       basin                                  planned            more interventions in        and agreed to explore
                               committee reps                                     interventions
                                                                                                     sanitation along the wadi    options     for      enhancing
                                                                                  including
                                                                                  environmenta       areas      to     enhance    sanitation       interventions
                                                                                  l and social       services and prevent         along the Wadi to prevent
                                                                                  risks and .        pollution.                   pollution.
                                                                         •        Preventive       • The      existing   water • A              comprehensive
                                                                                  Measures: A        supply system does not       assessment          will     be
                                                                                  detailed           serve all Wadi Hagar         considered         to     map
                                                                                  overview of
                                                                                                     districts. However, there    underserved areas and
                                                                                  the proactive
                                                                                  steps we will      is         need        for   prioritize both water and
                                                                                  take to            comprehensive study to       sanitation needs.
                                                                                  prevent            ensure coverage of the • To address quality concerns,
                                                                                  SEA/SH from        populated areas along        the project committed to
                                                                                  occurring          the Wadi with Water,         enforcing strict compliance
                                                                                  within the         Sanitation and Hygiene       with technical specifications
                                                                                  project.
                                                                                                     Services.                    and             strengthening
                                                                         •        Accessible
                                                                                  Grievance        • The project can also look    supervision and monitoring
                                                                                  Mechanism:         at the uncompleted           to ensure that works are
                                                                                  Information        drinking water supply        implemented efficiently and
                                                                                  on how             schemes which require        meet                beneficiary
                                                                                  stakeholders       some finalization work to    expectations.
                                                                                  can easily use
                                                                                                     be operational.



                                                                             14


                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                            Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency    Data     Venue                                                                     Stakeholder Feedback                  Response
                                 Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                          our grievance Technical         specifications
                                                                          mechanism to usually          outlined       in
                                                                          report any       assessment studies must
                                                                          SEA/SH
                                                                                           be fully respected by
                                                                          concerns or
                                                                          incidents.       contractors and closely
                                                                      • Victim-            supervised by all partners
                                                                          Centered         to      ensure      efficient
                                                                          Complaints       implementation            and
                                                                          Handling: An     operation as well as
                                                                          outline of our satisfaction                 of
                                                                          protocol for
                                                                                           beneficiaries.
                                                                          managing
                                                                          complaints,
                                                                          which
                                                                          prioritizes a
                                                                          sensitive and
                                                                          confidential
                                                                          approach to
                                                                          protect the
                                                                          dignity of all
                                                                          victims.
UNOPS    23 &      Aden       WB and PWP           9          5       Discussion        of • Need      for     stronger • Institutionalize a quarterly
         24 July   UNOPS                                              technical aspects      communication channels       coordination meeting to
         2025      Office                                                                    between the central          track progress and address
                                                                                             coordination unit and        issues in real-time.
                                                                                             field-level implementers. • Standardize           reporting
                                                                                           • Requests for clearer         templates        to    ensure
                                                                                             guidance on reporting        uniformity in data collection
                                                                                             formats, timelines, and      and monitoring.




                                                                       15


                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                            Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency    Data     Venue                                                                     Stakeholder Feedback                  Response
                                 Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                           data-sharing                 • Strengthen       collaboration
                                                                                           procedures.                    with local authorities and
                                                                                         • Concerns about delays in       communities to secure
                                                                                           fund disbursement or           access and acceptance.
                                                                                           procurement processes, • Set up a mechanism for joint
                                                                                           which may affect timely        field visits and monitoring to
                                                                                           implementation.                ensure            harmonized
                                                                                         • Challenges in accessing        implementation.
                                                                                           some project sites due to
                                                                                           security, logistics, or
                                                                                           local             authority
                                                                                           restrictions.
                                                                                         • Requests       for    more
                                                                                           technical          capacity-
                                                                                           building and support for
                                                                                           local staff.
UNDP     22 July   Aden –   IPs - SFD, PWP,       16          3       Project Objectives Stakeholders appreciated The project team confirmed
         2025      UNDP     UWS     -     PMU                         and                being engaged early and that             clear,     continuous
                   Office   (Management and                           Communication      emphasized                 the communication         will    be
                            Senior Officers)                                             importance        of     clear maintained through regular
                                                                                         communication on the updates meeting.
                                                                                         project’s         objectives,
                                                                                         components,               and
                                                                                         expected outcomes.
                                                                      Sub-project        IPs requested more clarity The project team confirmed
                                                                      Selection Criteria on the criteria and process that criteria for sub-project
                                                                                         for      identifying      and selection will be developed
                                                                                         prioritizing sub-projects.     jointly with IPs and validated
                                                                                                                        with                 community
                                                                                                                        representatives to ensure



                                                                       16


                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                            Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency    Data     Venue                                                                    Stakeholder Feedback                   Response
                                 Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                                                         transparency and fairness. It
                                                                                                                         will also draw on standard
                                                                                                                         thematic criteria such as IPC,
                                                                                                                         Population density, IDP’s …etc
                                                                      Timelines    and    Concerns were raised           The project team confirmed
                                                                      Preparatory Work    about timelines and the        that technical studies and
                                                                                          need       for    sufficient   safeguards assessments will
                                                                                          preparatory            work    be conducted prior to
                                                                                          (technical         studies,    implementation to minimize
                                                                                          safeguards assessments)        risks and ensure quality
                                                                                          before implementation.         outcomes.
                                                                      Inclusion      of   Specific emphasis was          The project team confirmed
                                                                      Vulnerable Groups   placed on ensuring that        that measures will be
                                                                                          vulnerable          groups     introduced to guarantee the
                                                                                          (women,                IDPs,   participation of vulnerable and
                                                                                          marginalized households)       disadvantaged           groups,
                                                                                          are meaningfully included      including gender-responsive
                                                                                          in both planning and           consultations and targeted
                                                                                          implementation.                outreach strategies.
UNDP     28 July   Aden –   IPs – SFD, PWP,       13          4       Coordination        Limited        coordination    Establish        a       Project
         2025      UNDP     UWS - PMU (ESRM                           Between IPs and     between IPs.                   Coordination Committee. A
                   Office   team          and                         the                                                Project            Coordination
                            technical team)                           implementation                                     Committee will oversee these
                                                                      modality                                           efforts and ensure smooth
                                                                                                                         collaboration           Monthly
                                                                                                                         meeting at the start of the
                                                                                                                         project, shifting to bi-monthly
                                                                                                                         once coordination is well
                                                                                                                         established. Annual work
                                                                                                                         plans will be coordinated to
                                                                                                                         divide responsibilities based
                                                                                                                         on identified needs and



                                                                       17


                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                 Stakeholder Feedback                 Response
                             Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                                                determine which IP will start in
                                                                                                                each      location.     Regular
                                                                                                                coordination meetings will be
                                                                                                                held to discuss joint concern s
                                                                                                                and share experiences, align
                                                                                                                methodologies, and avoid
                                                                                                                overlaps.

                                                                  Environmental     Challenges in developing    Quality of initial submissions is
                                                                  and Social Risk   and      clearing   ESAPs   often low due to missing data
                                                                  Management        highlight the need to       and insufficient information.
                                                                                    accelerate the clearance    Review periods are extended
                                                                                    process to ensure smooth    when many individual ESAPs
                                                                                    project implementation,     are submitted separately.
                                                                                    prevent funding gaps, and   Grouping Sub-projects: UNDP
                                                                                    align resources with on-    will group sub-projects to
                                                                                    the-ground progress.        reduce the number of ESAP
                                                                                                                submissions.
                                                                                                                Low-Risk Approach: For low-
                                                                                                                risk sub-projects, IPs will
                                                                                                                develop an ESRAC document.
                                                                                                                The structure will be agreed
                                                                                                                with the World Bank's ES risk
                                                                                                                management team and will be
                                                                                                                internally approved by UNDP.
                                                                                                                Learning Process: UNDP will
                                                                                                                treat the ESAP review as a
                                                                                                                learning     opportunity      by
                                                                                                                developing a comment matrix
                                                                                                                based on feedback received
                                                                                                                from the WB on previous
                                                                                                                similar projects. This will help



                                                                   18


                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants        Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                Stakeholder Feedback                 Response
                             Group           Male      Female          Discussed
                                                                                                                ensure that future ESAPs
                                                                                                                proactively     address     past
                                                                                                                comments, thereby reducing
                                                                                                                review time
                                                                                                                Submission Planning: UNDP
                                                                                                                and IPs will prepare quarterly
                                                                                                                or bi-annual ESAP submission
                                                                                                                plans for the ESF WB team,
                                                                                                                including timelines and sub-
                                                                                                                project lists, so the WB can
                                                                                                                allocate resources for timely
                                                                                                                review.
                                                                                                                Templates & Capacity Building:
                                                                                                                A standardized ESAP template,
                                                                                                                cleared by the WB, will be
                                                                                                                shared with all IPs. UNDP will
                                                                                                                provide support and capacity
                                                                                                                building to improve ESAP
                                                                                                                quality.
                                                                                                                Target Review Time: With
                                                                                                                better     preparation      and
                                                                                                                incorporation of previous
                                                                                                                feedback, the goal is to
                                                                                                                achieve clearance within the
                                                                                                                first review or maximum two
                                                                                                                rounds.
                                                                                   IPs requested that all ESF   All requirements will be clearly
                                                                                   requirements           and   outlined in the Environmental
                                                                                   standards    be    clearly   and Social Framework (ESF).
                                                                                   defined      to     avoid    UNDP       will   organize     a
                                                                                   confusion.                   workshop to explain these
                                                                                                                requirements in detail and



                                                                  19


                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                 Stakeholder Feedback                     Response
                             Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                                                     discuss them with IPs. All
                                                                                                                     project plans (ESF, SEP, SMP,
                                                                                                                     LMP, etc.) will be reviewed to
                                                                                                                     ensure        their    practical
                                                                                                                     application at project sites.
                                                                                    Risks from Substantial           Such sub-projects will require
                                                                                    Activities, such as dams         a full Environmental and Social
                                                                                    with a height of 15 meters       Impact Assessment (ESIA),
                                                                                    pose significant OHS and         with mitigation measures
                                                                                    social risks.                    implemented on-site and
                                                                                                                     monitored regularly through
                                                                                                                     spot checks.
                                                                                    Upstream vs. Downstream          The project will address this
                                                                                    Water Conflicts. When            through             community
                                                                                    activities     begin        in   engagement, establishment of
                                                                                    upstream areas, water            water       committees,     and
                                                                                    flow     to    downstream        conflict-sensitive       project
                                                                                    communities       can      be    design. Fair water allocation
                                                                                    reduced,             creating    will be ensured by considering
                                                                                    potential conflicts. In some     downstream needs during
                                                                                    locations,         upstream      both      the     design    and
                                                                                    communities also lack            implementation           phases,
                                                                                    water user associations or       maintaining adequate water
                                                                                    committees to manage             flow throughout the wadi.
                                                                                    water distribution.
                                                                  Stakeholder       Concerns about taking            Photos are not required for
                                                                  Consultations     photos in the field,             ESAPs. In line with previous
                                                                                    especially    of      women      practice,         community
                                                                                    during consultations, due        consultation photos will be
                                                                                    to cultural sensitivities.       excluded,      while      key
                                                                                                                     information such as the
                                                                                                                     number      of   participants



                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                  Stakeholder Feedback                 Response
                             Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                                                 (disaggregated by gender),
                                                                                                                 concerns raised, and feedback
                                                                                                                 will be retained.
                                                                                      Community     Ownership    To     ensure     sustainability,
                                                                                      and Maintenance            communities will be engaged
                                                                                                                 from the start in identifying
                                                                                                                 needs,       planning,      and
                                                                                                                 implementing sub-projects.
                                                                                                                 Training will be provided to
                                                                                                                 community committees on
                                                                                                                 operation and maintenance of
                                                                                                                 the infrastructure.
                                                                  Women               Many sub-projects are      Design project activities in a
                                                                  Participation and   labour-intensive and not   way that is more women-
                                                                  Inclusion           suited     for   women's   friendly by identifying specific
                                                                                      participation.             tasks within larger sub-
                                                                                                                 projects that women can
                                                                                                                 undertake.
                                                                                                                 Provide training opportunities
                                                                                                                 for women so they can assume
                                                                                                                 new roles in project activities,
                                                                                                                 strengthen their skills, and
                                                                                                                 build knowledge with long-
                                                                                                                 lasting impact.

                                                                                                                 For example, the PWP trained
                                                                                                                 50 women in community
                                                                                                                 contracting, of whom 20
                                                                                                                 obtained licenses and are
                                                                                                                 already working. PWP will
                                                                                                                 share their contact list so they
                                                                                                                 can be considered for future



                                                                   21


                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                            Main participants    No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency    Data     Venue                                                                         Stakeholder Feedback                  Response
                                 Group            Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                                                             sub-projects, thereby ensuring
                                                                                                                             women’s             continued
                                                                                                                             participation             and
                                                                                                                             empowerment        in    local
                                                                                                                             development.
                                                                       Cultural          and                                 The project will respect and
                                                                       Traditional                                           adapt to the cultural and
                                                                       Sensitivities                                         traditional contexts of the
                                                                                                                             areas where activities are
                                                                                                                             implemented.
UNDP     31 July   Aden –   MoWE - Minister        10          2       Clarity of Roles        The Minister emphasized
         2025      MoWE     of Water and                               and                     that        roles      and    Roles and responsibilities will
                   Office   Environment                                Responsibilities        responsibilities of UN        be defined during project
                            Deputy Minister                                                    agencies,            local    design. A formal document
                            for Water Sector                                                   implementers,                 will be developed outlining
                            Deputy Minister                                                    government        entities,   these    roles  to     ensure
                            for Environment                                                    stakeholders,          and    transparency               and
                            Sector                                                             beneficiaries must be         accountability.
                            UWS      -   PMU                                                   clearly defined.
                            Director        of                         Avoiding     Social     Targeting specific areas      Coordination with the Ministry
                            Contracts     and                          Tensions      from      when        needs    exist    and branch offices will ensure
                            Consultations                              Project Targeting       nationwide could create       fair and transparent targeting.
                            General Director                                                   social tensions in non-       Stakeholder engagement will
                            of the PMU                                                         targeted areas.               occur throughout the project
                            Climate       Unit                                                                               cycle. Sub-project selection
                            Director                                                                                         will be based on assessed
                                                                                                                             needs, with consultations at
                                                                                                                             multiple stages from Ministry
                                                                                                                             level to direct beneficiary
                                                                                                                             engagement.
                                                                       Community Health        Potential increase in risks   Health and safety measures
                                                                       and Safety Risks        such     as    waterborne     will be implemented, including



                                                                        22


                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                            Main participants     No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency     Data    Venue                                                                          Stakeholder Feedback                    Response
                                 Group             Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                                diseases (Dengue and           site-specific mitigation plans,
                                                                                                Malaria) and accidents,        disease prevention, public
                                                                                                especially        affecting    safety awareness, protective
                                                                                                children near project sites.   measures,      and      regular
                                                                                                                               monitoring.
                                                                                                Project is important for
                                                                                                                               UNDP will align projects with
                                                                        Strategic Vision        meeting community needs
                                                                                                                               broader development goals
                                                                        and Development         and should consider a
                                                                                                                               while focusing on immediate
                                                                        Impact                  broader,        long-term
                                                                                                                               community needs.
                                                                                                development vision.
                                                                                                Climate change impacts         The project will adopt a
                                                                        Climate                 must be integrated into        Climate Co-Benefits (CCB)
                                                                        Considerations          design                and      approach and align with
                                                                                                implementation.                climate resilience priorities.
                                                                        Community               Communities          must      Continuous          stakeholder
                                                                        Awareness         and   understand         project     consultations will ensure
                                                                        Engagement              objectives and targeting       communities are informed
                                                                                                rationale.                     and can give feedback. Issues
                                                                                                                               can be raised via the GM.
                                                                                                                               Needs will be identified with
                                                                                                                               government authorities.
UNDP      3        Aden,    MoWE, MoAIF, IPs        62         16       Project indication      The project will greatly       The project will optimize
and       August   Panora   (SFD, PWP, UWS -                            (Components and         improve         livelihoods    water      use,     rehabilitate
UNOPS-    2025     ma       PMU),        WUA                            Objectives)             through better water use,      irrigation    systems,      build
Joint              Hotel    members,                                                            land protection, enhanced      farmer capacity, and ensure
Stakeho                     Irrigation Councils                                                 farming capacity, job          equitable benefits through
lder                        (ICs),         and                                                  creation, and improved         active              stakeholder
Engage                      Agricultural                                                        incomes. They stressed the     engagement and support to
ment                        Cooperatives                                                        need for fair water            Water User Associations.
Worksh                      (ACs), local CSOs,                                                  distribution,     irrigation
op                          basin committee                                                     repair, and engagement of
                            reps                                                                Water User Associations.



                                                                         23


                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                      Stakeholder Feedback                      Response
                             Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                  Potential              Most             participants    The project will conduct
                                                                  environmental          expressed no significant         environmental and social
                                                                  and social impacts     concerns, stating that if        assessments,             ensure
                                                                  of the project         the project is implemented       compliance       with        the
                                                                                         with accurate studies and        Environmental and Social
                                                                                         proper implementation in         Framework (ESF), and adopt
                                                                                         line with all standards and      mitigation     measures        to
                                                                                         the mitigation measures          address     identified     risks.
                                                                                         outlined in the ESMPs, the       Measures       will     include
                                                                                         impact would be positive.        environmental and social
                                                                                         Some noted potential             regulation safeguards to
                                                                                         risks, such as pollution of      protect water resources, soil
                                                                                         air and water, impacts on        quality, and biodiversity.
                                                                                         climate, or groundwater
                                                                                         contamination if sanitation
                                                                                         projects     are     located
                                                                                         nearby.
                                                                  Awareness         of   Participants demonstrated        The project will establish and
                                                                  grievance              good      awareness         of   publicize multiple grievance
                                                                  mechanisms             multiple channels for            channels in line with the
                                                                                         submitting complaints or         Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                                                                                         suggestions, including toll-     (SEP), including a toll-free
                                                                                         free hotlines, complaint         hotline, complaint boxes,
                                                                                         boxes,                  direct   email, WhatsApp, and direct
                                                                                         communication            with    communication              with
                                                                                         implementing       agencies,     implementing partners and
                                                                                         emails, WhatsApp, social         local authorities. Clear focal
                                                                                         media platforms, local           points will be designated in
                                                                                         authorities,     agricultural    each target area to receive and
                                                                                         associations,             and    forward complaints, ensuring
                                                                                         supervisory bodies. Some         timely     resolution       and
                                                                                         emphasized the need for          feedback.



                                                                   24


                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                       Stakeholder Feedback                    Response
                             Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                          accessible local grievance
                                                                                          points, clear focal points in
                                                                                          the     community,       and
                                                                                          diverse methods to ensure
                                                                                          inclusivity.
                                                                  The         project’s   Participants agreed that        The project will ensure
                                                                  inclusivity      and    the project should be           inclusivity through targeted
                                                                  equitable               inclusive and involve all       stakeholder        engagement,
                                                                  participation of all    community            groups,    guaranteeing representation
                                                                  community               including women, men,           of all social groups throughout
                                                                  groups, including       IDPs, the elderly, persons      the project cycle. Specific
                                                                  women,         men,     with disabilities, and other    safeguard measures will be in
                                                                  IDPs, the elderly,      vulnerable groups. Many         place to promote women’s
                                                                  persons         with    highlighted that such           participation,         integrate
                                                                  disabilities,    and    participation         would     vulnerable groups, and draw
                                                                  other vulnerable        enhance project success         on the expertise of elderly
                                                                  populations,            and sustainability, with        farmers.            Engagement
                                                                  throughout              benefits extending to all.      strategies will align with the
                                                                  project cycle.          Some noted that women           SEP and prioritize equitable
                                                                                          play a significant role in      access to project benefits.
                                                                                          agriculture, especially in
                                                                                          areas like Wadi Tuban, and
                                                                                          the project could also
                                                                                          integrate IDPs as a
                                                                                          workforce.            Others
                                                                                          emphasized the value of
                                                                                          elderly             farmers’
                                                                                          knowledge and the need to
                                                                                          involve them in water
                                                                                          resource management and
                                                                                          decision-making.




                                                                   25


                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                           Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency    Data    Venue                                                                    Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                                Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                     Potential of the    Participants         generally     The project will promote
                                                                     project       to    agreed that the project            women’s              economic
                                                                     contribute    to    could significantly improve        empowerment by ensuring
                                                                     women’s             women’s             economic       inclusive participation at all
                                                                     economic            conditions          if        it   stages—from planning to
                                                                     empowerment.        meaningfully engages rural         implementation             and
                                                                                         women, increases their             monitoring—while          fully
                                                                                         income, and supports their         complying with the gender
                                                                                         participation in agriculture       requirements       of      the
                                                                                         and related activities.            Environmental and Social
                                                                                         Many emphasized that               Framework                (ESF).
                                                                                         women are already key              Interventions will include
                                                                                         contributors to farming in         targeted training, capacity
                                                                                         the area, and involving            building, and measures to
                                                                                         them in decision-making,           guarantee equitable access to
                                                                                         training,     and       project    project benefits. Women’s
                                                                                         activities would enhance           participation will be tracked
                                                                                         livelihoods. They stressed         through dedicated gender
                                                                                         the importance of setting          indicators    to    strengthen
                                                                                         specific        participation      accountability and ensure
                                                                                         targets      for       women,      sustained impact.
                                                                                         ensuring      fair      benefit
                                                                                         distribution,              and
                                                                                         supporting        women-led
                                                                                         initiatives    to       sustain
                                                                                         impacts.
UNDP     12       Aden,      UWS - PMU           11          4       Introduction   to   UWS – PMU shared details           UNDP has committed to
         August   PMU                                                the UWS - PMU       on their current activities,       working jointly with the UWS -
         2025     Office                                             team          and   staff     structure,       and     PMU to review and update
                                                                     alignment      on   readiness        to      begin     manuals, frameworks, and
                                                                     collaboration for   operations.               They     guidelines to ensure alignment
                                                                     project             expressed interest in              with Environmental and Social



                                                                      26


                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                              Main participants     No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data     Venue                                                                              Stakeholder Feedback                  Response
                                   Group             Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                          implementation,        aligning with WB and             Framework              (ESF)
                                                                          including     ESRM     UNDP             safeguards      requirements.      Capacity-
                                                                          requirements,          requirements           and       building sessions will be
                                                                          grievance              acknowledged the need            conducted on ESRM, GM, and
                                                                          mechanisms,            for clear procedures,            GBV-SEA, while collaboration
                                                                          GBV/SH/SEA, and        updated         operational      mechanisms      will      be
                                                                          the development        documents, and targeted          established    to      guide
                                                                          of        manuals,     capacity-building before         implementation from the
                                                                          frameworks, and        implementation.                  outset.
                                                                          guidelines prior to
                                                                          project start-up.
 FAO     10 –12     Aden      Meeting        with     19          3       Water             &
                                                                                                 •     Safety precautions are
          Aug     (consult    Ministry of Water                           sanitation                                              •   FAO       will   integrate
                                                                                                       needed during the
          2025      ations    & Environment,                              interventions;                                              flooding risk mitigation
                                                                                                       rainy      season     to
                     with     Ministry         of                         safety during rainy                                         into implementation.
                                                                                                       prevent flooding, soil
                  instituti   Agriculture       &                         season;                                                 •   Community committees
                                                                                                       erosion, and crop
                     ons);    Irrigation, NWRA,                           monitoring      and                                         will be supported to
                                                                                                       damage.
                    Wadi      EPA,          Local                         community                                                   strengthen monitoring.
                                                                                                 •     Establish sector-based
                    Hajar     Authorities,                                committees;                                             •   Beneficiary selection will
                                                                                                       community
                   (comm      District       MAI                          beneficiary                                                 follow agreed transparent
                                                                                                       committees           for
                    unity     offices,                                    selection criteria;                                         criteria.
                                                                                                       monitoring.
                    orgs)     Community                                   GM            Cards                                     •   GM process to be
                                                                                                 •     Follow strict criteria
                              Committees,                                 Distribution       ;                                        operationalized       and
                                                                                                       for          beneficiary
                              Farmers                                     supervision       &                                         demonstrated            at
                                                                                                       selection to avoid
                              community orgs),                            compliance with                                             community level.
                                                                                                       conflicts.
                              the        farmers                          ESMP;          legal                                    •   ESMP compliance to be
                                                                                                 •     The community sees
                              consulted by Tel                            requirements;                                               enforced through PMU
                                                                                                       GM as promising but
                                                                          poor       telecom                                          and             contractor
                                                                                                       requests clarity on its
                                                                          Yemen       mobile                                          supervision.
                                                                                                       function. - Contractors
                                                                          Telephone                                               •   Ensure OHS training &
                                                                                                       & PMU must ensure
                                                                          network          not                                        PPE provision.
                                                                                                       ESMP compliance.
                                                                          covering      Wadi



                                                                           27


                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                            Main participants    No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data     Venue                                                                            Stakeholder Feedback                   Response
                                 Group            Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                       Hajar ; currency        •     Ensure labor law           •   Recommendations       on
                                                                       instability;                  compliance.                    telecom/currency
                                                                       women’s role in         •     Weak telecom and               challenges noted.
                                                                       water                         unstable currency are      •   Women’s role in water
                                                                       management                    challenges.                    management       to   be
                                                                                               •     Women           actively       strengthened, including
                                                                       Introduction for              engaged in irrigation          tailored ToT.
                                                                       the project FAO’s             & committees.              •   Clarification on UWS-
                                                                       components              •     UWS-PMU requested              PMU roles to be provided
                                                                       Apply Integrated              clarity on roles in LOA.       via workshops.
                                                                       Water Resources         •     Appreciation for flood
                                                                       Management                    protection, education
                                                                       (IWRM)                        &            ecosystem
                                                                       Impacts foreseen              preservation.
                                                                       during         the
                                                                       implementation
                                                                       Construction,
                                                                       Wastes,
                                                                       Water rights and
                                                                       restoring
                                                                       ecosystem

 FAO     13 Aug     Al      Inception              31          2       Government              -High appreciation for           -FAO supports creating a
          2025    Mukalla   Workshop for the                           Institutions            FAO’s role in SOP2 design        committed to maintaining a
                            project     FAO                            consultation            & participatory planning.        participatory       approach,
                            components.                                                        -SOP1 data collection            ensuring local ownership.
                                                                       Project planning,       supports future planning.
                            The parties that                           sustainability,         -SOP2 interventions align        -Outcomes        from    SOP1
                            contribute;                                participatory           with community needs,            integrated into SOP2 planning.
                            Ministry of Water                          approaches,             create jobs & ensure             - Women’s role will be further
                            and Environment                            women’s         role,   sustainability.                  strengthened          through
                            (MoWE), Ministry                           watershed                                                targeted activities.
                            of Agriculture and                         management


                                                                        28


                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                        Main participants    No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                          Stakeholder Feedback                   Response
                             Group            Male      Female           Discussed
                        Irrigation (MAI),                                                  -Women             actively      - Weather station and IWRM
                        Local authorities,                                                 contribute    to     water       principles incorporated.
                        MAI offices in                             questionnaire:          management & nutrition.
                        districts   level,                                                 -     Weather       station      - Previous studies on Wadi
                                                                   Suggestions       for                                    Hajar to guide activity design.
                        National Water                                                     database emphasized to
                                                                   Enhancing
                        Resources                                                          prevent disasters.               -Implementation
                                                                   Coordination
                        Authority    ,                                                     -IWRM principles for Wadi        arrangements confirmed with
                                                                   Mechanisms              Hajar.
                        Research                                                                                            stakeholders.
                        Institutions and
                        Environmental                                                      -Role           Assessment:
                        Protection                                                         Evaluating the role of
                        Authority                                                          institutions through the
                                                                                           development                of
                                                                                           environmental plans.
                                                                                           -Modern Techniques:
                                                                                           • Implementing
                                                                                                modern        irrigation
                                                                                                techniques            by
                                                                                                providing necessary
                                                                                                tools.
                                                                                           • Capacity          Building:
                                                                                                Supporting
                                                                                                institutions through
                                                                   Summary           of         capacity building and
                                                                   Government                   strengthening water
                                                                   Institutions                 institutions.
                                                                   consultation            -Irrigation            Channel
                                                                                           Development:

                                                                                           •     Rehabilitation      and
                                                                                                 development          of



                                                                    29


                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                      Stakeholder Feedback          Response
                             Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                                             irrigation channels as
                                                                                             part of agricultural
                                                                                             infrastructure
                                                                                             support.
                                                                                         -Strengthening
                                                                                         Coordination:
                                                                                         • Improving
                                                                                              coordination
                                                                                              mechanisms      and
                                                                                              implementing project
                                                                                              components.
                                                                  Summary           of
                                                                  Beneficiary            -Soil Conservation:
                                                                  consultation           • Supporting             soil
                                                                  (males)                     conservation efforts
                                                                                              and        empowering
                                                                                              stakeholders through
                                                                  Discussion
                                                                                              their participation and
                                                                  Objectives       for
                                                                                              capacity building.
                                                                  activities,     the
                                                                  expected impacts,      -Role         Assessment:
                                                                  gaps,                  Evaluating the role of
                                                                  recommendations
                                                                                         institutions through the
                                                                  and knowledge to
                                                                  document               development             of
                                                                  stakeholders’          environmental plans.
                                                                  concerns        and    -Modern       Techniques:
                                                                  lessons-learned in     Implementing      modern
                                                                  reference FAO’s        irrigation techniques by
                                                                  components 1.2         providing necessary tools.
                                                                  (SOP2)      planned
                                                                  interventions and



                                                                   30


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants         Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                      Stakeholder Feedback         Response
                             Group           Male      Female           Discussed
                                                                  to anticipate the      -Capacity          Building:
                                                                  potential              Supporting      institutions
                                                                  mitigation             through capacity building
                                                                  measures        in
                                                                                         and strengthening water
                                                                  general
                                                                                         institutions.
                                                                                         -Irrigation        Channel
                                                                                         Development:
                                                                                         Rehabilitation           and
                                                                  Summary           of   development of irrigation
                                                                  Beneficiary
                                                                                         channels as part of
                                                                  consultation
                                                                                         agricultural infrastructure
                                                                  (Females)
                                                                                         support.

                                                                                         -Concerns: The necessity
                                                                                         of working according to a
                                                                                         clear mechanism.
                                                                                         -Positive          Impacts:
                                                                                         Expecting positive impacts
                                                                                         from                 project
                                                                                         interventions.
                                                                                         -Beneficiary Selection: The
                                                                                         best methods for selecting
                                                                                         beneficiaries depend on
                                                                                         established criteria.
                                                                                         -Role      of      Women:
                                                                                         Emphasizing              the
                                                                                         significant role of women
                                                                                         in production and work.



                                                                   31


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                        Main participants   No. of Participants        Key Issue
Agency   Data   Venue                                                                Stakeholder Feedback         Response
                             Group           Male      Female          Discussed
                                                                                   -Complaint       Reception
                                                                                   Mechanism:       Evaluated
                                                                                   positively.



                                                                                   -Positive          Impacts:
                                                                                   Confirming the positive
                                                                                   impacts      of      project
                                                                                   interventions.
                                                                                   -Beneficiary      Selection:
                                                                                   Conducted           through
                                                                                   committees              and
                                                                                   associations,          with
                                                                                   women's participation
                                                                                   -Complaint Mechanism:
                                                                                   No      complaint     boxes
                                                                                   available




                                                                  32


                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
4.2. Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for Stakeholder Engagement
The I-WISE Project applies a comprehensive stakeholder engagement approach tailored to the diverse needs, capacities, and influence levels of
different stakeholder groups. Engagement methods are designed to ensure inclusive, transparent, and culturally appropriate consultations
throughout all project stages, from preparation to implementation and operations.
The plan includes targeted outreach to affected parties, disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, and other interested stakeholders such as
government institutions, private sector actors, and local civil society. Engagement techniques include community consultations, focus group
discussions, public meetings, household visits, workshops, site visits, and the dissemination of accessible communication materials. This approach
ensures that stakeholders are not only informed but also actively involved in project planning, implementation, risk mitigation, and monitoring.
Table (2) summarizes the planned engagement tools, responsibilities, and frequency by stakeholder group and project phase.
Table 2: Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                                                                                                       Status
                                                             Topic of                                                                            (Completed/Planned)
  Project
                             Target Stakeholders           Consultation /       Method Used           Responsibilities    Frequency/ Timeline
   Stage
                                                             Message

                         Government ministries and        Present project      Formal meetings,    UNDP, UNOPS, FAO,     Initial consultations   Completed (July–
                         agencies (MoWE, MoAIF,           objectives,          workshops,          and IPs (SFD, PWP,    during design phase;    August 2025)
                         NWRA, MoPIC), local              components, and      technical working   UWS - PMU)            updates as needed
                         governorate and district         expected             group sessions                            before effectiveness
                         authorities, WUA members,        benefits; clarify
                         Irrigation Councils (ICs), and   roles and



     Preparation stage
                         Agricultural Cooperatives        responsibilities;
                         (ACs), local CSOs, basin         obtain input on
                         committee reps.                  design and
                                                          targeting; discuss
                                                          environmental
                                                          and social risks
                                                          including SEA/SH,
                                                          labor risks, OHS,
                                                          child labor, and
                                                          security risks.



                                                                                           33


                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                        Status
                                           Topic of                                                                               (Completed/Planned)
Project
             Target Stakeholders         Consultation /         Method Used           Responsibilities     Frequency/ Timeline
 Stage
                                           Message

          Local communities in target   Introducing           Community            IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS -   Initial consultations   Planned
          basins and urban/peri-        project, outline      consultations,       PMU)                   before sub-project
          urban WASH service areas      potential benefits    focus group                                 selection
                                        and impacts,          discussions, site
                                        solicit feedback      visits
                                        on needs and
                                        priorities; discuss
                                        environmental
                                        and social risks
                                        including SEA/SH,
                                        labor risks, OHS,
                                        child labor, and
                                        security risks.
          Project-Affected People:      Project scope and     Public meetings;     UNDP, UNOPS, FAO,      Prior to project        Planned
          Farmers, water user           rationale;            separate             and IPs (SFD, PWP,     effectiveness and
          associations, local           environmental &       meetings for         UWS - PMU)             during design
          communities in targeted       social principles     women and                                   finalization; at
          governorates, vulnerable      including SEA/SH,     vulnerable                                  community level in
          households (women-            labor risks, OHS,     groups; focus                               each targeted
          headed, elderly, persons      child labor, and      group                                       governorate
          with disabilities,            security risks;       discussions; field
          marginalized groups)          proposed              visits; disclosure
                                        interventions by      of written
                                        component;            information
                                        grievance             (brochures,
                                        mechanism             posters, flyers);
                                        process;              information




                                                                            34


                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                                                                                              Status
                                         Topic of                                                                       (Completed/Planned)
Project
             Target Stakeholders       Consultation /       Method Used       Responsibilities    Frequency/ Timeline
 Stage
                                         Message

                                      expected benefits    boards at
                                      and risks            community
                                                           centers
          Other Interested Parties    Policy alignment;    Formal meetings; UNDP, UNOPS, FAO     Quarterly   or    as Planned
          (internal):      Relevant   roles          and   inter-agency                          required
          government ministries and   responsibilities;    workshops;
          agencies (MoPIC and local   legal          and   submission    of
          governorates)               compliance           reports
                                      issues;
                                      monitoring and
                                      reporting
                                      arrangements




                                                                       35


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                              Status
                                                          Topic of                                                                      (Completed/Planned)
Project
                            Target Stakeholders         Consultation /     Method Used        Responsibilities    Frequency/ Timeline
 Stage
                                                          Message

                                                      Inform           on                                                               Planned
                                                      implementation
                                                      progress,
                                                      construction
                                                      schedules,
                                                      potential
                                                      disruptions,




  Implementation stage
                                                      grievance
                                                      mechanism
                                                      access;      cover Community                              Quarterly        during
                         Local communities        and                                      IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS -
                                                      community           meetings, public                      construction        and
                         beneficiaries                                                     PMU)
                                                      health and safety, notices, leaflets                      annually thereafter
                                                      OHS risks, labor
                                                      risks   (including
                                                      child       labor),
                                                      SEA/SH
                                                      prevention,
                                                      security risks, and
                                                      environmental
                                                      mitigation
                                                      measures.




                                                                                     36


                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                Status
                                           Topic of                                                                       (Completed/Planned)
Project
             Target Stakeholders         Consultation /        Method Used       Responsibilities   Frequency/ Timeline
 Stage
                                           Message

          Project-Affected    People:   Work schedules;       Community          UNDP, UNOPS, FAO Monthly during work     Planned
          Farmers, Households, water    construction          consultations; on- and IPs (SFD, PWP,
          user associations, laborers   impacts; safety       site     meetings; UWS - PMU)
          in      worksites,    local   measures;             toolbox     talks;
          communities in sub-project    environmental         leaflets        at
          areas                         and         social    worksites;
          in project areas, and Local   mitigation            grievance
          businesses.                   measures              mechanism
                                        including SEA/SH,     notice boards
                                        labor risks, OHS,
                                        child labor, and
                                        security     risks;
                                        grievance
                                        mechanism;
                                        community roles




                                                                         37


                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                 Status
                                           Topic of                                                                        (Completed/Planned)
Project
             Target Stakeholders         Consultation /      Method Used        Responsibilities    Frequency/ Timeline
 Stage
                                           Message

                                     Tailored                                                                              Planned
                                     information on
                                     project activities,
                                     rights, benefits,
                                     and      grievance
                                     channels; gather
                                     feedback         on
                                     access          and    Dedicated focus
          Disadvantaged/vulnerable
                                     inclusion; cover       group
          groups (women, elderly,
                                     community              discussions,      IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS - Twice a year, or more
          persons with disabilities,
                                     health and safety,     household visits, PMU)                 frequently as needed
          IDPs,        marginalized
                                     OHS risks, labor       accessible
          communities)
                                     risks    (including    materials
                                     child        labor),
                                     SEA/SH
                                     prevention,
                                     security risks, and
                                     environmental
                                     mitigation
                                     measures.
          Other Interested Parties: Procurement             Supplier          UNDP, UNOPS, FAO At procurement stages; Planned
          Private sector suppliers and opportunities;       meetings; pre-bid and IPs (SFD, PWP, as needed
          contractors.                 health & safety      briefings;        UWS - PMU)
                                       requirements;        workshops;
                                       environmental        written
                                       and         social   guidelines; email
                                                            communications




                                                                       38


                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                             Status
                                                          Topic of                                                                     (Completed/Planned)
Project
                              Target Stakeholders       Consultation /     Method Used       Responsibilities    Frequency/ Timeline
 Stage
                                                          Message

                                                      compliance; GM
                                                      process
                                                     Consult        on                                                                 Planned
                                                     operational
                           Basin Committees, Water                     Coordination
                                                     issues,     water                    IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS -
                           User Associations, LWSCs,                   meetings, training                      Quarterly, as needed
                                                     allocation,                          PMU)
                           GARWSP branches                             sessions
                                                     infrastructure
                                                     management
                           Project-Affected   People: O&M        roles;   Follow-up           UNDP, UNOPS, FAO Semi-annual     during Planned
                           Water user associations, sustainability        meetings;           and IPs (SFD, PWP, O&M phase
                           farmers, local communities measures;           refresher training; UWS - PMU)
                                                      feedback      on    GM       updates;
                                                      system              community




 Operation & Maintenance
                                                      performance;        monitoring visits
                                                      grievance
                                                      mechanism
                           Other Interested Parties: Project              Review           UNDP, UNOPS, FAO Annually, as needed        Planned
                           Relevant ministries and outcomes:              workshops;       and IPs (SFD, PWP,
                           agencies; donors; NGOs    lessons learned;     dissemination of UWS - PMU)
                                                     compliance with      reports
                                                     E&S
                                                     commitments;
                                                     future
                                                     collaboration




                                                                                     39


                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
4.3. Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the Views of Vulnerable Groups
The Project will conduct targeted and culturally appropriate stakeholder engagement with
vulnerable and disadvantaged groups identified in the stakeholder analysis, including women
(particularly women-headed households), elderly persons, persons with disabilities, internally
displaced persons, marginalized communities, poor and landless households, and unemployed
youth. Engagement will be designed to ensure their views, concerns, and priorities are
meaningfully considered throughout the project life cycle.
To remove barriers to participation, consultations will be conducted at times and locations
convenient for these groups, with gender-segregated sessions where appropriate, female
facilitators and when feasible transport support. Information will be disseminated in accessible
formats and local languages (e.g., Arabic, simplified language, visual aids, oral presentations) to
accommodate low literacy levels and disabilities. Trusted community leaders and local
associations will be engaged to extend outreach, build trust, and facilitate feedback collection.
Capacity-building initiatives will be provided to vulnerable groups, particularly women and WUAs,
to enhance their understanding of water management practices, project benefits, and their rights
and responsibilities.
Dedicated grievance channels will be adapted to meet the needs of vulnerable groups, ensuring
accessibility, confidentiality, and survivor-centered handling of sensitive complaints such as GBV
or SEA/SH. Participation will be regularly monitored, and feedback systematically integrated into
project adjustments to ensure inclusion and accountability.
5. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement

5.1. Implementation Arrangements and Resources
The overall responsibility for the implementation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) lies
with the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) established within each Implementing Agency
(UNDP, UNOPS, and FAO) for their respective project components and sub-components. Each
PIU will be led by a Project Manager/Coordinator and supported by Environmental and Social
Risk Management (ESRM)/Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) team, including focal points
for stakeholder engagement and grievance redress. These ESRM/ESS team and focal points will
be formally appointed by the respective UN Agencies to ensure clear accountability and adequate
capacity for stakeholder engagement and grievance management.
The Implementing Agencies will be responsible for planning, coordinating, and monitoring
stakeholder engagement activities, ensuring that they are consistent with the requirements of
the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and the SEP. The PIUs will work closely
with their respective local implementing partners, the Social Fund for Development (SFD), the
Public Works Project (PWP), and the Urban Water Supply Project Management Unit (UWS - PMU),
to deliver engagement activities at the community level.
The PIUs will (i) help to supervise and streamline the Grievance Mechanism (GM) management
system based on the experience from field; (ii) provide support to respective project affected
communities in arranging training on SEA/SH related risk mitigation ; (iii) manage the overall
training and capacity-building program; (iv) monitor and supervise all project management
activities; (v) organize monitoring and evaluation activities, including GM management; (vi)
prepare necessary project progress and project completion reports; and (vii) ensure full

                                               40


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
compliance with World Bank ESF, including the management of child labor risks, occupational
health and safety (OHS) risks, and relevant UN and national regulations.

Stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through meeting minutes, consultation
reports, progress updates, and GM records, which will be compiled by the PIUs and shared with
the World Bank and other relevant stakeholders as per the agreed reporting schedule.

Table 3: Role and Responsibilities for SEP Implementation
    Actor / Stakeholder / Responsible Person                         Responsibilities
                                                     -   Provide     overall      oversight   of   SEP
                                                         implementation        for    their  respective
                                                         components.
                                                     -   Ensure compliance with World Bank ESF and
                                                         national regulations.
                                                     -   Review and consolidate monthly consultation
                                                         reports from IPs.
                                                     -   Provide technical guidance and support to IPs
   UNDP, UNOPS, FAO (Implementing Agencies)
                                                         on stakeholder engagement, GM operation,
                                                         and SEA/SH risk mitigation.
                                                     -   Compile and submit Bi-annual stakeholder
                                                         engagement and GM reports to the World
                                                         Bank.
                                                     -   Lead coordination with other UN agencies,
                                                         government bodies, and donors on SEP-
                                                         related activities.
                                                     -   Plan and conduct stakeholder consultations
                                                         at the community level in coordination with
                                                         local     authorities      and     community
                                                         representatives.
                                                     -   Facilitate inclusive engagement with
                                                         vulnerable groups, ensuring accessibility and
                                                         cultural sensitivity.
  SFD, PWP, UWS-PMU (Implementing Partners)
                                                     -   Maintain records of all consultations,
                                                         including participant lists, meeting minutes,
                                                         and feedback received.
                                                     -   Operate and publicize the GM at the
                                                         community level.
                                                     -   Report consultation and GM activities
                                                         monthly to the respective UN agency.
                                                     -   Inform local communities about planned
                                                         work, schedules, and potential impacts.
                                                     -   Maintain      open      communication     with
                                                         stakeholders during construction activities.
                                                     -   Display GM contact details and project
   ESRM/ESS Specialists (appointed by both UN
                                                         information at worksites.
              agencies and IPs)
                                                     -   Report any grievances, feedback, or
                                                         stakeholder concerns.
                                                     -   Implement the Contractor’s Code of Conduct,
                                                         Labor Management Procedures, and relevant
                                                         E&S mitigation measures.


                                                41


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
    Actor / Stakeholder / Responsible Person                           Responsibilities
                                                       -   Support mobilization of community members
                                                           for consultations.
                                                       -   Facilitate coordination between the project
    Local Authorities (Governorate and District            and local stakeholders.
                       Levels)                         -   Monitor local-level implementation of
                                                           stakeholder engagement activities.
                                                       -   Assist in addressing grievances where local
                                                           authority intervention is required.
                                                       -   Support dissemination of project information
                                                           to the wider community.
                                                       -   Represent community concerns, priorities,
         Community Representatives /                       and feedback to IPs and UN agencies.
        Leaders/Community Committees                   -   Encourage participation of vulnerable groups
                                                           in consultations.
                                                       -   Collaborate in resolving minor grievances and
                                                           ensuring community awareness of GM.

The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through detailed minutes of meetings,
attendance sheets, photographic records, a dedicated stakeholder engagement log, biannual
progress reports, TPM reports, and mission discussions/presentations. All feedback received,
including grievances, will be systematically recorded and tracked.

The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through the PIU, led by the ESRM
Unit.

The budget estimate for preparing and implementing the SEP is USD 120,000. The budget
breakdown can be found in Annex 2. See the sample budget line items listed in Annex 2.

6. Grievance Mechanism (GM)

A Grievance Mechanism is a system that allows not only grievances, but also queries, suggestions,
positive feedback, and concerns of project-affected parties related to the environmental and
social performance of a project to be submitted and responded to in a timely manner.

6.1. Description of Grievance Mechanism
The project’s Grievance Mechanism (GM) ensures that stakeholders can raise concerns and
receive timely, fair, and effective responses. It is designed to be accessible, confidential,
transparent, and survivor-centered, in line with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Standard 10 (ESS10), the safeguard policies of UNDP, UNOPS, and FAO, as well as applicable
national laws. The mechanism applies to all project components and is coordinated across three
levels.




                                                  42


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Grievance Redress Structure
 Level             Description
 1. Community      Grievances are first received at community level through Implementing
 Level             Partners (SFD, PWP, UWS - PMU) via designated GM focal points and
                   grievance boxes in project sites. These focal points ensure complaints are
                   logged immediately and acknowledged.
 2. National PIU   If a complaint cannot be resolved at the local level, it will be escalated
 Level             promptly to the PIU Complaint Committee. The Committee, which includes
                   ESRM Specialists and relevant technical staff, is responsible for reviewing
                   and resolving such cases in a timely, confidential, and survivor-centered
                   manner.
 3. UN Agency      UNDP, FAO, and UNOPS provide technical support, oversight, and
 Oversight Level   consolidation of data from IPs. The ESRM teams within these agencies ensure
                   that the GM operates according to World Bank standards, survivor-centered
                   SEA/SH protocols, and national laws. Complex or unresolved grievances may
                   be escalated to this level for joint decision-making and reporting to the World
                   Bank.

                   For FAO-managed activities, the GM will be implemented by the Monitoring,
                   Evaluation, Accountability and Learning (MEAL) Unit. The FAO GM Focal
                   Points in Sana’a and Aden are responsible for managing the mechanism.
                   These focal points maintain and record beneficiaries’ complaints in the FAO
                   system and share them with the Project Management Unit.

                   If grievance is of a sensitive in nature (e.g., SEA/SH, child protection),
                   additional safeguards apply. For SEA/SH-related complaints, confidentiality
                   and the safety of the complainant are strictly prioritized. Information is
                   shared only on a need-to-know basis with individuals directly responsible for
                   handling the case. The GM team immediately escalates SEA/SH complaints,
                   which are referred directly to the designated GBV Focal Point for appropriate
                   management.
                   For FAO-managed cases, and in line with FAO’s Policy on the Prevention of
                   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) (AC 2013/27), the FAO Representative
                   (FAOR) should forward the complaint or reasonable concern without delay
                   to the Ethics Officer (Senior PSEA Focal Point, HQ OIG) for immediate action.
                   FAO follow the Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) to inform
                   the WB for any incident received by GRM. And FAOR will notify the World
                   Bank of any SEA cases within 24-48 hours as per the ESCP.




                                             43


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Grievance Uptake Channels
Grievances can be submitted through any of the following channels:
 Agency             Channels
 UNDP                  Toll-free: 8000939
                       Email: amani.al-muntaser@undp.org / mohammed.salah@undp.org
                       In person: UNDP Office in Yemen
                       Global: project.concerns@undp.org / Call +1-844-595-5206
                       In person:
 UNOPS                 Toll-free: 8000190
                       SMS: 8000190
                       WhatsApp: 739888388
                       Email: grm.yemen@unops.org
                       In person: UNOPS Office
 FAO                   Toll-free: 8001919
                       WhatsApp: 776013030
                       Email: Yemen-Feedback@fao.org
                       In person: FAO Office
                       Website: www.fao.org
                       In person: FAO Office
                       The surveys and consultations were carried out by FAO staff
 SFD                   Toll-free: 8009800
                       SMS: 771788975
                       WhatsApp: 771788975
                       Email: chm_hq@sfd-yemen.org
                       In person: SFD Office
                       Suggestion boxes at sub-project sites
 PWP                   Toll-free: 8002626
                       SMS: 775626262
                       WhatsApp: 775626262
                       Email: grm@pwpyemen.org
                       In person: PWP Office
                       Suggestion boxes at sub-project sites
 UWS - PMU             Telephone: 02-275585
                       Email: piuaden@gmail.com
                       In person: UWS - PMU Office
                       Suggestion boxes at sub-project sites

GM Process Flow
       Step                     Description               Timeline         Responsible Party
 Sorting, processing    Any complaint received is      Upon receipt of   Local GM focal points
                        forwarded to the               complaint
                        designated grievance focal
                        point; logged in the central
                        GM database; categorized
                        according to the following


                                                44


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
           Step                       Description                      Timeline               Responsible Party
                            complaint types: Low,
                            Moderate, and Critical4.
    Acknowledgement         Receipt of the grievance is    Within 2 – 3 days Local GM focal points
    and follow-up           acknowledged to the            of receipt
                            complainant by SMS,
                            phone, email, or written
                            note. A grievance ID
                            number is provided.
    Verification,           Verification of a complaint is Within 10 – 14 The              Complaint
    investigation,          led by the relevant GM focal working days        Committee              is
    action                  point or, where necessary,                       composed of PIU GM
                            by a designated Complaint The duration also focal points, the ESRM
                            Committee composed of depends on each Specialist, and relevant
                            PIU staff and, when case individually, technical staff as
                            appropriate, independent based on its type, required. SEA/SH cases
                            experts, with support from circumstances,        are referred directly to
                            technical specialists as and sensitivity.        the designated GBV
                            needed.                                          focal point, or, in the
                                                                             case of FAO-managed
                                                                             activities, to the FAOR
                            Cases of sexual exploitation
                                                                             and the Senior PSEA
                            and             abuse/sexual
                                                                             Focal Point at HQ OIG.
                            harassment (SEA/SH) are
                            immediately referred to a
                            specialized GBV focal point
                            and are not investigated by
                            project staff.
                            FAO-specific procedures: In
                            line with FAO’s procedures,
                            SEA/SH cases are referred
                            without delay to the FAO
                            Representative (FAOR). The
                            FAOR is responsible for
                            forwarding the complaint or
                            concern directly to the FAO
                            Ethics Office (Senior PSEA
                            Focal Point, HQ Office of the
                            Inspector General - OIG) for
                            immediate action.



4
 Low = inquiries, requests for assistance, or false calls.
Moderate = operational delays, under-distribution, unclear selection criteria, quality issues, overlapping activities,
dissatisfaction, labor disputes, technical shortcomings, environmental concerns, or non-critical OHS incidents.
Critical = staff misconduct, corruption, fraud, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), Gender-Based Violence (GBV), child
protection violations, abuse of authority, forced displacement, land-related issues, or fatal/serious workplace
accidents.

                                                         45


                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       Step                 Description                Timeline         Responsible Party
                    For non-SEA/SH cases, a
                    proposed resolution is
                    formulated by the
                    Complaint Committee and
                    communicated to the
                    complainant by the GM
                    focal point in a timely and
                    transparent manner.
Monitoring    and   Data on complaints is          Monthly            PIU GM Focal Points
evaluation          collected in the GM            tracking;
                    Information System and         quarterly/bi-
                    reported to PIU                annually
                    management monthly.            reporting
                    Consolidated reports are
                    submitted bi-annually to
                    the World Bank.
Provision      of   Feedback from                  Upon resolution    GM Focal Point
feedback            complainants regarding         of grievance
                    their satisfaction with
                    complaint resolution is
                    collected through follow-
                    up calls, SMS, short
                    surveys, or in-person
                    meetings, and documented
                    in the GM Information
                    System.
Training            Training needs for             At    start   of   ESRM Team at UNDP,
                    staff/consultants in the       project     and    FAO, UNOPS, and
                    PIU, Contractors, and          quarterly with     Implementing
                    Supervision Consultants        refresher          Partners (SFD, PWP,
                    include grievance uptake,      sessions    held   and UWS - PMU)
                    sorting, recording,            annually
                    response, and feedback
                    mechanisms, with a strong
                    focus on grievance
                    handling, confidentiality,
                    World Bank ESF
                    requirements, SEA/SH
                    survivor-centered
                    protocols, and reporting
                    procedures. Training will
                    also cover communication
                    skills, conflict resolution,
                    and protocols for handling
                    sensitive complaints, with
                    regular refresher sessions.

                                           46


                                                                                            Official Use Only
        Step                   Description               Timeline          Responsible Party
 Appeals process       If a complainant is not       Upon request        PIUs at UNDP, FAO,
                       satisfied with the proposed                       UNOPS, Implementing
                       resolution, they will have                        Partners (SFD, PWP,
                       the right to appeal.                              and UWS - PMU), and
                       Appeals will first be                             World Bank
                       reviewed by the PIU
                       through a higher-level
                       Committee and, where
                       appropriate, an
                       independent third party. If
                       the grievance remains
                       unresolved, the
                       complainant may escalate
                       the case to the World
                       Bank’s Grievance Redress
                       Service (GRS) or the
                       Inspection Panel. The
                       appeals process will
                       guarantee impartiality,
                       transparency, and timely
                       resolution, while
                       safeguarding the
                       complainant’s rights to
                       confidentiality and
                       protection.

6.2. Labor Grievance Mechanism
A dedicated Labor Grievance Mechanism (Labor GM) will be established to address grievances
from all workers engaged under the I-WISE Project. This includes workers hired by contractors,
subcontractors, service providers, implementing partners (IPs), those involved in community
contracting, and individuals under Cash-for-Work (CFW) arrangements. The Labor GM will align
with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standard 2 (ESS2) and applicable national labor
regulations, ensuring that the process is accessible, confidential, transparent, and free from
retaliation.
Structure and Oversight
The Labor GM will be integrated into the broader project grievance system, coordinated by the
IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS-PMU) and overseen by the respective UN agencies (UNDP, FAO, and UNOPS)
based on component responsibilities. Contractors, subcontractors, and IPs will each designate
site-level grievance focal points (e.g., Site Manager, OHS Officer) to receive, log, and resolve
complaints raised by workers. Grievances that cannot be resolved at the site level will be
escalated to the respective IP or UN agency for review and resolution.




                                              47


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Reporting Channels
Workers may submit grievances through multiple safe and accessible channels, including:
   • Direct submission to on-site grievance focal persons
   • Complaint/suggestion boxes at sub-project locations
   • Toll-free telephone hotlines or SMS services operated by IPs
   • Direct email or walk-in submission to IP/UN agency GM focal points
   • Anonymous reporting options for sensitive cases (e.g., SEA/SH)

All workers will be informed of these channels through regular briefings and training sessions at
project induction and during implementation.
Confidentiality and Protection
The Labor GM will include clear provisions to:
    • Maintain confidentiality of the complainant
    • Allow anonymous submissions
    • Preventing retaliation or discrimination against those raising concerns
    • Ensure survivor-centered response protocols for SEA/SH-related complaints

Scope of Grievances
Grievances addressed under the Labor GM may include, but are not limited to:
    • Non-payment or delayed payment of wages
    • Violations of employment terms or contracts
    • Occupational health and safety (OHS) risks and incidents
    • Poor working or living conditions
    • Workplace harassment or discrimination
    • Incidents of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, or Harassment (SEA/SH)
    • Inadequate access to protective equipment or rest breaks

SEA/SH cases will be managed under confidential protocols with referral to trained GBV focal
points.
Awareness and Capacity Building
All workers will receive mandatory induction training on:
     • The Labor GM process
     • Their rights under national and project-specific labor standards
     • The project’s Labor Code of Conduct (CoC)
     • Preventive and response measures related to SEA/SH and workplace misconduct

Resolution and Monitoring
Each grievance will be:
   • Logged and tracked from receipt to resolution
   • Resolved within defined timeframes
   • Followed up with the complainant to confirm satisfaction
Labor grievances will be summarized monthly by the IPs and shared with the respective UN
agency. Consolidated reports will be submitted to the World Bank as part of regular
environmental and social performance reporting.

The Labor GM will be further detailed in the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) of the project.

                                              48


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
6.3. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH)
The Project’s Grievance Mechanism (GM) will be fully equipped and trained to receive and
manage complaints related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in
a safe, confidential, and survivor-centered manner. This includes SEA/SH cases involving children,
in line with the World Bank’s Good Practice Note. All partners, including UNDP, FAO, UNOPS, and
the Implementing Partners (SFD, PWP, and UWS-PMU), will ensure that their staff are trained in
the ethical handling of SEA/SH complaints, with strict adherence to principles of confidentiality,
informed consent, and non-retaliation. Complaints may be submitted through existing grievance
channels at the community, partner, or UN agency level, and only essential non-identifying details
will be documented

The GM will apply a survivor-centered approach, prioritizing the wishes, needs, and safety of
survivors at every stage. Immediate referral pathways will be established with qualified service
providers to guarantee access to medical, psychosocial, legal, and protection support.
Information on these services and focal points will be made available to all GM operators and
shared with communities through accessible means. Where perpetrators are linked to project
activities, swift action will be taken in accordance with the Code of Conduct signed by all workers,
which may include disciplinary measures such as suspension, termination, or referral to law
enforcement. Discreet and timely handling of cases will be ensured, with reporting to the World
Bank limited to consolidated, non-identifying data on cases received, actions taken, and
outcomes.

Alongside grievance management, the project will invest heavily in training and capacity building.
UNDP, FAO, UNOPS, and the IPs will deliver targeted and ongoing training for staff, partners, and
stakeholders, with a focus on SEA/SH risk awareness, safe and confidential reporting, referral
pathways, and reinforcement of the Code of Conduct. This training will be complemented by
refresher sessions throughout the project cycle to ensure that readiness and responsiveness
remain strong.
Awareness-raising and community engagement will also form a core part of the strategy. Regular
campaigns will be conducted to ensure that all community members, particularly women and
vulnerable groups, are aware of their rights, know how to report grievances, and understand the
services available to them. These campaigns will specifically include the dissemination of
information on the legal rights of beneficiaries to strengthen their protection and empower them
to act if violations occur. Moreover, the project will guarantee equitable participation of women
and vulnerable groups in project-related consultations and employment opportunities, thereby
ensuring that engagement goes beyond awareness and extends into meaningful involvement in
decision-making and access to benefits. Community engagement will further emphasize the role
of women-led groups, vulnerable households, and local community structures in reducing risks,
strengthening prevention measures, and building trust in the GM.
The GM for the I-WISE Project will be multi-tiered, allowing for various entry points and resolution
levels to ensure accessibility and effectiveness for all stakeholders, including vulnerable groups.
The mechanism will be designed to be culturally appropriate, transparent, and responsive to
community needs. In addition, FAO has established a specific safeguard whereby any SEA/SH
report received will trigger immediate follow-up by the Ethics Officer, who will act in accordance
with the official chain of action and FAO’s internal procedures to ensure accountability and timely
response.

                                                49


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
7. Monitoring and Reporting

7.1. Summary of How SEP Will Be Monitored and Reported Upon
The SEP will be monitored based on both qualitative reporting (based on progress reports) and
quantitative reporting linked to results indicators on stakeholder engagement and grievance
performance.

SEP reporting will include the following:
   (i) Progress reporting on the ESS10-Stakeholder Engagement commitments under the
       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
  (ii) Cumulative qualitative reporting on the feedback received during SEP activities, in
       particular (a) issues that have been raised that can be addressed through changes in
       project scope and design, and reflected in the basic documentation such as the Project
       Appraisal Document, Environmental and Social Assessment, Resettlement Plan,
       Indigenous Peoples Plan, or SEA/SH Action Plan, if needed; (b) issues that have been
       raised and can be addressed during project implementation; (c) issues that have been
       raised that are beyond the scope of the project and are better addressed through
       alternative projects, programs or initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by
       the project due to technical, jurisdictional or excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes
       of meetings summarizing the views of the attendees can also be annexed to the
       monitoring reports.
 (iii) Quantitative reporting based on the indicators included in the SEP. An illustrative set of
       indicators for monitoring and reporting is included in Annex 3.
7.2. Reporting Back to Stakeholder Groups
The SEP will be revised and updated as necessary during project implementation. Quarterly
summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related incidents, together
with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventative actions will be collated
by responsible staff and referred to the project managers. Specific mechanisms to report back to
stakeholders will include:

    ▪   Number of consultation meetings and public discussions held within the reporting period
        (quarterly or bi-annual), disaggregated by location and participant type (including women
        and vulnerable groups).
    ▪   Frequency and coverage of public engagement activities, including settlements in remote
        or underserved areas within the project area of influence.
    ▪   Number and type of grievances received within the reporting period, and the proportion
        resolved within 14 days timeline, covering both the community GM and labor GM.
    ▪   Number of press or communication materials published/broadcast in local, regional, and
        national media.

Feedback to communities will be provided through public/community meetings, basin committee
briefings, direct communication, and grievance channels. These channels will ensure that
stakeholders, including those in remote areas, are informed of project progress, decisions, and
grievance outcomes.




                                              50


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
8. Annexes

Annex 1: Template to Capture Consultation Minutes
     Stakeholder (Group or          Summary of           Response of Project       Follow-up Action/Next
          Individual)                Feedback           Implementation Team                Steps




Annex 2: SEP Budget Table5
The following budget is a provisional collective estimate covering all three UN agencies (UNDP,
FAO, UNOPS). Each agency will allocate and manage its share of resources within its respective
project components.

                                                 Unit
        Stakeholder                                                            Total Cost
                                  Quantity       Cost         Times/Years                    Remarks
    Engagement Activities                                                        (US$)
                                                (US$)
                                                                                            Covered
                                                                                            under
    Staff/Consultants                                                                       Project
                                      -           -                -               -
    salaries                                                                                Consulting
                                                                                            Service
                                                                                            Budget
    Training on Stakeholder
                                 Lump sum         -         Annual/As needed   10,000.00
    Engagement and GM
    Stakeholder/Community
    Meetings in project          Lump sum         -         Annual/As needed   10,000.00
    areas
    Meetings with District &          2                                                     Institutional
                                                 500            5 years         5,000.00
    Governorate Officials       meetings/year                                               engagement
    Travel expenses (field
                                 Lump sum         -            Quarterly       80,000.00
    visits, consultations)
    Communication
    materials    (posters,
    brochures,      flyers,      Lump sum         -             Annual          5,000.00
    billboards,   website
    updates)
    GM              expenses                                                                GM
    (committee meetings,         Lump sum         -             Annual         10,000.00    operation &
    follow-up, hotline costs)                                                               monitoring
    TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:                                       120,000.00



5
 This budget is a provisional/referential estimate and should not be considered final or fully accurate. It
provides an indicative allocation of resources for stakeholder engagement and grievance redress activities
collectively across all participating agencies (UNDP, FAO, UNOPS, and Implementing Partners). Each agency
will manage its own share of resources for SEP and GM implementation within its respective project
components.

                                                       51


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
Annex 3: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP
  Key evaluation                                                                          Data Collection
                     Specific Evaluation questions         Potential Indicators
    questions                                                                                Methods

 GM. To what         •   Are        project-affected   •     Usage of GM               Records from the
 extent       have       parties raising issues and          and/or feedback           implementing agency
 project-affected        grievances?                         mechanisms                and other relevant
 parties     been    •   How quickly/effectively are   •     Requests           for    agencies
 provided     with       the grievances resolved?            information from
 accessible and                                              relevant agencies.
 inclusive means                                       •     Use of suggestion
 to raise issues                                             boxes placed in
 and grievances?                                             the
 Has           the                                           villages/project
 implementing                                                communities.
 agency                                                •     Number              of
 responded      to                                           grievances raised
 and     managed                                             by         workers,
 such grievances?                                            disaggregated by
                                                             gender of workers
                                                             and       worksite,
                                                             resolved within a
                                                             specified       time
                                                             frame.
                                                       •     Number of Sexual
                                                             Exploitation, and
                                                             Abuse/Sexual
                                                             Harassment
                                                             (SEA/SH)       cases
                                                             reported in the
                                                             project       areas,
                                                             which          were
                                                             referred           for
                                                             health, social, legal
                                                             and         security
                                                             support according
                                                             to the referral
                                                             process in place. (if
                                                             applicable)
                                                       •     Number              of
                                                             grievances       that
                                                             have been (i)
                                                             opened,            (ii)
                                                             opened for more
                                                             than 30 days, (iii)
                                                             resolved,         (iv)
                                                             closed, and (v)
                                                             number              of
                                                             responses        that
                                                             satisfied         the
                                                             complainants,
                                                             during            the

                                                  52


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
 Key evaluation                                                                           Data Collection
                     Specific Evaluation questions          Potential Indicators
   questions                                                                                 Methods

                                                              reporting period
                                                              disaggregated by
                                                              category          of
                                                              grievance, gender,
                                                              age, and location
                                                              of complainant.
Stakeholder          •   Was there interest and         •     Active                   Stakeholder
engagement               support for the project?             participation     of     Consultation
impact         on    •   Were        there       any          stakeholders       in    Attendance
project design           adjustments made during              activities               Sheets/Minutes
and                      project     design      and    •     Number of actions
implementation.          implementation based on              taken in a timely        Evaluation forms
How          have        the feedback received?               manner             in
engagement           •   Was priority information             response          to     Structured surveys
activities made a        disclosed    to    relevant          feedback received
difference      in       parties throughout the               during                   Social
project design           project cycle?                       consultation             media/traditional
and                                                           sessions       with      media entries on the
implementation?                                               project affected         project results
                                                              parties.
                                                        •     Number            of
                                                              consultation
                                                              meetings        and
                                                              public discussions
                                                              where            the
                                                              feedback        and
                                                              recommendation
                                                              received            is
                                                              reflected in project
                                                              design          and
                                                              implementation.
                                                        •     Number            of
                                                              disaggregated
                                                              engagement
                                                              sessions       held,
                                                              focused on at-risk
                                                              groups in the
                                                              project.
Implementation       •   Were       the    activities   •     Percentage of SEP        Communication
effectiveness.           implemented as planned?              activities               Strategy (Consultation
Were                     Why or why not?                      implemented.             Schedule)
stakeholder          •   Was      the   stakeholder     •     Key barriers to
engagement               engagement        approach           participation            Periodic Focus Group
activities               inclusive of disaggregated           identified     with      Discussions
effective      in        groups? Why or why not?              stakeholder
implementation?                                               representatives.         Face-to-face meetings
                                                        •     Number            of     and/or Focus Group
                                                              adjustments made         discussions     with
                                                              in the stakeholder


                                                   53


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
  Key evaluation                                                                Data Collection
                     Specific Evaluation questions    Potential Indicators
    questions                                                                      Methods

                                                        engagement           Vulnerable Groups or
                                                        approach        to   their representatives
                                                        improve projects’
                                                        outreach,
                                                        inclusion      and
                                                        effectiveness.

Annex 4: Project Map




FAO Project Map for Wadi Hajar




Figures FAO activities Watershed –Wadi Hajar
Map © FAO Yemen


                                                 54


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Annex 5: Photo Documentation of Consultation Workshops
This annex provides photographic documentation of the stakeholder consultation workshops
conducted under the project between July–August 2025.

              Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Hajar – UNOPS (July 14, 2025)




           Stakeholder Consultation with MoWE in Aden – UNDP (July 30, 2025)




                                           55


                                                                                           Official Use Only
Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS
                                 (August 3, 2025)




                                      56


                                                                                  Official Use Only
         Stakeholder Consultation with MoWE in Aden – FAO (August 12, 2025)




Disclosed in the media: ‫حضموت يطلع‬  ‫محافظ ر‬
        ‫ر‬
‫تحسي اإلدارة‬     ‫ر‬
              ‫"مشوع‬   ‫عل مخرجات ورشة عمل‬
‫⋆ "المتكاملة لمستجمعات المياه لحوض وادي حجر‬ Minutes of meeting for the consultation
                                            conducted by FAO‘s team in MoWE



     Stakeholder Consultation for Wadi Hajar in Al Mukalla – FAO (August 13, 2025)




                                         57


                                                                                      Official Use Only
         Stakeholder Consultation for Wadi Hajar in Al Mukalla – FAO (August 13, 2025)




Annex 6: Media Coverage of Stakeholder Consultations
Stakeholder Consultation with MoWE in Aden – UNDP (July 30, 2025)
‫اإلنمائ آليات تنفيذ مشاري ع المياه والبيئة‬ ‫البنامج‬
                                                ‫جب يبحث مع ر‬   ‫ر‬
                                   ‫ي‬                      ‫ الوزير الش ر ي‬- ‫رئاسة مجلس الوزراء‬

Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS (August
3, 2025)
 ‫تحسي إدارة المياه والري نف وادي ر ن‬
‫تي‬                              ‫ن‬       ‫ وزير المياه يفتتح ورشة عمل تشاورية ر‬- ‫رئاسة مجلس الوزراء‬
                                     ‫لمشوع‬
           ‫ي‬
Publishing the consultative meetings conducted by FAO with government institutions and the
local community

https://www.facebook.com/share/16t4p6jnCs/
           ‫ وزارة الزراعة والري ر‬-" ‫وزير الزراعة واألسماك ريثأس اللقاء التشاوري بي الوزارة ومنظمة "الفاو‬
‫والثوة السمكية‬
https://share.google/pCyBEqHAFtTwXlNST

https://www.nhadramout.com/14/08/2025/213023/.html

‫“مشوع تحسي اإلدارة المتكاملة لمستجمعات المياه لخوض وادي حجر‬‫ورشة عمل تشاورية بالمكال حول ر‬
https://hadramout.news/en/2025/08/14/‫تحس‬-‫مشوع‬          ‫ ر‬-‫حول‬-‫بالمكال‬-‫تشاورية‬-‫عمل‬-‫ورشة‬/



Annex 7: Attendance sheet from Stakeholder Consultation
Annex (1) Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Tuban – UNOPS (July 14, 2025)



   Stakeholder
Consultation in Wadi Hajar – UNOPS (July 14, 2025).pdf




                                                        58


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Annex (2) Stakeholder Consultation with the IPs in Aden – UNDP (July 28, 2025)



   Stakeholder
Consultation with the IPs in Aden – UNDP (July 28, 2025).pdf

Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS (August
3, 2025)



 Joint Stakeholder
Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS (August 3, 2025).pdf

Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Hajar in Hadramout – FAO (August 13, 2025)



   Stakeholder
Consultation in Wadi Hajar – FAO (August 13, 2025).pdf

Annex 8: Stakeholder Consultation Summary

FAO Conducted Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Hajar, with a total of 55 participants, (August
10-13, 2025) in wadi Hajar with community representatives and randomly selected samples
from community in Wadi Hajar and Aden City with local institutions.


FAO conducted consultations with Community Committees, beneficiaries (community
organizations), and government institutions, with a total of 22 participants, in Wadi Hajar under
its Components 1.2: Integrated Management of the Wadi Hajer Basin for SOP2.
Between 10 and 12 August 2025, FAO conducted public consultations with 15 different
stakeholders and consultants representing the Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE), the
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MAI), local authorities, MAI districts offices, the National
Water Resources Authority, and the Environmental Protection Authority, as well as 7 local
beneficiaries (farmers) community organization in wadi Hajar. These participants included
technical, water, and irrigations engineers responsible for supervising water management and
agriculture re activities in the Wadi Hajar Watershed.

FAO has also conducted initial consultations with beneficiary farmers represented by 10
community organizations established by FAO across ten sectors in Wadi Hajar. These
organizations have benefited from FAO’s components 1.2 interventions under the Yemen
Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (I-WISE,
P505562) – SOP2. The interventions focused on rehabilitating existing water infrastructure in
Wadi Hajar and promoting agriculture aligned with Integrated Water Resources Management
(IWRM) principles, emphasizing sustainable and resilient farming practices. The program also



                                                      59


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
aimed to optimize water use, restore ecosystems, support climate-adaptive measures, and help
the community align with global sustainability objectives.

The overall objective of these initial consultations was to gain a general understanding of SOP2
activities, their expected impacts, existing gaps, recommendations, and knowledge-sharing
needs, while documenting stakeholders’ concerns and lessons learned. This information will
inform FAO’s planned Components 1.2 interventions under SOP2 and help anticipate the
potential mitigation measures in general.

Additional feedback and issues were gathered during the inception workshop held in Al Mukalla
City, Hadramout Governorate, on 13 August 2025, as well as through consultations with
stakeholders and randomly selected representatives from community organizations in Wadi
Hajar regarding FAO’s Components 1.2 – Integrated Management of the Wadi Hajer Basin under
the World Bank project “Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability
and Efficiency Project (I-WISE, P505562)_ Preparation Phase”.




                    Figure (1): Wadi Hajar Community Organizations Sectors

FAO-Conducted Consultations with Stakeholders and Government Institutions FAO conducted
consultations from 10 to 12 August 2025 in Aden City with local institutions, involving 22
participations.

Consultation Results:
     • During the rainy season, FAO should take all necessary safety precautions to avoid
         flooding risks and prevent negative impacts on farmers near construction sites in Wadi
         Hajar, especially soil erosion and crop damage.
     • Continuous monitoring should be maintained, and each sector in Wadi Hajar should
         have a local committee through the community organizations.
     • The selection criteria should be strictly followed to avoid conflicts within the Wadi Hajar
         community. Suggested criteria include a) Farmers with the ability to work, b) Water
         sector program as an indicator of poverty, c) Using the local authorities’ database for
         family selection.


                                               60


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
     •   The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is very promising, but the community needs
         to see how it will function in practice to ensure that complaints from the community
         are addressed effectively.
     •   The GRM system will help improve the quality of work by collecting and considering
         suggestions for farmers and institutions.
     •   Contractors and direct supervision teams from the government (PMU) should ensure
         that mitigation measures outlined in the ESMP are implemented.
     •   All local labor laws (Yemeni Labor Law) and other relevant legal requirements should
         be followed.
     •   Telecommunications services in Wadi Hajar are very weak and do not cover the entire
         area.
     •   Currency exchange rate instability may create challenges during project
         implementation.
     •   Both women and men have already received training in water conservation in Wadi
         Hajar and have participated in the process of selecting committees in their areas.
     •   Women farmers in Wadi Hajar actively manage irrigation for their farms and sometimes
         cut down trees to open flood channels.
     •   The UWS-PMU expressed interest in participating in the FAO project in accordance with
         the signed LOA and requested clarification on the specific tasks assigned to them. They
         confirmed their capacity to carry out these tasks as stated in the LOA.
     •   The implementation arrangements for SOP2 were discussed.
     •   Flooding has destroyed many farmers and agricultural equipment in Wadi Hajar. The
         community expressed strong appreciation for SOP2, noting its support for agricultural
         education, flood protection, and ecosystem preservation.
     •   The government has been informed, given approval, and agreed to participate. FAO will
         arrange for a workshop in Hadramout (Al Mukalla City) to present updates on the UWS
         and sanitation components of the SOP2 project, starting the workplan and
         implementation arrangements.
     •   GRM analysts explained the process for verifying beneficiaries for the different
         activities.

Recommendation:
     • The FAO GRM system should be available to receive complaints 24 hours a day.
     • FAO should provide comprehensive training in Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) to
       prevent accidents and incidents during the construction of water infrastructure
       facilities.
     • Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) should be provided to workers engaged in Cash-
       for-Work (CFW) programs or employed by contractors.
     • Suggestions from the community should be utilized to improve work quality, prevent
       conflicts, and protect property from damage during the flooding season.
     • FAO should support and follow the work permits to avoid delays in project
       implantations.
     • Provide special “Training of Trainers” (TOT) programs for women in Wadi Hajar.
     • Currently, there are only two women’s community organizations in Wadi Hajar; efforts
       should be made to increase women’s participation.


                                             61


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
      •   The UWS-PMU indicated that the Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE)
          recommended expanding the Wadi Hajar project boundary to include areas such as Al
          Mukalla City and Gail Bawazeer to allow them to benefit from the project.

FAO – Conducted workshop Date & Venue: 13 August 2025, Al Mukalla City – Nesta Hotel
Participants: 33

Consultation Results:
     • The local authority highly appreciated the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization
         (FAO) in implementing the current project, as well as its contributions to the
         preparation, planning, and organization of the initiative.
     • The SOP1 project aims to meet the government's aspirations for collecting,
         documenting, and utilizing data for future planning. This consultative workshop is
         crucial for effective development planning in the valley, helping to identify essential
         needs and prioritize them.
     • Participants produced outcomes that were discussed at all levels, reaffirming the
         activities and interventions proposed by FAO, which reflect the genuine needs for
         community development and job creation for youth. This involvement instills a sense
         of full responsibility and ensures the sustainability of projects.
     • The local authority expressed satisfaction with the high level of participatory planning,
         which reduces problems faced by donors in project implementation, as the community
         contributed to proposing solutions and setting priorities.
     • There was significant understanding and acknowledgment of responsibilities to address
         issues beyond citizens’ capacity, which will enhance the preservation of these projects
         and ensure their sustainability.
     • Active participation of women alongside men highlighted their vital role in community
         development, improving family nutrition, and effectively managing water resources
         while mitigating the effects of climate change.
     • The importance of the weather station database was emphasized to prevent flooding
         and disasters. The World Bank is supporting Yemen’s water and irrigation sector
         through SOP1, beginning with creating databases within the Ministry of Water.
     • SOP2 will focus on implementing watershed management in Wadi Hajar under FAO’s
         leadership.
     • Wadi Hajar was selected due to its safety, results from previous studies, and its relative
         distance from current escalations in Yemen.
     • The Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) principle will be applied in Wadi
         Hajar.
     • All previous studies on Wadi Hajar’s requirements will be utilized to guide FAO’s
         planned activities in the area.
     • The SEA/SH GBV_GRM specialist explained the verification process for beneficiaries
         across various activities and provided an induction on the Code of Conduct (COC), FESM,
         and World Bank Standards.

Recommendation:

      •   Local authorities in the districts expressed their satisfaction with collaborating with
          beneficiaries and emphasized the importance of participatory planning for community
                                              62


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         development, which ensures successful implementation and reduces conflicts arising
         from discrepancies between community needs and proposed solutions.
The stakeholders, beneficiaries’ representatives and local institution supporting the previous
recommendation mentioned in the consultation conducted between 10 to 12 Augst 2025


UNDP - Conducted Consultation with Implementing Partners (IPs) – Senior Management

On 22 July 2025, UNDP conducted a stakeholder consultation in Aden at the UNDP Office with its
key Implementing Partners (IPs), namely the Social Fund for Development (SFD), the Public Works
Project (PWP), and the Urban Water Supply Project Management Unit (UWS-PMU). The meeting
brought together 16 participants, including 3 women, representing management and senior
officers of the IPs. The objective of the consultation was to present the project’s objectives,
components, and expected outcomes, while also gathering feedback from IPs to inform project
design and implementation.

The consultation emphasized four main themes: project objectives and communication, sub-
project selection criteria, timelines and preparatory work, and inclusion of vulnerable groups.
Stakeholders expressed appreciation for being engaged early in the design process and
highlighted the importance of clear, continuous communication. Concerns were also raised
regarding the criteria for sub-project selection, the need for sufficient preparatory work, and the
meaningful inclusion of disadvantaged groups such as women, IDPs, and marginalized
households.

Consultation Results:

    •   Stakeholders welcomed the early engagement and emphasized the importance of
        transparent communication regarding project objectives, components, and outcomes.
    •   IPs requested greater clarity on the criteria and process for identifying and prioritizing
        sub-projects.
    •   Concerns were raised about the timelines and the need for preparatory work such as
        technical studies and safeguards assessments before implementation.
    •   Participants highlighted the importance of ensuring the inclusion of vulnerable groups in
        both planning and implementation stages.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

    •   The project team confirmed that clear and continuous communication will be maintained
        through regular update meetings.
    •   Sub-project selection criteria will be developed jointly with IPs and validated with
        community representatives to ensure transparency and fairness, drawing on thematic
        criteria such as IPC classification, population density, and the presence of IDPs.
    •   Technical studies and safeguards assessments will be conducted before implementation
        to minimize risks and ensure quality outcomes.



                                               63


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
   •   Specific measures will be introduced to guarantee the participation of vulnerable and
       disadvantaged groups, including gender-responsive consultations and targeted outreach
       strategies.

UNDP - Conducted Consultation with Implementing Partners (IPs) – Technical and ESRM

On 28 July 2025, UNDP conducted a stakeholder consultation in Aden at the UNDP Office with the
technical and Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) teams of its Implementing
Partners (SFD, PWP, and UWS-PMU). A total of 13 participants, including 4 women, attended. The
meeting focused on strengthening coordination between IPs, addressing environmental and
social risk management challenges, and ensuring inclusivity and cultural sensitivity in project
design and implementation.

The discussions highlighted the need for effective coordination among IPs, improved quality and
efficiency in the clearance of Environmental and Social Action Plans (ESAPs), and practical
mechanisms to ensure sustainability and community ownership of sub-projects. Gender inclusion,
stakeholder consultations, and conflict-sensitive approaches for water management were also
key areas of concern.

Consultation Results:

   •   Coordination Between IPs and Implementation Modality: Stakeholders noted limited
       coordination among IPs. It was agreed to establish a Project Coordination Committee to
       oversee collaboration, supported by monthly coordination meetings (later shifting to bi-
       monthly) and annual joint work planning. This will ensure clarity on sequencing,
       responsibilities, and location-based implementation.

   •   Environmental and Social Risk Management: Challenges in preparing and clearing ESAPs
       were raised, including low quality of initial submissions, missing data, and delays due to
       multiple separate submissions. To address this, UNDP will group sub-projects to reduce
       submission volume, introduce an ESRAC system for low-risk sub-projects, and prepare
       quarterly/bi-annual submission plans with IPs. Standardized templates, a WB-cleared
       ESAP format, and targeted capacity-building will be provided. The goal is to achieve WB
       clearance within one or two rounds of review.

   •   ESF Requirements: IPs requested clarity on all ESF requirements. UNDP confirmed that
       all requirements will be outlined in a comprehensive framework and a workshop will be
       organized to explain ESF instruments (SEP, SMP, LMP, etc.) and their application in
       practice.

   •   High-Risk Sub-projects (e.g., dams over 15m): Recognized as carrying significant OHS and
       social risks. These will require full ESIA, with strong mitigation and monitoring measures.

   •   Water Conflicts (Upstream vs. Downstream): Risks of reduced downstream flow and
       conflicts were highlighted. The project will establish water committees, apply conflict-
       sensitive design, and ensure equitable allocation of water across communities.

                                              64


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    •   Stakeholder Consultations: Concerns were raised about photos of women during
        consultations due to cultural sensitivities. It was agreed that photos will not be required
        for ESAPs; instead, gender-disaggregated attendance, feedback, and key issues will be
        documented.

    •   Community Ownership and Maintenance: Sustainability will be strengthened by
        involving communities from the outset in need identification, planning, and
        implementation. Training will be provided to community committees on operation and
        maintenance of infrastructure.

    •   Women’s Participation and Inclusion: While many sub-projects are labor-intensive,
        opportunities will be created for women by designing women-friendly roles, providing
        training, and leveraging successful models such as PWP’s women community contractors
        (50 trained, 20 licensed and active). Their contact lists will be used for future sub-projects.

    •   Cultural and Traditional Sensitivities: The project team reaffirmed that all activities will
        respect local cultural and traditional norms.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

    •   Establish a Project Coordination Committee to manage IP coordination.
    •   Group ESAP submissions, apply ESRAC for low-risk sub-projects, and standardize
        templates.
    •   Organize an ESF requirements workshop for IPs.
    •   Require full ESIA for substantial-risk sub-projects (e.g., dams).
    •   Engage communities to prevent upstream-downstream water conflicts.
    •   Document consultations without photos to respect cultural sensitivities.
    •   Train community committees for O&M of infrastructure.
    •   Expand women’s participation by creating tailored opportunities and drawing on PWP’s
        contractor experience.

UNDP - Conducted Consultation with Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE)

On 31 July 2025, UNDP conducted a high-level stakeholder consultation at the Ministry of Water
and Environment (MoWE) office in Aden. The meeting was chaired by the Minister of Water and
Environment and attended by the Deputy Ministers for the Water and Environment Sectors, the
UWS-PMU Director of Contracts and Consultations, the PMU General Director, and the Climate
Unit Director. A total of 10 participants, including 2 women, were present.

The consultation focused on clarifying institutional roles, addressing potential social tensions,
ensuring community health and safety, and embedding long-term development and climate
resilience into the project’s design and implementation.

Consultation Results:



                                                 65


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
   •   Clarity of Roles and Responsibilities: The Minister emphasized the need for clearly
       defined roles and responsibilities for all parties, including UN agencies, local
       implementers, government entities, stakeholders, and beneficiaries. UNDP confirmed
       that a formal document will be developed during the project design phase to define these
       roles and ensure transparency and accountability.

   •   Avoiding Social Tensions from Project Targeting: Concerns were raised about targeting
       specific areas while unmet needs exist nationwide, which could create social tensions. It
       was agreed that coordination with MoWE and its branch offices will be central to ensuring
       fairness and transparency. Sub-project selection will be based on assessed needs, and
       multi-level consultations will be conducted with both national authorities and direct
       beneficiaries.

   •   Community Health and Safety Risks: The Ministry highlighted risks such as waterborne
       diseases (e.g., Dengue, Malaria) and accidents affecting children near project sites. UNDP
       committed to implementing robust health and safety measures, including site-specific
       mitigation plans, disease prevention, public safety awareness, and regular monitoring.

   •   Strategic Vision and Development Impact: The project was recognized as an important
       intervention to meet urgent community needs while also contributing to broader
       development goals. UNDP confirmed its commitment to aligning project interventions
       with long-term national development strategies and vision.

   •   Climate Considerations: The Climate Unit stressed that climate change impacts must be
       fully integrated into project design. UNDP confirmed that the Climate Co-Benefits (CCB)
       approach will be applied, ensuring activities support both resilience and sustainability.

   •   Community Awareness and Engagement: Participants emphasized the importance of
       community understanding of project objectives, targeting rationale, and feedback
       mechanisms. UNDP committed to continuous stakeholder consultations throughout the
       project cycle, with issues addressed through the established Grievance Mechanism (GM)
       and needs assessments conducted jointly with government authorities.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

   •   Develop a formal roles and responsibilities framework for all actors.
   •   Coordinate closely with MoWE and its branch offices to ensure fair targeting and avoid
       social tensions.
   •   Apply site-specific mitigation and awareness measures to address health and safety risks.
   •   Align interventions with national development strategies for long-term impact.
   •   Mainstream climate change adaptation and resilience measures through the CCB
       approach.
   •   Strengthen community awareness, consultations, and GM use to ensure accountability
       and transparency.


                                              66


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
UNDP and UNOPS – Conducted Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in
Aden

On 3 August 2025, UNDP and UNOPS organized a joint stakeholder engagement workshop at the
Panorama Hotel in Aden. The workshop brought together representatives from the Ministry of
Water and Environment (MoWE), Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Fisheries (MoAIF),
Implementing Partners (SFD, PWP, UWS-PMU), Water User Associations (WUAs), Irrigation
Councils (ICs), Agricultural Cooperatives (ACs), local CSOs, and basin committee representatives.
A total of 62 participants attended, including 16 women.

The workshop aimed to present the project’s objectives, components, and expected outcomes;
discuss potential environmental and social impacts; raise awareness of grievance mechanisms;
and ensure inclusivity and equitable participation of all stakeholders, including women, IDPs, and
vulnerable groups.

Consultation Results:

    •   Project Indication (Components and Objectives): Participants agreed that the project
        would improve livelihoods through better water use, land protection, enhanced farming
        capacity, job creation, and improved incomes. They stressed the need for fair water
        distribution, irrigation repair, and active engagement of Water User Associations. The
        project team confirmed that water use optimization, irrigation system rehabilitation, and
        farmer capacity building would be prioritized, with equitable benefits ensured through
        stakeholder engagement and WUA support.

    •   Potential Environmental and Social Impacts: Most participants expressed confidence in
        the project’s positive impacts if implemented with accurate studies, proper safeguards,
        and strong monitoring. Some noted potential risks, including air and water pollution,
        climate impacts, and groundwater contamination if sanitation projects are nearby. The
        project team committed to conducting ES assessments, applying mitigation measures in
        line with the ESF, and safeguarding water, soil, and biodiversity resources.

    •   Awareness of Grievance Mechanisms (GM): Participants showed strong awareness of
        multiple GM channels (hotlines, complaint boxes, direct communication with IPs, emails,
        WhatsApp, social media, local authorities, and associations). They emphasized the need
        for local-level accessibility, designated community focal points, and diverse methods for
        inclusivity. The project team confirmed that multiple grievance channels will be
        publicized, focal points established, and timely resolution of complaints ensured.

    •   Inclusivity and Equitable Participation: Participants highlighted that inclusivity of
        women, men, IDPs, elderly, persons with disabilities, and marginalized groups is critical
        for project success. Women’s role in agriculture, particularly in Wadi Tuban, was
        emphasized, along with the potential of IDPs as a labor force and the value of elderly
        farmers’ knowledge. The project confirmed that inclusivity measures will be embedded,
        with gender-responsive consultations and safeguards to ensure all groups benefit.

                                               67


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
   •   Women’s Economic Empowerment: Stakeholders noted the project’s potential to
       significantly enhance women’s economic conditions by increasing their income,
       participation, and leadership in agriculture. They stressed setting participation targets,
       supporting women-led initiatives, and ensuring fair benefit distribution. The project team
       confirmed that women’s empowerment will be mainstreamed through training, capacity
       building, and gender-responsive indicators to track results and sustain impact.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

   •   Prioritize equitable water distribution and irrigation repair with active WUA engagement.
   •   Conduct comprehensive ES assessments and apply mitigation to prevent negative
       environmental and social impacts.
   •   Strengthen and diversify grievance mechanisms with clear community focal points.
   •   Guarantee inclusivity and equitable participation across all groups, including vulnerable
       populations.
   •   Mainstream women’s economic empowerment with specific targets, training, and
       monitoring indicators.


UNDP - Conducted Consultation with UWS-PMU

On 12 August 2025, UNDP held a consultation meeting with the Urban Water Supply Project
Management Unit (UWS-PMU) at the PMU Office in Aden. A total of 11 participants attended,
including 4 women.

The meeting served to introduce the PMU team, discuss collaboration modalities, and ensure
alignment with World Bank (WB) and UNDP safeguard requirements.

Consultation Results:

   •   Introduction and Alignment: UWS-PMU presented their staff structure, current activities,
       and readiness to engage in project implementation. They emphasized their commitment
       to aligning with WB and UNDP standards.
       UNDP confirmed its support in establishing collaboration mechanisms from the outset to
       ensure smooth implementation.

   •   Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM): The PMU acknowledged the need
       for clear procedures and updated manuals for ESRM application.
       UNDP committed to reviewing and updating manuals, frameworks, and guidelines with
       the PMU to ensure compliance with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).

   •   Grievance Mechanism (GM): PMU stressed the importance of having an accessible and
       effective GM prior to start-up.
       The project team confirmed that GM procedures will be finalized, publicized, and adapted
       to ensure inclusivity and responsiveness in all target areas.


                                              68


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
    •   GBV/SEA/SH Safeguards: PMU highlighted the need for awareness and preparedness to
        address risks of GBV, SEA, and SH.
        UNDP committed to delivering targeted capacity-building sessions and incorporating
        preventive and responsive measures in all project frameworks.

    •   Capacity Building and Operational Readiness: PMU expressed the need for tailored
        training to strengthen staff knowledge on ESRM, safeguards, and operational procedures.
        UNDP confirmed that structured capacity-building sessions will be conducted on ESRM,
        GM, and GBV/SEA, while clear guidelines will be jointly developed and operationalized
        before project start-up.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

    •   Joint review and update of all PMU operational manuals, frameworks, and guidelines.
    •   Establish a structured collaboration mechanism (coordination meetings, clear lines of
        communication).
    •   Conduct targeted training on ESRM, GM, and GBV/SEA/SH safeguards.
    •   Ensure all procedures and tools are finalized before field implementation.


UNOPS – Conducted Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Tuban
Total number of participants: 63 (51 male, 12 female)
Key stakeholders consulted: MoWE, WUA members, local CSOs, basin committee reps
The date of the consultations: 14July 2025

The key findings: The key points expressed by stakeholders:

    •   Sanitation: There is a strong interest in expanding sanitation services, particularly in the
        wadi areas, to improve public health and prevent pollution.
    •   Water Supply and Coverage: A comprehensive study is needed to extend water,
        sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services to all populated areas along the Wadi.
        Additionally, stakeholders suggested completing unfinished drinking water supply
        schemes to make them operational.
    •   Quality Control: The technical specifications outlined in assessment studies must be
        strictly followed by contractors and closely monitored by all partners to ensure the
        project's success and beneficiary satisfaction.
    •   Communication & Reporting: Stakeholders requested stronger communication channels
        between central coordination and field teams, as well as clearer guidance on reporting
        formats, timelines, and data-sharing.
    •   Operational Challenges: Concerns were raised about delays in funding and procurement,
        which could impact project timelines. Challenges were also noted regarding site access
        due to security, logistical issues, or local restrictions.

Capacity Building: There is a need for more technical training and support for local staff.


                                                69


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
During the consultation the UNOPS team discussed the following topics with participants:
Climate Action and Sustainability:
      • UNOPS has developed a comprehensive Climate Strategy and Action Plan for 2025-2029
          to guide its efforts in climate mitigation and adaptation.
      • UNOPS aims to integrate climate risk screening into 100% of its infrastructure projects
          by 2030.
      • UNOPS is working to reduce damage to critical infrastructure and essential services
          from climate-induced hazards.
      • UNOPS plans to explore carbon removal projects (technology-based and nature-based
          solutions) to address hard-to-abate emissions.
      • UNOPS integrates climate change considerations into projects, such as improving WASH
          infrastructure to reduce exposure to climate-induced diseases, rehabilitating roads and
          parks for flood mitigation and urban heat island effect reduction and replacing fossil-
          fuel-based electricity with renewable energy.
      • UNOPS committed to climate neutrality and offset emissions using certified emission
          reductions.
Project Implementation and Management:
      • UNOPS acts as an implementing agency within the UN system, bridging climate policies
          with practical implementation.
      • UNOPS manage projects that contribute to various Sustainable Development Goals
          (SDGs), including poverty eradication, water and sanitation, affordable and clean
          energy, and sustainable cities and communities.
      • UNOPS has implemented 895 sub-projects, with a focus on tertiary municipal services,
          road rehabilitation, water and sanitation infrastructure, electricity provision for critical
          services, and solid waste management.
      • UNOPS engage in capacity-building activities for local institutions to enable them to
          manage their activities and assets independently.
      • UNOPS emphasizes stakeholder engagement, establishing plans and conducting
          consultations throughout the project cycle.
      • UNOPS has a GIS platform to display sub-project status and interventions, and a
          Grievance Mechanism (GM) for beneficiaries to communicate concerns.
Partnerships and Technology:
      • UNOPS prioritizes partnerships with national authorities, UN entities,
          intergovernmental institutions, and regional/multilateral financing institutions to
          amplify climate efforts.
      • UNOPS collaborates with the private sector for disaster risk reduction tools, early
          warning systems, carbon accounting platforms, and sustainable infrastructure.
      • Technology is a key enabler, with UNOPS utilizing platforms like Impact for corporate
          emissions data management and exploring automation tools for value chain emissions
          calculations.
      • UNOPS is enhancing ERP capabilities for product carbon footprint assessments and
          expanding Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to map project-specific climate risks.




                                                 70


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
