Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                             REPUBLIC OF YEMEN


                               Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for
                                       Sustainability and Efficiency Project




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               (I-WISE, P505562)


                                     STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)


                                                        Collectively Prepared by:
                                             United Nations Development Program (UNDP)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                            United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS)

                               Funded and supported by the World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                                November 6, 2025




                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Contents
1.      Introduction/Project Description ............................................................................................ 1
     1.1.       Country and Sector context ........................................................................................... 1
     1.2.       Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................. 2
     1.3.       Project Description......................................................................................................... 4
2.      Objective/Description of SEP................................................................................................... 8
3.      Stakeholder Identification and Analysis .................................................................................. 9
     3.1.       Methodology .................................................................................................................. 9
     3.2.       Affected Parties.............................................................................................................. 9
     3.3.       Other Interested Parties .............................................................................................. 11
     3.4.       Disadvantaged /Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ...................................................... 11
4.      Stakeholder Engagement Program ....................................................................................... 12
     4.1.       Summary of Stakeholder Engagement Done During Project Preparation................... 14
     4.2.   Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for
     Stakeholder Engagement .......................................................................................................... 39
     4.3.       Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the Views of Vulnerable Groups ........................... 43
5.      Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement ....................... 43
     5.1.       Implementation Arrangements and Resources ........................................................... 43
6.      Grievance Mechanism (GM) .................................................................................................. 45
     6.1.       Description of Grievance Mechanism .......................................................................... 45
     6.2.       Labor Grievance Mechanism ....................................................................................... 48
     6.3.       Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) ............................... 49
7.      Monitoring and Reporting ..................................................................................................... 50
     7.1.       Summary of How SEP Will Be Monitored and Reported Upon ................................... 50
     7.2.       Reporting Back to Stakeholder Groups ........................................................................ 50
8.      Annexes ................................................................................................................................. 52
     Annex 1: Template to Capture Consultation Minutes............................................................... 52
     Annex 2: SEP Budget Table ........................................................................................................ 52
     Annex 3: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP........................................................................ 53
     Annex 4: Project Map ................................................................................................................ 54
     Annex 5: Photo Documentation of Consultation Workshops ................................................... 55
     Annex 6: Media Coverage of Stakeholder Consultations .......................................................... 58
     Annex 7: Attendance sheet from Stakeholder Consultation..................................................... 58


                                                                        ii


                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
   Annex 8: Stakeholder Consultation Summary........................................................................... 59


List of Tables
Table 1: Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation ........................ 14
Table 2: Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for
Stakeholder Engagement .............................................................................................................. 39
Table 3: Role and Responsibilities for SEP Implementation ........................................................... 44




                                                                  iii


                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Abbreviation List
ACs         Agricultural Cooperatives
CAMA        Civil Aviation and Meteorology Authority
CCB         Climate Co-Benefits
CCDR        Country Climate and Development Report
CECS        Centre of Environmental and Climate Studies
CERC        Contingent Emergency Response Component
CFW         Cash for Work
CoC         Code of Conduct
CSOs        Civil Society Organizations
CWIMS       Climate and Water Information Management System
EPA         Environmental Protection Authority
ESCP        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF         Environmental and Social Framework
ESIAs       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF        Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESRM        Environmental and Social Risk Management
ESS         Environmental and Social Standard
GARWSP      General Authority for Rural Water Supply Projects
GBV         Gender-Based Violence
GDP         Gross Domestic Product
GM          Grievance Mechanism
ICs         Irrigation Councils
IDPs        Internally Displaced Persons
IPF         Investment Project Financing
IPs         Implementing Partners
IRG         Internationally Recognized Government
I-WISE      Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and
            Efficiency Project
IWRM        Integrated Water Resources Management
LMP         Labor Management Procedures
LWSCs       Local Water and Sanitation Corporations
MEAL        Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning
MoAIF       Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Fisheries
MoPIC       Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
MoWE        Ministry of Water and Environment
NGOs        Non-Governmental Organizations
NWRA        National Water Resources Authority
OCHA        Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
OHS         Occupational Health and Safety
PDO         Project Development Objectives
PIU         Project Implementation Unit
PPE         Personal Protective Equipment
PWP         Public Works Project
SEA/SH      Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment
SEP         Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SFD         Social Fund for Development
SMP         Security Management Plan


                                            iv


                                                                                    Official Use Only
STC         Southern Transitional Council
TPM         Third Party Monitoring
UNDP        United Nations Development Programme
UNOPS       United Nations Office for Project Services
UWS - PMU   Urban Water Supply - Project Management Unit
WASH        Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WRM         Water Resources Management
WSS         Water Supply and Sanitation
WUAs        Water User Associations




                                           v


                                                           Official Use Only
1. Introduction/Project Description1

1.1. Country and Sector context
Yemen has long been the poorest country in the Middle East and North Africa and has been
experiencing one of the world’s most severe humanitarian crises. Socioeconomic conditions
in Yemen have deteriorated sharply over the past decade, due to declining remittances, trade
disruptions, electrical outages, severe fuel supply shortages, and reduced humanitarian
operations amidst the ongoing crisis. The economy has been devastated by the protracted
conflict that started in early 2015, leading to severe food insecurity and destroying critical
infrastructure. The impact of armed conflict has been exacerbated by multiple economic
shocks and climate hazards - including rising prices, droughts, floods, the COVID-19 pandemic,
a cholera epidemic, a locust invasion, and the escalation of conflict in the Red Sea in 2024.
About 80 percent of Yemeni households need humanitarian assistance (World Bank, 2023),
with roughly half (15.3 million people) requiring emergency support to access clean water and
meet basic sanitation needs (OCHA 2022). About 17.6 million people face acute food
insecurity, with close to 74 percent of the population below the national poverty line in 2022.
Yemen’s public institutions are struggling with services delivery, further complicated by the
lack of regular salary payments to many public workers for more than six years. Living
conditions in Yemen are dire, especially for the many people displaced by conflict. The latest
Humanitarian Response Plan for Yemen suggests that an estimated 4.5 million people, 14
percent of the population, are internally displaced. A World Bank phone survey conducted in
2022 and 2023 in 21 governorates estimated that the level of displaced households was
around 25 percent. Over 89 percent of internally displaced people (IDPs) have no source of
income and are surviving on less than US$ 40 per month. Yemen's rapid population growth,
from 23.15 million in 2010 to 31.15 million in 2021, with a projected annual increase of 3%
through 2030, is intensifying the country's climate crisis vulnerabilities. In 2021, 41% of the
population were children and youth, increasing demands on public services like water and
sanitation. Yemen also faces severe environmental challenges.

Yemen's political landscape is fragmented and unstable due to a decade-long conflict
between the Internationally Recognized Government (IRG) and the Houthi Movement (also
known as ‘Ansar Allah’) based in Sana’a (North). Each faction controls its own institutions and
monetary systems, which has led to political and economic disparities and complicated efforts
for lasting peace. Fiscal and monetary challenges have increased, worsened by the Houthi
blockade on IRG oil exports and the collapse of the UN-sponsored truce in October 2022.
While it is generally recognized that there are four major conflicts over political control
between national, subnational, and international forces, there are two major conflicting
parties. These are the Houthi movement based in Sana’a, and the Internationally Recognized
Government of Yemen (IRG) based in Aden. The IRG shares power with the Southern
Transitional Council (STC), with other actors including the IRG-aligned Joint Resistance Forces
and the Hadramawt Elite Forces. These have resulted in a complex mosaic of territorial
controls, the boundaries of which are constantly shifting but which largely reflect the division
of the country prior to unification in 1990 (International Crisis Group 2022). The Houthi
controls an estimated one-third of the territory, which is home to about two-thirds of the
population and includes the mountainous areas with the highest rainfall and upper reaches of
the main water management areas.




1
  All project information presented in this section has been extracted from the Project Appraisal Document
(PAD).

                                                       1


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Public revenues are under immense stress, as the country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
per capita has shrunk by 54 percent between 2015 and 2023, and external shocks have
added to economic stress and food insecurity. The fiscal revenues of IRG, including grants,
declined by over 30 percent in 2023 (World Bank, 2024). The economic impacts of the war in
Ukraine are compounding the already severe and lingering food insecurity impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The main impacts include: (i) sudden and significant increases in global
food and fuel prices starting in March 2022; (ii) steep reductions in food imports, especially
imports of wheat (a major staple food for the country); and (iii) recent and substantial
financing gaps with regards to humanitarian assistance, driven by increasing humanitarian
priorities in other countries.

Climate change presents an additional challenge for Yemen, threatening its development
prospects by exacerbating existing vulnerabilities and hindering progress in key areas such
as water security. In the MENAAP Region, Yemen is country most vulnerable to the impacts
of climate change and is ranked 27th globally in vulnerability to climate change. It is also the
least prepared country in MENAAP to manage the impacts associated with climate change.
Global climate models forecast a future for Yemen which is characterized by warmer
temperatures and higher annual average precipitation, with more frequent, intense rainfall
events resulting in flash floods and longer dry periods. The anticipated additional rainfall can
contribute to development, but only if the country is able to make the needed investments to
better cope with the increasing variability. Modelling done as part of the Yemen Country
Climate and Development Report (CCDR) indicate that in a more optimistic scenario, Yemen
could achieve GDP growth of 1.5 percent by 2040, while climate shocks could lead to a decline
of 3.9 percent in GDP by 2040 in a pessimistic scenario with limited investments.

Yemenis show remarkable resilience despite political, social, and economic challenges, due
to several factors: (a) adaptability to instability, allowing communities to cope and sustain
themselves; (b) decentralized governance and local institutions providing community-level
support; (c) social safety nets and cultural norms, including tribal structures, helping
communities endure hardships; (d) vibrant civil society advocating for social change and
supporting vulnerable populations; (e) women's and youth participation enhancing
community resilience and fostering innovation; (f) private sector contributions driving
economic activity and providing jobs; and (g) remittances and diaspora support bolstering the
economy and offering family relief. These elements collectively enable Yemenis to navigate
and withstand multifaceted challenges.

1.2. Sectoral and Institutional Context
Overall water scarcity and limited water availability: Yemen's geographical location in an arid
to semi-arid zone has made water resources management a long-standing and critical
constraint on the country's social and economic development. The water use exceeds
renewable resources, and intense competition for limited water resources frequently
exacerbates local conflicts. Yemen is one of only four countries globally facing both low per
capita income and experiencing absolute water scarcity, with water security issues stemming
from the complex interplay between development, conflict, and climate change. Prior to the
conflict, water-related disputes accounted for 70 to 80 percent of rural conflicts (UNDP 2023;
Heffez, Adams 2013). The Ministry of Interior reports that violent land and water disputes
result in as many as 4,000 deaths annually (Small Arms Survey 2010). In 2020, water use is
estimated to have been about 5.1 billion cubic meters (BCM), up by 76 percent over the three




                                               2


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
decades since 1990, leaving a deficit of 2.6 BCM each year. 2 Over 90 percent is used for
agricultural activities, eight percent for the municipal water supply sector, and two percent
for the industrial sector. Several major cities are already bearing the brunt of water scarcity:
Ta’iz already experiences extreme water stress and in Sana’a on average six deep wells are
being closed each year. The coastal cities, including Aden and Al-Hodeida - the economic and
commercial hubs – are also facing lack of safe drinking water and seawater intrusion is
increasingly invading groundwater aquifers. In addition, the limited available freshwater
resources are at risk of contamination due to the seepage of untreated wastewater from
manholes, septic tanks, and non-operational wastewater treatment plants. The main
groundwater aquifers supplying some major cities, including the capital Sana’a, are at risk of
being fully depleted in the foreseeable future.

Lack of water and sanitation services: The scarcity of water resources is leading to widespread
lack of access to safe water and sanitation services, which is one of the lowest rates in the
MENAAP region. Water security has additional adverse impacts on women and girls who are
the ones primarily tasked with fetching and managing household water resources. Distances
to fetch water are increasing in many areas. In a household survey conducted in [month, year],
55 percent of the respondents in both rural and urban areas reported that it took them more
than one hour to collect water, which often needed to be done several times a day. Women
travel in groups to water sources they consider to be threatening to personal security. The
long trips to public taps expose women and children to violence and abuse. Women in Sana’a,
Aden, Dhale’e, Lahj and Abyan reported frequent experiences of sexual harassment.
Water for agriculture and impact on food security: Water and food security are increasingly
under threat due to a combination of population growth, deteriorating infrastructure,
limitations in irrigation services and inefficient use of water for agriculture, breakdown of
sanitation services, and the adverse impact of climate change. Yemen has one of the world’s
highest population growth rates and one of the lowest levels of per capita water availability,
estimated at 65 cubic meters per person in 2020 and projected to decline further to 54, by
2050.3 With public water utilities largely nonfunctional due to infrastructure damage, fuel
shortage, power outages, and inability to pay civil staff for over six years, many Yemenis are
forced to rely on costly and often unsafe alternatives such as private water trucking.
Additionally, the number of sewage system failures has risen, and has further intensified
public health risks, contributing to one of the world’s largest cholera outbreaks, with millions
of suspected cases and thousands of deaths since 2016. The agriculture sector faces
compounding challenges, including a sharp expansion in qat cultivation, which continues to
divert both land and water resources away from food crops. This has led to a significant
decline in local food production and a corresponding increase in market food prices, further
straining household food access. Additionally, Yemen depends on imports for over 85 percent
of its food supply, making it highly vulnerable to global supply chain disruptions, exchange
rate volatility, and port closures, especially during periods of conflict or global crises such as
the COVID-19 pandemic. Climate change is exacerbating these structural weaknesses by
increasing the frequency and severity of droughts and floods. The increasing frequency and
intensity of drought has led to diminishing crop yields, pasture degradation, and acute water
scarcity, while flash floods, such as those recorded in 2020, 2021, and during July – September
2022 monsoon season, caused widespread infrastructure damage and displacement. These
floods affected over 73,000 households across 182 districts in 18 governorates, including Al-
Hodeida, Hadramawt, Al Mahra, Socotra, Marib and Al Bayda governorates. The total direct

2 World Bank. 2023. “Charting the Course - A Rapid Water Security Diagnostic for Yemen”. Washington, DC.

World Bank.
3
  World Bank. 2023. “Charting the Course - A Rapid Water Security Diagnostic for Yemen”. Washington, DC.
World Bank.

                                                      3


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
economic damage is estimated to range from US$ 336 million to US$ 811 million, equivalent
to approximately 2.7 percent of Yemen's GDP in 2021. These overlapping crises have not only
deepened the country’s food insecurity but have also undermined the coping capacity of rural
households, particularly those dependent on rainfed agriculture, small-scale livestock, and
subsistence farming. Malnutrition rates remain alarmingly high, with children and pregnant
or lactating women among the most affected.
Yemen's water sector faces significant operational cost challenges due to insufficient
funding for infrastructure maintenance, water treatment chemicals, and administrative
needs. This financial shortfall hampers the maintenance of water distribution systems and the
provision of basic services, further limiting the sector's functionality. The ongoing conflict
exacerbates these issues, with many facilities experiencing a high level of operational capacity
shortfall. Financial barriers restrict access to water services, as families struggle with costs due
to an 80 percent loss in purchasing power from currency collapse.
Yemen's water sector relies heavily on external aid due to domestic resource constraints
from the ongoing economic crisis. Public expenditure on water has significantly declined,
representing a small fraction of government spending compared to pre-conflict levels.
External donors provide substantial humanitarian funding aimed at improving access to water
supply, but it is insufficient to address infrastructure maintenance and essential service
provision. Water security, management and governance have been neglected since the start
of the conflict in 2015 as the limited donor funds focused on improving water access. The
MoWE faces a significant funding gap, highlighting the need for sustainable financing
strategies. Strengthening domestic resource mobilization and improving financial efficiency
are crucial for long-term recovery.
1.3. Project Description
The project will be implemented in selected priority basins in Yemen, initially focusing on the
Aden–Tuban Basin and Wadi Hajer Basin, with the possibility of expansion to additional basins
based on progress achieved and available resources. The I-WISE Project aims to improve
irrigation service delivery and enhance access to climate-resilient water supply and sanitation
services, thereby strengthening community resilience to climate shocks, improving
livelihoods, and contributing to poverty reduction.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve irrigation services delivery, and
enhancing access to climate resilient water supply and sanitation services in selected basins.

The project will contribute to improved community livelihoods, strengthened resilience to
climate shocks and poverty alleviation (impact). Early results of SoP1, including strengthened
climate and water information management system, and improved mechanisms for
coordination among relevant stakeholders can be used to inform the design and
implementations of investments to be realized under SoP2. The design of the investments
and capacity building activities will also build on previous and ongoing operations in
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM), water supply and sanitation (WSS), food
security, urban and health that have been implemented throughout the country before and
during the conflict.

The I-WISE project is structured into the following components:

    •   Component 1: Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management Systems
    •   Component 2: Climate Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation Services
    •   Component 3: Resilient Water Supply and Sanitation Systems and WASH Services


                                                4


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
   •       Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project
           Management
   •       Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
Implementing Entities:
The project is implemented jointly by United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS)With implementing partners Public Works
Project (PWP), Social Fund for Development (SFD), and Urban Water Supply Project
Management Unit (UWS-PMU).
Project components:
Component 1: Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management Systems
(Implemented by UNDP)
Component 1.1: Climate and Water Information Management System (CWIMS): Establish a
scalable system to monitor hydrological and meteorological climate hazards.
   (i)        Data Recovery and Consolidation:
              - Conduct an inventory of existing climate and water data.
              - Digitize and consolidate records into a unified database.
   (ii)       System Development:
              - Design a National Climate and Water Information Management System and
                  implement it for two priority basins, namely Aden- Wadi Tuban and
                  Hadramout -Wadi Hajer.
              - Enable data sharing through standardized protocols, APIs, and cloud-based
                  systems.
              - Develop plans for new observation stations, sustainable operation, and
                  maintenance.
   (iii)      Capacity Building:
              - Train institutions such as the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE), the
                  Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation and Fish Wealth (MAIF), and the Civil
                  Aviation and Meteorology Authority (CAMA).
              - Deploy tools such as web-based visualization platforms and decision support
                  systems in pilot basins.
              - Ensure decentralized institutions can access and manage data for improved
                  decision-making.

Component 1.2: Climate Resilient Decision-Making: Pilot and operationalize decision-
support tools in two priority basins: Aden-Wadi Tuban and Hadramout-Wadi Hajer. The tools
will be utilized to guide the decision making for the following challenges.

   (i)        Aden- Tuban Basin:
              - Address water scarcity and enhance water security, particularly for Aden City.
              - Develop solutions for groundwater depletion, seawater intrusion, and poor
                 sanitation.
              - Improve planning for sustainable water supply and sanitation infrastructure.
              - Facilitate data-driven consultation processes to prioritize investments.
   (ii)       Hadramout - Hajer Basin:
              - Protect water resources and mitigate flash flood impacts.
              - Explore storage solutions such as dams, weirs, and diversion structures.
              - Enhance irrigation efficiency and agricultural productivity through:
                    ▪ Infrastructure improvement.

                                               5


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                    ▪   Provision of agricultural inputs, modern tools, and machinery.
                    ▪   Establishment of greenhouses and food manufacturing facilities.
    (iii)   Capacity Development:
            - Train basin-level institutions to use Decision Support Systems (DSS).
            - Organize study tours, workshops, and technical training for data
               management and sharing.
            - Equip institutions with the tools to sustain and enhance CWIMS and DSS.

Component 2: Climate Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation Services -
Implemented by UNDP (Aden-Tuban Basin and Wadi Hajer Basin) This component is
dedicated to the financing of both the planning and execution of watershed management
plans and activities aimed at enhancing irrigation services. It encompasses investments,
alongside training and capacity-building initiatives for local institutions and beneficiaries.

Sub-component 2.1: Integrated Management of Aden-Tuban Basin and Wadi Hajer Basin
    a) Watershed Management: Watershed management in arid and semi-arid regions like
       Yemen focuses on conserving water resources, enhancing agricultural productivity,
       and building community resilience against climate change and environmental
       degradation. Key activities include:
       • Water Harvesting and Soil Conservation: this includes the development of
          watershed management plans and the implementation of prioritized activities
          including, among other, measures for water harvesting (building reservoirs,
          ponds, and rainwater harvesting systems to capture and store water efficiently),
          stabilization of slopes and protection of land (planting vegetation, constructing
          retaining walls, etc), construction of check dams, weirs, embankments, etc, to
          protect riverbeds from erosion and degradation).
       • Erosion Control and Land Protection: interventions intend to protect basin banks
          from erosion using vegetative measures and gabion retaining walls to prevent
          land degradation and sustain agricultural productivity.
       • Community-Based Management and Institutional Support: involving
          Engagement with communities in managing irrigation and watershed activities
          and ensuring sustainable practices and local ownership. Strengthening
          institutions like the MoWE and MoAIF’s local offices at basin level is vital for
          effective watershed management.
       • Groundwater depletion and quality deterioration: Addressing groundwater
          depletion, saline intrusion, and dried-up springs require integrated approaches
          that balance upstream and downstream interests. Adapting to climate change
          impacts, such as increased floods and droughts, is also crucial for effective
          watershed management.

    b) Irrigation improvement at basin level: This sub-component represents a holistic
       approach to irrigation infrastructure development, integrating technological
       advancements and data-driven strategies to foster sustainable agricultural practices
       and address the challenges posed by climate change.
Component 3: Resilient Water Supply & Sanitation Systems and WASH Services
implemented by UNOPS: This component aims to improve access to resilient water supply
and sanitation services in the selected basins with the following three sub-components:



                                              6


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Sub-component 3.1: Restoring Access to and Improving Quality of WSS Services: This
subcomponent is dedicated to the restoration, enhancement, and expansion of access to
Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) services, with a particular emphasis on addressing
desalination and sanitation needs in key urban and peri-urban areas. Key interventions
include:

        •   Infrastructure Development: The project is designed to rehabilitate and construct
            medium to large-scale water supply and sanitation (WSS) facilities, with a focus
            on expanding pipelines and networks for efficient water distribution and
            sanitation services
        •   Efficiency and Sustainability: Efforts will be made to minimize water losses
            through improved infrastructure and management practices, ensuring that water
            resources are utilized effectively.
Sub-component 3.2: Capacity building for urban water utilities: The project will implement
capacity-building initiatives to enhance the management capabilities of urban water utilities,
improving their efficiency and effectiveness in service delivery and ensuring the sustainability
of Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) facilities. Key activities will include:

    •   Infrastructure Operation and Maintenance: Training programs will be developed to
        equip utility staff with the skills necessary for effective operation and maintenance of
        WSS infrastructure, including routine inspections, repairs, and upgrades to ensure
        optimal functionality and longevity.
    •   Advanced Metering Systems: The project will introduce advanced metering systems
        to improve the accuracy and efficiency of water usage tracking, facilitating better
        resource management and billing processes.
    •   Financial Management: Efforts will focus on enhancing the utilities' ability to manage
        water billing and collection processes, implementing efficient billing systems and
        strategies to ensure timely payments and reduce arrears.
    •   Sustainability and Efficiency: Training will be provided on optimizing resource use,
        including water conservation techniques and energy-efficient practices, contributing
        to the sustainability of WSS operations and reducing environmental impact.
Sub-component 3.3: Improving hygiene and quality of water supply of critical water and
sanitation systems for IDP, Refugees and marginalized communities: Very often, the WASH
(Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene) facilities in IDP, refugees’ camps and marginalized
communities, health centers, schools, and local markets are in poor condition, posing
significant risks to public health.
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project Management
(implemented by UNDP and UNOPS). This component aims to: (i) strengthen the institutional
capacity of local institutions to address climate challenges; (ii) support UN agencies and local
partners in project implementation; and (iii) oversee project administration, management,
and monitoring and evaluation activities to ensure satisfactory project implementation
through the set-up of dedicated PMUs and the hiring of a third-party monitoring agency. The
capacity building will focus on: (i) strengthening local water and irrigation institutions; (ii)
training beneficiaries in land and water management for climate-resilient water and food
security (iii) enhancing technical and managerial skills of management staff; and (iv)
developing the capacity of WBCs, WUAs, ACs and service providers to ensure sustainability of
investment and services. Opportunities for female participation in these activities will be
prioritized.

                                              7


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (implemented by UNDP
and UNOPS) This component is a zero-dollar Contingent Emergency Response Component
(CERC) whereby the Bank could authorize the reallocation of funds from other project
components in case of unforeseen events such as a natural disaster, epidemic or other
emergency. Disbursements under this component will be subject to the declaration of
emergency or equivalent by the Government, the international community, or the UN;
submission of a request to the Bank for support for an eligible emergency through the CERC,
the preparation by the Recipient of an acceptable Emergency Action Plan for the use of CERC
funds, and the Bank’s approval of such a Plan. The Bank would determine how to reallocate
funds from other components to address the emergency, in consultation with its
implementing partners.

The I-WISE project is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Framework (ESF).

2. Objective/Description of SEP

This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared for the I-WISE Project to guide
meaningful, inclusive, and continuous engagement with all stakeholders throughout the
project life cycle. The SEP is aligned with the requirements of the World Bank’s Environmental
and Social Standard 10 (ESS10): Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, which
underscores the importance of open communication, timely disclosure of project information,
and an effective grievance redress system as core elements of good project management and
sustainability. The SEP describes how UNDP and UNOPS in collaboration with the
Implementing Partners (PWP, SFD, and UWS-PMU), will communicate and engage with
stakeholders. It also establishes a Grievance Mechanism (GM) through which stakeholders
can raise concerns, provide feedback, or submit complaints related to the project and its
activities

The objectives of this SEP are to:
    1. Identify all relevant stakeholders, including project-affected people (PAPs), vulnerable
       and disadvantaged groups, local institutions, civil society organizations, government
       entities, and the private sector.
    2. Ensure that stakeholders are informed about the project’s objectives, components,
       implementation modalities, environmental and social risks, and related mitigation
       measures in a transparent and accessible manner.
    3. Establish an inclusive and culturally appropriate engagement process, tailored to the
       capacities and preferences of different stakeholder groups, particularly marginalized
       groups at risk of exclusion (e.g., women, persons with disabilities, and internally
       displaced persons)
    4. Facilitate meaningful consultation throughout the project cycle to incorporate
       stakeholder views, concerns, and suggestions into project design, implementation,
       and monitoring.
    5. Promote trust and collaboration between project stakeholders, the implementing
       agencies (UNDP and UNOPS), and implementing partners (PWP, SFD, UWS-PMU).
    6. Strengthen the social accountability mechanisms through effective communication,
       feedback loops, and information disclosure, particularly at the community level.
    7. Establish and operationalize a robust Grievance Mechanism (GM) that enables
       stakeholders to raise concerns and receive timely, fair, and confidential responses and
       resolutions.


                                              8


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    8. Monitor the effectiveness of stakeholder engagement activities and adjust the
       strategy as needed to improve inclusiveness, responsiveness, and project outcomes.

The SEP is a living document that will be updated as the project evolves, and as new
stakeholders or issues emerge. It will serve as a tool to ensure that stakeholder engagement
remains dynamic, transparent, and responsive to the needs and expectations of all parties
involved.

3. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis

3.1. Methodology
To align with best practice standards, the I-WISE Project will adopt the following stakeholder
engagement principles:

    •   Openness and life-cycle approach: Stakeholder engagement activities will occur
        openly and continuously from design to completion, free from manipulation or
        coercion.
    •   Informed participation and feedback: Information about the project will be provided
        in a timely manner, in accessible formats, and through culturally appropriate
        channels. All stakeholders will be given opportunities to express their views, raise
        concerns, and provide feedback, which will be considered in decision-making.
    •   Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification and engagement will
        promote effective communication and constructive relationships. Participation will be
        inclusive, ensuring the involvement of all stakeholder groups at every stage. Equal
        access to information will be guaranteed through methods tailored to stakeholder
        needs. Special attention will be given to vulnerable and disadvantaged groups,
        particularly women, the elderly, persons with disabilities, and IDPs, while respecting
        the cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic and social groups in the project areas.
    •   Gender sensitivity and social inclusion: Consultations will be organized throughout
        the project cycle to ensure equal access and active participation for women, men, and
        persons with disabilities. Separate meetings and focus group discussions will be
        arranged, with facilitators of the same gender as participants, to encourage open
        participation. Additional support will be provided to enable the participation of
        caregivers.
    •   Sustainability and resilience: The project will consider stakeholder concerns
        regarding the sustainability of activities and outcomes beyond the project period.
        Project outputs are designed to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity in
        addressing social, environmental, and economic vulnerabilities and risks.

For the I-WISE, the following stakeholders have been identified and analyzed per project
component. These stakeholders include affected parties (as defined in section 3.2), other
interested parties (as defined in section 3.3) and disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or
groups (as defined in section 3.4).

3.2. Affected Parties

Affected parties include individuals, groups, and communities who are likely to be directly
impacted positively or negatively by the implementation of the I-WISE Project. These impacts
may result from infrastructure works, service provision, institutional reforms, or engagement
activities. The affected parties are grouped below according to the four main project’s
components:


                                              9


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Components 1: Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management Systems
(Implemented by UNDP)

The primary beneficiaries of this project will be the water, agriculture, and environmental
units of various governmental institutions in the Wadi Hajjar and Tuban basins at local level
and all water user associations (WUAs) within the project coverage area. Ministries at national
level will be able to use the data generated for decision-making processes and to support the
development of future policies and projects. Indirect project stakeholders include:

    •   Community workers in the project sites and personnel of the key involved institutions.
    •   Farmers and Local Water Users in Aden–Wadi Tuban and Hadramout–Wadi Hajer
        basins who depend on reliable water resources and irrigation management.
    •   Community Committees and Local Councils engaged in planning, monitoring, and
        community outreach for water and agricultural projects.
    •   Local Residents living in areas where monitoring stations, storage infrastructure, or
        pilot interventions will be installed.
    •   Irrigation and Water User Associations (WUAs) affected by changes in water
        allocation, data access, and irrigation scheduling.
    •   Agricultural Cooperatives that rely on improved data for crop planning, irrigation
        efficiency, and climate risk management.
    •   Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) – Lead coordination and policy oversight
        for CWIMS and water sector management.
    •   Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Fish Wealth (MoAIF) – Co-lead on agricultural
        data use, irrigation planning, and resilience interventions.
    •   Civil Aviation and Meteorology Authority (CAMA) – Key partner for meteorological
        data recovery, integration, and operation of new observation stations.
    •   National Water Resources Authority (NWRA) – Core partner in basin-level planning,
        hydrological monitoring, and data management.
    •   Centre of Environmental and Climate Studies (CECS) – Partner in capacity building,
        technical training, and research collaboration.
    •   Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) – Interested in environmental data,
        ecosystem monitoring, and integration with national environmental databases.
    •   Universities and Research Institutions (e.g., Aden University, Hadramout University)
    •   Users of climate and hydrological data for research and policy analysis.
    •   Relevant Agriculture Research Institutions and studies centers.

Component 2 – Climate-Resilient Catchment Management and Irrigation Services
(Implemented by UNDP in Tuban Basin and in Wadi Hajer Basin)

    •   Smallholder Farmers and Agricultural Landowners, benefiting from rehabilitated
        irrigation systems, terrace stabilization, and integrated watershed management
        interventions.
    •   Water User Associations (WUAs), Irrigation Councils (ICs), and Agricultural
        Cooperatives (ACs) involved in the operation, maintenance, and governance of
        rehabilitated schemes.
    •   Households in Adjacent Communities, residing near areas where erosion control,
        water harvesting structures, or land management activities are being implemented.
    •   Local Agricultural Laborers and Skilled Workers, who may be temporarily engaged in
        construction or rehabilitation works and impacted by labor conditions and
        occupational health and safety (OHS) risks.


                                             10


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    •   Pastoralists and Livestock Owners, who may benefit from enhanced access to water
        points and pasturelands as a result of improved catchment-level planning.

Component 3 – Resilient Water Supply and Sanitation Systems (Implemented by UNOPS)

    •   Water User Associations (WUAs) directly involved in the operation and maintenance
        of Water Supply and Sanitation Systems.
    •   Urban and Peri-Urban Households in targeted cities who will benefit from upgraded
        or new water supply and sanitation (WSS) services, including desalination and
        wastewater treatment facilities.
    •   Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and Marginalized Groups living in or near project
        service areas, many of whom face higher barriers to access and may require inclusive
        outreach strategies.
    •   Public Service Users, including students, teachers, healthcare workers, and patients,
        where WASH infrastructure is improved in schools and health facilities.
    •   Water Vendors and Local Private Operators, whose services may be affected
        (positively or negatively) by expanded public WSS infrastructure and revised tariff
        structures.
    •   Small Businesses and Market Vendors, particularly those operating in areas with poor
        sanitation and intermittent water access, who stand to benefit from improved
        conditions.

Component 4 – Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development, and Project Management
(Jointly implemented by UNDP and UNOPS)

    •   Staff from the Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE), Ministry of Agriculture,
        Irrigation and Fisheries (MoAIF), and the National Water Resources Authority
        (NWRA) who will participate in institutional strengthening, policy development, and
        technical training.
    •   Local Water and Sanitation Corporations (LWSCs) and General Authority for Rural
        Water Supply Projects (GARWSP) branches involved in utility operations, planning,
        and performance improvement.
    •   Basin Committees and Technical Coordination Teams engaged in decentralized
        water governance and integrated basin-level planning.

3.3. Other Interested Parties
The projects’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities,
including:

    •   Government Ministries, Agencies, and Authorities such as the Ministry of Planning
        and International Cooperation (MoPIC), local governorate and district authorities.
    •   Other UN agencies and international donors support complementary initiatives or
        contributing technical and financial resources.
    •   National and international NGOs active in water, agriculture, WASH, and climate
        resilience sectors.
    •   Private Sector Stakeholders including suppliers, contractors, and service providers for
        civil works, equipment, and related services.

3.4. Disadvantaged /Vulnerable Individuals or Groups
Within the I-WISE Project, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include but are not
limited to the following:

                                             11


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    •   Women and female-headed households often have limited access to land, financial
        resources, and decision-making processes, and may face cultural or social barriers to
        participation.
    •   Children and Youth particularly susceptible to water-borne diseases and impacts of
        water scarcity. Youth may also lack opportunities for engagement in project planning
        and implementation.
    •   The elderly may face mobility constraints, limited access to information, or exclusion
        from decision-making.
    •   Persons with disabilities may require adapted communication and accessible
        meeting venues to participate effectively.
    •   Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and returnees often lack secure access to water,
        sanitation, and livelihoods, and may not be formally represented in governance
        structures.
    •   Marginalized communities and minority groups include rural poor, socially excluded
        groups, and those living in remote or underserved areas.
    •   Youth at risk include unemployed or underemployed young people with limited
        opportunities to engage in decision-making.

Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the project will be further confirmed
and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate. Description of the methods of
engagement that will be undertaken by the project is provided in the following sections.

4. Stakeholder Engagement Program

As part of the preparation phase of the I-WISE Project, UNDP and UNOPS carried out a series
of stakeholder consultations between July 14 and November 3, 2025, engaging approximately
273 participants from Aden, Hadramout, Lahj, Abyan, Taiz and other governorates. These
engagements included joint and agency-specific meetings with government institutions,
implementing partners (SFD, PWP, and UWS-PMU), local authorities, technical experts,
community-based organizations, Water User Associations (WUAs), Irrigation Councils (ICs),
Agricultural Cooperatives (ACs), and directly affected communities, including women’s
groups.
The consultations aimed to introduce the project, gather feedback on the design and
implementation approach, identify potential risks, and promote inclusive participation. UNDP
and UNOPS conducted a detailed session on the Grievance Mechanism (GM), presenting its
principles and commitments, including a zero-tolerance approach to SEA/SH, ethical conduct,
and protection of all project participants. The session outlined proactive measures to reduce
SEA/SH risks, such as awareness campaigns, staff training, and risk assessments. UNDP and
UNOPS explained clear and safe channels for stakeholders to report concerns or incidents
confidentially, emphasizing a survivor-centered approach that ensures sensitivity, dignity, and
confidentiality in managing complaints. The accountability of implementing partners in
preventing and responding to SEA/SH was clarified, and hands-on sessions with real-life
examples reinforced understanding of complaint handling and response measures. The
briefing highlighted UNDP and UNOPS’ commitment to maintaining a safe, ethical, and
transparent project environment, with training and stakeholder engagement to ensure
effective grievance management. A strong focus was placed on gender inclusion and
safeguards: participants were briefed on codes of conduct and protection from SEA/SH, and
telephone consultations with women beneficiaries identified barriers to participation and
access to resources. Overall, the consultations highlighted the importance of inclusive


                                             12


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
engagement, sustainable water governance, adaptive farming, and transparent grievance
mechanisms to support both community resilience and women’s empowerment.
Key findings highlighted the importance of strengthened water governance, inclusive
targeting of beneficiaries (particularly vulnerable households and women), transparent and
accessible grievance mechanisms, SEA/SH risk mitigation, stronger environmental and social
risk management (including OHS and child labor), enhanced gender inclusion, capacity
building for local institutions and WUAs, and improved coordination mechanisms among
stakeholders. Feedback from stakeholders has been integrated into the design of project
activities and the preparation of the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) instruments.
Table (1) summarizes the main consultations conducted to date, highlighting stakeholder
feedback and the corresponding responses. summarizes the main consultations conducted to
date, highlighting stakeholder feedback and the corresponding responses.




                                           13


                                                                                              Official Use Only
        4.1. Summary of Stakeholder Engagement Done During Project Preparation
        During project preparation, the following public consultation meetings were conducted.

        Table 1: Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation
                                                                      No. of
                                             Main participants
  Agency          Date          Venue                              Participants        Key Issue Discussed           Stakeholder Feedback                    Response
                                                  Group
                                                                 Male    Female
UNOPS        14 July 2025    Ramada Hotel   MoWE, WUA            51      12       • Present the project           • Stakeholders express        • The project team acknowledged
                             - Mukalla      members, local                          planned interventions           their interest in having      the concerns and agreed to
                                            CSOs, basin                             including environmental         more interventions in         explore options for enhancing
                                            committee reps                          and social risks and.
                                                                                                                    sanitation along the wadi     sanitation interventions along the
                                                                                  • Preventive Measures: A
                                                                                                                    areas to enhance services     Wadi to prevent pollution.
                                                                                    detailed overview of the
                                                                                    proactive steps we will         and prevent pollution.      • A comprehensive assessment will
                                                                                    take to prevent SEA/SH        • The existing water supply     be considered to map underserved
                                                                                    from occurring within the       system does not serve all     areas and prioritize both water
                                                                                    project.                        Wadi Hagar districts.         and sanitation needs.
                                                                                  • Accessible Grievance            However, there is need      • To address quality concerns, the
                                                                                    Mechanism: Information
                                                                                                                    for comprehensive study       project committed to enforcing
                                                                                    on how stakeholders can
                                                                                    easily use our grievance        to ensure coverage of the     strict compliance with technical
                                                                                    mechanism to report any         populated areas along the     specifications and strengthening
                                                                                    SEA/SH concerns or              Wadi with Water,              supervision and monitoring to
                                                                                    incidents.                      Sanitation and Hygiene        ensure that works are
                                                                                  • Victim-Centred                  Services.                     implemented efficiently and meet
                                                                                    Complaints Handling: An       • The project can also look     beneficiary expectations.
                                                                                    outline of our protocol for
                                                                                                                    at the uncompleted
                                                                                    managing complaints,
                                                                                    which prioritizes a             drinking water supply
                                                                                    sensitive and confidential      schemes which require
                                                                                    approach to protect the         some finalization work to
                                                                                    dignity of all victims.         be operational.



                                                                                  14


                                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                                                  No. of
                                       Main participants
  Agency       Date         Venue                              Participants        Key Issue Discussed      Stakeholder Feedback                     Response
                                            Group
                                                           Male      Female
                                                                                                         • Technical specifications
                                                                                                           usually outlined in
                                                                                                           assessment studies must
                                                                                                           be fully respected by
                                                                                                           contractors and closely
                                                                                                           supervised by all partners
                                                                                                           to ensure efficient
                                                                                                           implementation and
                                                                                                           operation as well as
                                                                                                           satisfaction of
                                                                                                           beneficiaries.
UNOPS      23 -24 July   Aden UNOPS   WB and PWP           9         5        Discussion of technical    • Need for stronger            • Institutionalize a quarterly
           2025          Office                                               aspects                      communication channels         coordination meeting to track
                                                                                                           between the central            progress and address issues in
                                                                                                           coordination unit and          real-time.
                                                                                                           field-level implementers.    • Standardize reporting templates
                                                                                                         • Requests for clearer           to ensure uniformity in data
                                                                                                           guidance on reporting          collection and monitoring.
                                                                                                           formats, timelines, and      • Strengthen collaboration with
                                                                                                           data-sharing procedures.       local authorities and communities
                                                                                                         • Concerns about delays in       to secure access and acceptance.
                                                                                                           fund disbursement or         • Set up a mechanism for joint field
                                                                                                           procurement processes,         visits and monitoring to ensure
                                                                                                           which may affect timely        harmonized implementation.
                                                                                                           implementation.




                                                                              15


                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                                                   No. of
                                         Main participants
  Agency       Date          Venue                              Participants        Key Issue Discussed       Stakeholder Feedback                         Response
                                              Group
                                                               Male   Female
                                                                                                           • Challenges in accessing
                                                                                                             some project sites due to
                                                                                                             security, logistics, or local
                                                                                                             authority restrictions.
                                                                                                           • Requests for more
                                                                                                             technical capacity-
                                                                                                             building and support for
                                                                                                             local staff.
UNDP       22 July 2025   Aden – UNDP   IPs - SFD, PWP, UWS    16     3        Project Objectives and      Stakeholders appreciated          The project team confirmed that
                          Office        - PMU (Management                      Communication               being engaged early and           clear, continuous communication
                                        and Senior Officers)                                               emphasized the importance         will be maintained through regular
                                                                                                           of clear communication on         updates meeting.
                                                                                                           the project’s objectives,
                                                                                                           components, and expected
                                                                                                           outcomes.
                                                                               Sub-project Selection       IPs requested more clarity        The project team confirmed that
                                                                               Criteria                    on the criteria and process       criteria for sub-project selection will
                                                                                                           for identifying and               be developed jointly with IPs and
                                                                                                           prioritizing sub-projects.        validated with community
                                                                                                                                             representatives to ensure
                                                                                                                                             transparency and fairness. It will
                                                                                                                                             also draw on standard thematic
                                                                                                                                             criteria such as IPC, Population
                                                                                                                                             density, IDP’s …etc
                                                                               Timelines and Preparatory   Concerns were raised about        The project team confirmed that
                                                                               Work                        timelines and the need for        technical studies and safeguards
                                                                                                           sufficient preparatory work       assessments will be conducted prior
                                                                                                           (technical studies,               to implementation to minimize risks
                                                                                                                                             and ensure quality outcomes.


                                                                               16


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                                  No. of
                                         Main participants
  Agency       Date          Venue                             Participants        Key Issue Discussed     Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                                              Group
                                                              Male   Female
                                                                                                         safeguards assessments)
                                                                                                         before implementation.
                                                                              Inclusion of Vulnerable    Specific emphasis was          The project team confirmed that
                                                                              Groups                     placed on ensuring that        measures will be introduced to
                                                                                                         vulnerable groups (women,      guarantee the participation of
                                                                                                         IDPs, marginalized             vulnerable and disadvantaged
                                                                                                         households) are                groups, including gender-responsive
                                                                                                         meaningfully included in       consultations and targeted outreach
                                                                                                         both planning and              strategies.
                                                                                                         implementation.
UNDP       28 July 2025   Aden – UNDP   IPs – SFD, PWP, UWS   13     4        Coordination Between IPs   Limited coordination           Establish a Project Coordination
                          Office        - PMU (ESRM team                      and the implementation     between IPs.                   Committee. A Project Coordination
                                        and technical team)                   modality                                                  Committee will oversee these
                                                                                                                                        efforts and ensure smooth
                                                                                                                                        collaboration Monthly meeting at
                                                                                                                                        the start of the project, shifting to
                                                                                                                                        bi-monthly once coordination is well
                                                                                                                                        established. Annual work plans will
                                                                                                                                        be coordinated to divide
                                                                                                                                        responsibilities based on identified
                                                                                                                                        needs and determine which IP will
                                                                                                                                        start in each location. Regular
                                                                                                                                        coordination meetings will be held
                                                                                                                                        to discuss joint concern s and share
                                                                                                                                        experiences, align methodologies,
                                                                                                                                        and avoid overlaps.
                                                                              Environmental and Social   Challenges in developing       Quality of initial submissions is often
                                                                              Risk Management            and clearing ESAPs highlight   low due to missing data and
                                                                                                         the need to accelerate the     insufficient information. Review
                                                                                                         clearance process to ensure    periods are extended when many



                                                                              17


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed     Stakeholder Feedback                  Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                       smooth project            individual ESAPs are submitted
                                                                                       implementation, prevent   separately.
                                                                                       funding gaps, and align   Grouping Sub-projects: UNDP will
                                                                                       resources with on-the-    group sub-projects to reduce the
                                                                                       ground progress.          number of ESAP submissions.
                                                                                                                 Low-Risk Approach: For low-risk sub-
                                                                                                                 projects, IPs will develop an ESRAC
                                                                                                                 document. The structure will be
                                                                                                                 agreed with the World Bank's ES risk
                                                                                                                 management team and will be
                                                                                                                 internally approved by UNDP.
                                                                                                                 Learning Process: UNDP will treat
                                                                                                                 the ESAP review as a learning
                                                                                                                 opportunity by developing a
                                                                                                                 comment matrix based on feedback
                                                                                                                 received from the WB on previous
                                                                                                                 similar projects. This will help ensure
                                                                                                                 that future ESAPs proactively
                                                                                                                 address past comments, thereby
                                                                                                                 reducing review time
                                                                                                                 Submission Planning: UNDP and IPs
                                                                                                                 will prepare quarterly or bi-annual
                                                                                                                 ESAP submission plans for the ESF
                                                                                                                 WB team, including timelines and
                                                                                                                 sub-project lists, so the WB can
                                                                                                                 allocate resources for timely review.
                                                                                                                 Templates & Capacity Building: A
                                                                                                                 standardized ESAP template, cleared
                                                                                                                 by the WB, will be shared with all
                                                                                                                 IPs. UNDP will provide support and



                                                            18


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed     Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                                                      capacity building to improve ESAP
                                                                                                                      quality.
                                                                                                                      Target Review Time: With better
                                                                                                                      preparation and incorporation of
                                                                                                                      previous feedback, the goal is to
                                                                                                                      achieve clearance within the first
                                                                                                                      review or maximum two rounds.
                                                                                       IPs requested that all ESF     All requirements will be clearly
                                                                                       requirements and standards     outlined in the Environmental and
                                                                                       be clearly defined to avoid    Social Framework (ESF). UNDP will
                                                                                       confusion.                     organize a workshop to explain
                                                                                                                      these requirements in detail and
                                                                                                                      discuss them with IPs. All project
                                                                                                                      plans (ESF, SEP, SMP, LMP, etc.) will
                                                                                                                      be reviewed to ensure their practical
                                                                                                                      application at project sites.
                                                                                       Risks from Substantial         Such sub-projects will require a full
                                                                                       Activities, such as dams       Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                                       with a height of 15 meters     Assessment (ESIA), with mitigation
                                                                                       pose significant OHS and       measures implemented on-site and
                                                                                       social risks.                  monitored regularly through spot
                                                                                                                      checks.
                                                                                       Upstream vs. Downstream        The project will address this through
                                                                                       Water Conflicts. When          community engagement,
                                                                                       activities begin in upstream   establishment of water committees,
                                                                                       areas, water flow to           and conflict-sensitive project design.
                                                                                       downstream communities         Fair water allocation will be ensured
                                                                                       can be reduced, creating       by considering downstream needs
                                                                                       potential conflicts. In some   during both the design and
                                                                                       locations, upstream            implementation phases, maintaining



                                                            19


                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed      Stakeholder Feedback                     Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                        communities also lack        adequate water flow throughout the
                                                                                        water user associations or   wadi.
                                                                                        committees to manage
                                                                                        water distribution.
                                                            Stakeholder Consultations   Concerns about taking        Photos are not required for ESAPs.
                                                                                        photos in the field,         In line with previous practice,
                                                                                        especially of women during   community consultation photos will
                                                                                        consultations, due to        be excluded, while key information
                                                                                        cultural sensitivities.      such as the number of participants
                                                                                                                     (disaggregated by gender), concerns
                                                                                                                     raised, and feedback will be
                                                                                                                     retained.
                                                                                        Community Ownership and      To ensure sustainability,
                                                                                        Maintenance                  communities will be engaged from
                                                                                                                     the start in identifying needs,
                                                                                                                     planning, and implementing sub-
                                                                                                                     projects. Training will be provided to
                                                                                                                     community committees on
                                                                                                                     operation and maintenance of the
                                                                                                                     infrastructure.
                                                            Women Participation and     Many sub-projects are        Design project activities in a way
                                                            Inclusion                   labour-intensive and not     that is more women-friendly by
                                                                                        suited for women's           identifying specific tasks within
                                                                                        participation.               larger sub-projects that women can
                                                                                                                     undertake.
                                                                                                                     Provide training opportunities for
                                                                                                                     women so they can assume new
                                                                                                                     roles in project activities, strengthen
                                                                                                                     their skills, and build knowledge
                                                                                                                     with long-lasting impact.



                                                            20


                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                                    No. of
                                         Main participants
  Agency       Date          Venue                               Participants        Key Issue Discussed     Stakeholder Feedback                     Response
                                              Group
                                                                Male   Female

                                                                                                                                         For example, the PWP trained 50
                                                                                                                                         women in community contracting,
                                                                                                                                         of whom 20 obtained licenses and
                                                                                                                                         are already working. PWP will share
                                                                                                                                         their contact list so they can be
                                                                                                                                         considered for future sub-projects,
                                                                                                                                         thereby ensuring women’s
                                                                                                                                         continued participation and
                                                                                                                                         empowerment in local
                                                                                                                                         development.
                                                                                Cultural and Traditional                                 The project will respect and adapt to
                                                                                Sensitivities                                            the cultural and traditional contexts
                                                                                                                                         of the areas where activities are
                                                                                                                                         implemented.
UNDP       31 July 2025   Aden – MoWE   MoWE - Minister of      10     2        Clarity of Roles and       The Minister emphasized
                          Office        Water and                               Responsibilities           that roles and
                                                                                                                                         Roles and responsibilities will be
                                        Environment                                                        responsibilities of UN
                                                                                                                                         defined during project design. A
                                        Deputy Minister for                                                agencies, local
                                                                                                                                         formal document will be developed
                                        Water Sector                                                       implementers, government
                                                                                                                                         outlining these roles to ensure
                                        Deputy Minister for                                                entities, stakeholders, and
                                                                                                                                         transparency and accountability.
                                        Environment Sector                                                 beneficiaries must be
                                        UWS - PMU Director                                                 clearly defined.
                                        of Contracts and                        Avoiding Social Tensions   Targeting specific areas      Coordination with the Ministry and
                                        Consultations                           from Project Targeting     where needs exist             branch offices will ensure fair and
                                        General Director of                                                nationwide could create       transparent targeting. Stakeholder
                                        the PMU                                                            social tensions in non-       engagement will occur throughout
                                        Climate Unit Director                                              targeted areas.               the project cycle. Sub-project
                                                                                                                                         selection will be based on assessed
                                                                                                                                         needs, with consultations at multiple



                                                                                21


                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                                                    No. of
                                           Main participants
   Agency          Date           Venue                          Participants        Key Issue Discussed     Stakeholder Feedback                      Response
                                                Group
                                                                Male   Female
                                                                                                                                         stages from Ministry level to direct
                                                                                                                                         beneficiary engagement.
                                                                                Community Health and       Stakeholders inquired
                                                                                Safety Risks               whether the project
                                                                                                                                         UNDP clarified that the project does
                                                                                                           includes activities
                                                                                                                                         not include activities specifically
                                                                                                           addressing public health
                                                                                                                                         targeting waterborne diseases.
                                                                                                           issues such as waterborne
                                                                                                           diseases.
                                                                                                           Project is important for
                                                                                                                                         UNDP will align projects with
                                                                                                           meeting community needs
                                                                                Strategic Vision and                                     broader development goals while
                                                                                                           and should consider a
                                                                                Development Impact                                       focusing on immediate community
                                                                                                           broader, long-term
                                                                                                                                         needs.
                                                                                                           development vision.
                                                                                                           Climate change impacts        The project will adopt a Climate Co-
                                                                                Climate Considerations     must be integrated into       Benefits (CCB) approach and align
                                                                                                           design and implementation.    with climate resilience priorities.
                                                                                Community Awareness and    Communities must              Continuous stakeholder
                                                                                Engagement                 understand project            consultations will ensure
                                                                                                           objectives and targeting      communities are informed and can
                                                                                                           rationale.                    give feedback. Issues can be raised
                                                                                                                                         via the GM. Needs will be identified
                                                                                                                                         with government authorities.
UNDP and       3 August 2025   Aden,      MoWE, MoAIF, IPs      62     16       Project indication         The project will greatly      The project will optimize water use,
UNOPS- Joint                   Panorama   (SFD, PWP, UWS -                      (Components and            improve livelihoods through   rehabilitate irrigation systems, build
Stakeholder                    Hotel      PMU), WUA                             Objectives)                better water use, land        farmer capacity, and ensure
Engagement                                members, Irrigation                                              protection, enhanced          equitable benefits through active
Workshop                                  Councils (ICs), and                                              farming capacity, job         stakeholder engagement and
                                          Agricultural                                                     creation, and improved        support to Water User Associations.
                                          Cooperatives (ACs),                                              incomes. They stressed the
                                                                                                           need for fair water



                                                                                22


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                 No. of
                         Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                         Participants        Key Issue Discussed       Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                              Group
                                             Male   Female
                        local CSOs, basin                                                distribution, irrigation
                        committee reps                                                   repair, and engagement of
                                                                                         Water User Associations.
                                                             Potential environmental     Most participants expressed      The project will conduct
                                                             and social impacts of the   no significant concerns,         environmental and social
                                                             project                     stating that if the project is   assessments, ensure compliance
                                                                                         implemented with accurate        with the Environmental and Social
                                                                                         studies and proper               Framework (ESF), and adopt
                                                                                         implementation in line with      mitigation measures to address
                                                                                         all standards and the            identified risks. Measures will
                                                                                         mitigation measures              include environmental and social
                                                                                         outlined in the ESMPs, the       regulation safeguards to protect
                                                                                         impact would be positive.        water resources, soil quality, and
                                                                                         Some noted potential risks,      biodiversity.
                                                                                         such as pollution of air and
                                                                                         water, impacts on climate,
                                                                                         or groundwater
                                                                                         contamination if sanitation
                                                                                         projects are located nearby.
                                                             Awareness of grievance      Participants demonstrated        The project will establish and
                                                             mechanisms                  good awareness of multiple       publicize multiple grievance
                                                                                         channels for submitting          channels in line with the Stakeholder
                                                                                         complaints or suggestions,       Engagement Plan (SEP), including a
                                                                                         including toll-free hotlines,    toll-free hotline, complaint boxes,
                                                                                         complaint boxes, direct          email, WhatsApp, and direct
                                                                                         communication with               communication with implementing
                                                                                         implementing agencies,           partners and local authorities. Clear
                                                                                         emails, WhatsApp, social         focal points will be designated in
                                                                                         media platforms, local           each target area to receive and
                                                                                         authorities, agricultural



                                                             23


                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed           Stakeholder Feedback                        Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                             associations, and               forward complaints, ensuring timely
                                                                                             supervisory bodies. Some        resolution and feedback.
                                                                                             emphasized the need for
                                                                                             accessible local grievance
                                                                                             points, clear focal points in
                                                                                             the community, and diverse
                                                                                             methods to ensure
                                                                                             inclusiveness.
                                                            The project’s inclusivity and    Participants agreed that the    The project will ensure inclusivity
                                                            equitable participation of all   project should be inclusive     through targeted stakeholder
                                                            community groups,                and involve all community       engagement, guaranteeing
                                                            including women, men,            groups, including women,        representation of all social groups
                                                            IDPs, the elderly, persons       men, IDPs, the elderly,         throughout the project cycle.
                                                            with disabilities, and other     persons with disabilities,      Specific safeguard measures will be
                                                            vulnerable populations,          and other vulnerable            in place to promote women’s
                                                            throughout project cycle.        groups. Many highlighted        participation, integrate vulnerable
                                                                                             that such participation         groups, and draw on the expertise of
                                                                                             would enhance project           elderly farmers. Engagement
                                                                                             success and sustainability,     strategies will align with the SEP and
                                                                                             with benefits extending to      prioritize equitable access to project
                                                                                             all. Some noted that women      benefits.
                                                                                             play a significant role in
                                                                                             agriculture, especially in
                                                                                             areas like Wadi Tuban, and
                                                                                             the project could also
                                                                                             integrate IDPs as a
                                                                                             workforce. Others
                                                                                             emphasized the value of
                                                                                             elderly farmers’ knowledge
                                                                                             and the need to involve



                                                            24


                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                            No. of
                                    Main participants
  Agency       Date       Venue                          Participants        Key Issue Discussed          Stakeholder Feedback                        Response
                                         Group
                                                        Male   Female
                                                                                                       them in water resource
                                                                                                       management and decision-
                                                                                                       making.
                                                                        Potential of the project to    Participants generally           The project will promote women’s
                                                                        contribute to women’s          agreed that the project          economic empowerment by
                                                                        economic empowerment.          could significantly improve      ensuring inclusive participation at all
                                                                                                       women’s economic                 stages—from planning to
                                                                                                       conditions if it meaningfully    implementation and monitoring—
                                                                                                       engages rural women,             while fully complying with the
                                                                                                       increases their income, and      gender requirements of the
                                                                                                       supports their participation     Environmental and Social
                                                                                                       in agriculture and related       Framework (ESF). Interventions will
                                                                                                       activities. Many emphasized      include targeted training, capacity
                                                                                                       that women are already key       building, and measures to guarantee
                                                                                                       contributors to farming in       equitable access to project benefits.
                                                                                                       the area, and involving          Women’s participation will be
                                                                                                       them in decision-making,         tracked through dedicated gender
                                                                                                       training, and project            indicators to strengthen
                                                                                                       activities would enhance         accountability and ensure sustained
                                                                                                       livelihoods. They stressed       impact.
                                                                                                       the importance of setting
                                                                                                       specific participation targets
                                                                                                       for women, ensuring fair
                                                                                                       benefit distribution, and
                                                                                                       supporting women-led
                                                                                                       initiatives to sustain
                                                                                                       impacts.
UNDP       12 August   Aden, PMU   UWS - PMU            11     4        Introduction to the UWS -      UWS – PMU shared details         UNDP has committed to working
           2025        Office                                           PMU team and alignment         on their current activities,     jointly with the UWS - PMU to
                                                                        on collaboration for project   staff structure, and             review and update manuals,



                                                                        25


                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                                                    No. of
                                      Main participants
  Agency       Date        Venue                                 Participants        Key Issue Discussed        Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                                           Group
                                                             Male      Female
                                                                                implementation, including    readiness to begin               frameworks, and guidelines to
                                                                                ESRM requirements,           operations. They expressed       ensure alignment with
                                                                                grievance mechanisms,        interest in aligning with WB     Environmental and Social
                                                                                GBV/SH/SEA, and the          and UNDP safeguards              Framework (ESF) requirements.
                                                                                development of manuals,      requirements and                 Capacity-building sessions will be
                                                                                frameworks, and guidelines   acknowledged the need for        conducted on ESRM, GM, and GBV-
                                                                                prior to project start-up.   clear procedures, updated        SEA, while collaboration
                                                                                                             operational documents, and       mechanisms will be established to
                                                                                                             targeted capacity-building       guide implementation from the
                                                                                                             before implementation.           outset.
UNDP       30 October   Aden, CAMA   Ministry of Transport   8        1                                      CAMA emphasized that
           2025         Office       - Civil Aviation and                                                    strengthening climate and
                                     Meteorological                                                          water data systems is a top      UNDP confirmed that Component 1
                                     Services (CAMA)                                                         institutional priority. They     CWIMS will address this gap through
                                                                                Institutional Priorities     requested the project’s          data recovery, consolidation, and
                                                                                                             support to provide access        digitization, directly supporting
                                                                                                             to actual, reliable data and     CAMA’s mandate.
                                                                                                             to integrate existing
                                                                                                             records.
                                                                                                             The institution highlighted
                                                                                                                                              UNDP confirmed that capacity
                                                                                                             limited technical capacity
                                                                                                                                              building is an integral part of
                                                                                                             and requested tailored
                                                                                                                                              Component 1 and that a detailed
                                                                                                             training for staff to improve
                                                                                                                                              capacity needs assessment will be
                                                                                                             skills in data management,
                                                                                Capacity Gaps and Training                                    carried out to design appropriate
                                                                                                             operation of monitoring
                                                                                Needs                                                         training programs in coordination
                                                                                                             stations, and climate-water
                                                                                                                                              with CAMA and other relevant
                                                                                                             modelling. They
                                                                                                                                              agencies. UNDP also noted that the
                                                                                                             appreciated being included
                                                                                                                                              project will explore options for
                                                                                                             in the project’s governance
                                                                                                                                              upgrading monitoring and early
                                                                                                             structure at this early stage.



                                                                                26


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed      Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                        CAMA also emphasized the        warning systems in alignment with
                                                                                        need for more advanced          national priorities
                                                                                        monitoring equipment,
                                                                                        noting that their current
                                                                                        systems mainly capture
                                                                                        climate data and lack
                                                                                        integrated early warning
                                                                                        capabilities
                                                                                        CAMA requested to be
                                                                                        involved from the early
                                                                                                                        UNDP agreed to include CAMA in
                                                                                        preparation phase,
                                                                                                                        the project preparation and
                                                                                        particularly in selecting the
                                                            Participation in Project                                    planning process and to ensure that
                                                                                        locations and technical
                                                            preparation and Technical                                   station siting and system design are
                                                                                        specifications of
                                                            Planning                                                    technically aligned with existing
                                                                                        observation stations,
                                                                                                                        national networks and CAMA
                                                                                        ensuring integration with
                                                                                                                        standards.
                                                                                        their existing infrastructure
                                                                                        and systems.
                                                                                        CAMA confirmed that
                                                                                        women’s participation in
                                                                                        the project is welcomed         UNDP acknowledged CAMA’s
                                                                                        and socially accepted. They     existing inclusion of women and
                                                                                        already have women              confirmed that gender-responsive
                                                            Gender Participation and
                                                                                        employed in several             engagement and participation will
                                                            Inclusion
                                                                                        technical units and foresee     remain a core principle in the
                                                                                        no social or institutional      project’s implementation and
                                                                                        barriers to female              capacity-building activities.
                                                                                        involvement in the planned
                                                                                        activities.




                                                            27


                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed        Stakeholder Feedback                      Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                         CAMA explained that they
                                                                                                                         UNDP commended CAMA’s
                                                                                         consult community
                                                                                                                         participatory approach and
                                                                                         committees and local
                                                            Consultation Practices and                                   confirmed that future community-
                                                                                         authorities during field
                                                            Local Coordination                                           level consultations under the project
                                                                                         operations, receiving
                                                                                                                         will coordinate closely with CAMA’s
                                                                                         positive feedback and
                                                                                                                         established channels.
                                                                                         cooperation.
                                                                                                                         UNDP noted CAMA’s proactive
                                                                                                                         stance and confirmed that the
                                                                                         CAMA stated that the            project will coordinate with CAMA
                                                                                         project poses no expected       and relevant authorities for risk
                                                                                         social or security conflicts.   monitoring and conflict resolution if
                                                            Conflict and Risk
                                                                                         They expressed readiness        required. UNDP noted that the
                                                            Management
                                                                                         to assist in resolving any      project’s Grievance Mechanism
                                                                                         institutional or local          (GM) will play a critical role in
                                                                                         conflicts if they arise.        monitoring and resolving any
                                                                                                                         potential community or institutional
                                                                                                                         conflicts.
                                                                                         CAMA clarified that all lands   UNDP explained the World Bank and
                                                                                         for existing or future          UNDP standards for the land
                                                            Land Donation and            meteorological installations    acquisition and the voluntary land
                                                            Regulatory Compliance        are publicly owned or           donation and confirmed that all
                                                                                         voluntarily donated, with       project activities will comply with
                                                                                         proper documentation.           these requirements.
                                                                                         Participants expressed
                                                                                                                         UNDP confirmed CAMA’s role as a
                                                                                         strong interest and support
                                                                                                                         key technical partner and
                                                            Interest and Commitment      for the project, noting that
                                                                                                                         committed to maintaining close
                                                            to Project Implementation    previous initiatives had
                                                                                                                         collaboration throughout
                                                                                         overlooked their institution.
                                                                                                                         implementation.
                                                                                         They view this project as an



                                                            28


                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                                                      No. of
                                          Main participants
  Agency      Date          Venue                                  Participants        Key Issue Discussed      Stakeholder Feedback                      Response
                                               Group
                                                               Male      Female
                                                                                                              important opportunity to
                                                                                                              strengthen national
                                                                                                              meteorological and
                                                                                                              hydrological services.
                                                                                                              Participants were briefed      UNDP confirmed that the GM will be
                                                                                                              on the UNDP GM system          accessible, transparent, and
                                                                                                              and the procedures             responsive, and CAMA staff will be
                                                                                  Grievance Mechanism (GM)
                                                                                                              available for beneficiaries    informed and trained on how to use
                                                                                                              and institutions to raise      and promote it within their areas of
                                                                                                              complaints or feedback.        work.
UNDP       2 November   Ministry of      Deputy Minister of    8         3                                    MoAIF confirmed that
           2025         Agriculture      Irrigation and Land                                                  coordination with UNDP
                                                                                                                                             UNDP acknowledged the strong
                        and Irrigation   Reclamation Sector,                                                  has been positive and
                                                                                                                                             coordination with MoAIF and
                        and Fisheries    Deputy Minister for                      Project Coordination and    effective. They welcomed
                                                                                                                                             confirmed that the Ministry will
                        (MoAIF)          Planning and                             Partnership                 the opportunity to continue
                                                                                                                                             remain a key stakeholder and
                        Office           Information system,                                                  close collaboration
                                                                                                                                             advisory partner in the project.
                                         DG of Information                                                    throughout project
                                         System, and other                                                    implementation.
                                         MoAIF staff                                                          The Ministry emphasized
                                                                                                                                             UNDP agreed that integration and
                                                                                                              that Components 1 and 2
                                                                                                                                             coordination between Components
                                                                                                              are technically linked and
                                                                                  Integration of Components                                  1 and 2 are essential and confirmed
                                                                                                              should be managed under
                                                                                  1 and 2                                                    that project preparation and
                                                                                                              one implementing entity to
                                                                                                                                             implementation arrangements will
                                                                                                              ensure efficiency and
                                                                                                                                             reflect this linkage.
                                                                                                              consistency.
                                                                                                              The Ministry proposed          UNDP confirmed that a launch and
                                                                                                              organizing a joint technical   technical planning workshop will be
                                                                                  Project Launch and
                                                                                                              workshop to officially         organized after the project appraisal
                                                                                  Technical Workshop
                                                                                                              launch the project, gather     to align technical groups, finalize
                                                                                                              technical teams, and           implementation arrangements, and



                                                                                  29


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed       Stakeholder Feedback                     Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                         discuss project activities,   ensure shared understanding of
                                                                                         methodologies, and            project activities.
                                                                                         approaches to ensure value
                                                                                         for money.
                                                                                         MoAIF requested to have a
                                                                                                                       UNDP confirmed that MoAIF will be
                                                                                         supervisory role in
                                                                                                                       part of the project’s governance and
                                                                                         overseeing project
                                                                                                                       coordination structure and will
                                                            Supervisory and              implementation and
                                                                                                                       contribute to supervision and
                                                            Coordination Role            coordinating with UNDP
                                                                                                                       oversight through regular
                                                                                         and the implementing
                                                                                                                       coordination meetings and progress
                                                                                         partners (IPs) to ensure
                                                                                                                       reviews.
                                                                                         smooth progress.
                                                                                         MoAIF stressed the
                                                                                         importance of establishing    UNDP confirmed that institutional
                                                                                         a strong coordination         coordination between these entities
                                                                                         mechanism between             will be a core aspect of project
                                                            Institutional Coordination
                                                                                         NWRA, CAMA, and the           design and that the Information
                                                            and Data Management
                                                                                         Ministry’s Information Unit   Management System will promote
                                                                                         to ensure data sharing,       cross-sectoral data integration and
                                                                                         technical alignment, and      information exchange.
                                                                                         effective project delivery.
                                                                                         The Ministry stated that      UNDP acknowledged the positive
                                                                                         similar projects have not     feedback and confirmed that
                                                                                         led to any conflicts in the   stakeholder consultations will
                                                                                         past. They assured that       continue during implementation to
                                                            Conflict and Community
                                                                                         communities in the            maintain community acceptance
                                                            Acceptance
                                                                                         targeted areas are            and ensure smooth progress. UNDP
                                                                                         supportive and recognize      noted that the project’s Grievance
                                                                                         the importance and priority   Mechanism (GM) will play a critical
                                                                                         of such interventions.        role in monitoring and resolving any



                                                            30


                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                               No. of
                                      Main participants
  Agency       Date        Venue                            Participants        Key Issue Discussed        Stakeholder Feedback                        Response
                                           Group
                                                           Male   Female
                                                                                                                                         potential community or institutional
                                                                                                                                         conflicts.
UNDP       2 November   Aden         Director of the       11     4                                      CECS confirmed that this
           2025         University   Training Unit,                                                      type of project is a high
                                     Director of the                                                     priority for the community,
                                                                                                                                         UNDP acknowledged CECS’s
                                     Centre of                                                           farmers, and the
                                                                                                                                         assessment and confirmed that the
                                     Environmental and                                                   government. They
                                                                           Project Relevance and                                         project directly responds to national
                                     Climate Studies                                                     emphasized that improved
                                                                           Priority                                                      and community priorities related to
                                     (CECS), Director of                                                 climate and water
                                                                                                                                         climate resilience, sustainable water
                                     the Consulting                                                      information systems are
                                                                                                                                         use, and agricultural productivity.
                                     Department,                                                         essential for climate-
                                     Secretary of the                                                    resilient agriculture and
                                     Environmental and                                                   national planning.
                                     Climate Studies                                                     The Centre emphasized that
                                                                                                                                         UNDP confirmed that capacity
                                                                                                         to ensure long-term project
                                     Centre, Director of                                                                                 building is a key component of the
                                                                                                         sustainability, strong
                                     Studies and                                                                                         project and will include tailored
                                                                           Capacity Building and         capacity-building activities
                                     Research, and other                                                                                 training for relevant institutions and
                                                                           Institutional Strengthening   are required for all entities
                                     technical staff                                                                                     staff, including technical,
                                                                                                         and staff involved in data
                                     members.                                                                                            managerial, and operational
                                                                                                         collection, analysis, and
                                                                                                                                         aspects.
                                                                                                         system operation.
                                                                                                         CECS suggested that the         UNDP agreed on the importance of
                                                                                                         project should establish or     post-implementation O&M and
                                                                           Operation and Maintenance     strengthen operation and        confirmed that sustainability and
                                                                           (O&M) after                   maintenance teams after         maintenance mechanisms will be
                                                                           Implementation                implementation to ensure        integrated into project preparation,
                                                                                                         continued functionality of      with institutional roles clearly
                                                                                                         infrastructure and systems.     defined.
                                                                           Collaboration and             The Centre proposed closer      UNDP welcomed CECS’s offer and
                                                                           Knowledge Exchange            collaboration with existing     confirmed that collaboration with



                                                                           31


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                                    No. of
                                        Main participants
  Agency       Date        Venue                                 Participants        Key Issue Discussed     Stakeholder Feedback                      Response
                                             Group
                                                             Male      Female
                                                                                                           national capacity-building     academic and research institutions
                                                                                                           institutions and offered to    will be pursued to enhance training
                                                                                                           share their experience and     delivery, knowledge exchange, and
                                                                                                           technical expertise in         local ownership.
                                                                                                           climate and environmental
                                                                                                           studies.
UNDP       3 November   Yemen          Head of Yemen         9         2                                   GSRMB confirmed that this      UNDP acknowledged the
           2025         Geological     Geological Survey                                                   type of project is a high      importance of the project and
                                                                                Project Relevance and
                        Survey and     and Mineral                                                         priority for the community     confirmed that it aligns with
                                                                                Community Priority
                        Mineral        Resources Board                                                     and will bring significant     community and local development
                        Resources      (GSMRB), Deputy                                                     benefits.                      priorities.
                        Board Office   Head of GSRMB,                                                      GSRMB requested to have
                                       Head of the                                                         regular coordination during
                                       Information                                                         implementation, noting         UNDP agreed to ensure continuous
                                       Management Unit,                                                    that in previous projects      coordination and engagement with
                                                                                Coordination and
                                       Information                                                         with other entities, they      GSRMB during all project phases to
                                                                                Engagement
                                       Management                                                          were often consulted only      strengthen ownership and
                                       Officer, Other                                                      for information and not        participation.
                                       technical staff                                                     fully engaged throughout
                                       members - Ministry                                                  the process.
                                       of Oil and Minerals                                                 GSRMB emphasized the
                                                                                                           need for a strong capacity-
                                                                                                                                          UNDP confirmed that capacity
                                                                                                           building component,
                                                                                                                                          building and skills development for
                                                                                                           particularly for staff who
                                                                                Capacity Building                                         partners are integral parts of the
                                                                                                           will be directly involved in
                                                                                                                                          project to support long-term
                                                                                                           implementation, to ensure
                                                                                                                                          sustainability.
                                                                                                           effective performance and
                                                                                                           project sustainability.
                                                                                Collaboration and          GSRMB expressed their          UNDP welcomed this commitment
                                                                                Institutional Support      readiness to coordinate        and confirmed that collaboration



                                                                                32


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                                                    No. of
                                      Main participants
  Agency      Date       Venue                                   Participants        Key Issue Discussed         Stakeholder Feedback                        Response
                                           Group
                                                             Male      Female
                                                                                                               with authorities and             with GSRMB will be formalized
                                                                                                               communities and to               through regular joint coordination
                                                                                                               collaborate with UNDP to         and reporting mechanisms.
                                                                                                               ensure smooth and
                                                                                                               effective implementation.
                                                                                                                                                UNDP took note of this feedback
                                                                                                                                                and will continue monitoring to
                                                                                                                                                ensure that all project activities
                                                                                                               GSRMB confirmed that the         remain conflict-sensitive and
                                                                                                               project will not create any      inclusive. UNDP noted that the
                                                                                Conflict Sensitivity
                                                                                                               conflict within the targeted     project’s Grievance Mechanism
                                                                                                               communities.                     (GM) will play a critical role in
                                                                                                                                                monitoring and resolving any
                                                                                                                                                potential community or institutional
                                                                                                                                                conflicts.
UNDP       3–5        Phone call     General director of     -         1                                       EPA highlighted weak             UNDP acknowledged these risks and
           November   and            Environmental                                                             institutional coordination,      confirmed that the project will
           2025       WhatsApp       Protection Authority                                                      limited accuracy of climate      establish a clear coordination
                                                                                Key Concerns Related to
                      Survey         (EPA) in Hadramout -                                                      and hydrological data,           mechanism, build data-sharing
                                                                                Project Activities
                      consultation   AL Mukalla - Ministry                                                     challenges in ensuring O&M       systems, and include awareness and
                                     of Water and                                                              after project closure, and       regular programs for local
                                     Environment -                                                             possible overlap in roles.       engagement.
                                     Hadramout Branch                                                          EPA confirmed that the
                                                                                                               project is a high priority and   UNDP agreed and highlighted that
                                                                                                               it will greatly enhance          the project aims to strengthen early
                                                                                Priority and Contribution to
                                                                                                               climate resilience through       warning, climate-informed planning,
                                                                                Climate Adaptation
                                                                                                               improved climate and water       and efficient water use in
                                                                                                               information systems, better      agriculture.
                                                                                                               watershed management,




                                                                                33


                                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed        Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                          and data-driven decision-
                                                                                          making.
                                                                                          EPA emphasized the need
                                                                                          to integrate project output
                                                                                                                          UNDP welcomed EPA’s commitment
                                                                                          into national and local plans
                                                                                                                          and confirmed that institutional
                                                                                          and to train national staff
                                                            Project Sustainability and                                    integration, data sharing, and
                                                                                          for system operation and
                                                            Institutional Role                                            environmental compliance are core
                                                                                          maintenance. The Authority
                                                                                                                          components of project
                                                                                          expressed readiness to
                                                                                                                          sustainability.
                                                                                          provide environmental
                                                                                          oversight and data support.
                                                                                          EPA noted that the project
                                                                                          can be a model for inclusive
                                                                                          engagement if equality
                                                                                                                          UNDP confirmed its commitment to
                                                                                          principles are embedded in
                                                                                                                          gender and social inclusion, ensuring
                                                                                          planning and
                                                                                                                          all groups especially vulnerable and
                                                            Inclusion and Participation   implementation. They
                                                                                                                          marginalized groups are
                                                                                          stressed the inclusion of
                                                                                                                          meaningfully involved in
                                                                                          women, displaced persons,
                                                                                                                          consultations, training, and benefits.
                                                                                          persons with disabilities,
                                                                                          and vulnerable groups in
                                                                                          project activities.
                                                                                          EPA recommended
                                                                                          establishing a joint            UNDP confirmed that these
                                                                                          technical committee,            recommendations align with the
                                                            Recommendations               conducting public               project’s participatory design and
                                                                                          awareness campaigns,            will be reflected in coordination and
                                                                                          strengthening institutional     implementation plans.
                                                                                          capacity, and using




                                                            34


                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                                                  No. of
                                      Main participants
  Agency      Date       Venue                                 Participants        Key Issue Discussed      Stakeholder Feedback                        Response
                                           Group
                                                           Male      Female
                                                                                                         participatory approaches to
                                                                                                         identify monitoring sites.
UNDP       3–4        Phone call     General director of   1         -                                   WEC emphasized that the
           November   and            the Water and                                                       project is a high priority for
           2025       WhatsApp       Environmental                                                       Hadramout and Aden due
                                                                                                                                          UNDP acknowledged that the
                      Survey         Center (WEC) –                                                      to the increasing pressure
                                                                                                                                          project directly aligns with national
                      consultation   Hadramout                                                           on limited water resources.
                                                                              Project Relevance and                                       and local priorities, particularly the
                                     University                                                          They highlighted the urgent
                                                                              Priority                                                    need for climate-informed water
                                                                                                         need for accurate
                                                                                                                                          management and disaster risk
                                                                                                         information systems to
                                                                                                                                          reduction.
                                                                                                         support water management
                                                                                                         and adaptation to droughts
                                                                                                         and floods.
                                                                                                         WEC raised several
                                                                                                         concerns including weak
                                                                                                         technical infrastructure for     UNDP noted these concerns and
                                                                                                         maintaining monitoring           confirmed that the project
                                                                                                         stations, limited local          preparation includes institutional
                                                                              Key Concerns Related to
                                                                                                         capacity to operate modern       capacity building, clear role
                                                                              Project Activities
                                                                                                         information systems,             definition, and sustainability
                                                                                                         overlapping institutional        planning for long-term O&M of
                                                                                                         roles, and sustainability        monitoring systems.
                                                                                                         challenges after external
                                                                                                         support ends.
                                                                                                         WEC stated that the project      UNDP confirmed that strengthening
                                                                                                         will significantly enhance       adaptive capacity and early warning
                                                                              Contribution to Climate    early warning and risk           are two of the main goals of the
                                                                              Adaptation                 management by improving          project, with direct benefits for
                                                                                                         data accuracy and analysis       water management, agriculture, and
                                                                                                         through CWIMS. It will           climate resilience.



                                                                              35


                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                                       No. of
                                          Main participants
   Agency           Date        Venue                               Participants        Key Issue Discussed       Stakeholder Feedback                       Response
                                               Group
                                                                Male      Female
                                                                                                                support drought and flood
                                                                                                                preparedness and better
                                                                                                                water allocation.
                                                                                                                WEC highlighted that
                                                                                                                sustainability should be
                                                                                                                                               UNDP confirmed that the project
                                                                                                                ensured through local
                                                                                                                                               will collaborate with universities to
                                                                                   Project Sustainability and   capacity building, technical
                                                                                                                                               support research, training, and
                                                                                   Institutional Role           training, and continued
                                                                                                                                               system maintenance beyond
                                                                                                                involvement of universities
                                                                                                                                               implementation.
                                                                                                                as research and monitoring
                                                                                                                partners.
                                                                                                                WEC recommended
                                                                                                                stronger coordination
                                                                                                                between government and
                                                                                                                                               UNDP agreed on the importance of
                                                                                                                academia, inclusion of
                                                                                                                                               multi-stakeholder coordination and
                                                                                                                communities in water
                                                                                   Recommendations                                             local engagement and will consider
                                                                                                                resource management,
                                                                                                                                               expansion based on results and
                                                                                                                ensuring post-project
                                                                                                                                               available funding.
                                                                                                                financing, and expanding
                                                                                                                the system to other basins
                                                                                                                in future.
PMU-WUS -       5 November   UWS - PMU   Head of UWS - PMU,     5        2                                      The consultation focused
Ministry of     2025         Office      Coordinator, and                                                       on clarifying the roles and
                                                                                                                                               UNDP confirmed that detailed roles
Water and                                Technical Specialist                                                   responsibilities of PMU-
                                                                                                                                               and deliverables for each
Environment -                                                                                                   UWS under both
                                                                                   Roles and Responsibilities                                  component will be outlined in the
Hadramout                                                                                                       Component 1 and
                                                                                   under Project Components                                    updated work plan and coordination
Branch                                                                                                          Component 2. PMU and
                                                                                                                                               framework to avoid overlaps and
                                                                                                                UNDP agreed on the
                                                                                                                                               ensure accountability.
                                                                                                                importance of clearly
                                                                                                                defining who will lead,



                                                                                   36


                                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed      Stakeholder Feedback                      Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                       support, and coordinate
                                                                                       each activity to ensure
                                                                                       smooth implementation.
                                                                                       The teams discussed the
                                                                                       operational modalities and
                                                                                                                       UNDP confirmed that a joint
                                                                                       coordination mechanisms
                                                                                                                       implementation plan will be
                                                                                       between PMU-UWS, local
                                                                                                                       finalized, defining timelines,
                                                                                       partners, and other
                                                            Implementation Modality                                    communication channels, and
                                                                                       implementing entities. The
                                                                                                                       reporting procedures to ensure
                                                                                       discussion covered how
                                                                                                                       effective coordination among all
                                                                                       activities will be sequenced,
                                                                                                                       partners.
                                                                                       coordinated, and
                                                                                       monitored.
                                                                                       The results of the recent       UNDP acknowledged the assessment
                                                                                       PMU institutional               findings and agreed to provide
                                                                                       assessment were reviewed,       targeted technical support and
                                                            PMU Assessment Findings
                                                                                       highlighting areas that         capacity building to strengthen
                                                                                       require further                 PMU’s institutional performance
                                                                                       improvement.                    and safeguards compliance.
                                                                                       PMU shared details of their
                                                                                       previous work in Wadi           UNDP appreciated the insights and
                                                                                       Hajer, outlining                emphasized the value of
                                                            Previous Work and
                                                                                       achievements, lessons           incorporating successful practices
                                                            Experience in Wadi Hajer
                                                                                       learned, and how these          and lessons learned into ongoing
                                                                                       experiences can support         and future interventions.
                                                                                       current project activities.
                                                                                       PMU highlighted the             UNDP confirmed that inclusive
                                                            Social Inclusion and       importance of community         participation and stakeholder
                                                            Community Engagement       engagement, social              engagement are necessary to
                                                                                       inclusion, and ensuring         project preparation and committed



                                                            37


                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                No. of
                        Main participants
Agency   Date   Venue                        Participants        Key Issue Discussed     Stakeholder Feedback                      Response
                             Group
                                            Male   Female
                                                                                       participation of affected      to providing guidance on integrating
                                                                                       populations in project         gender and social inclusion
                                                                                       planning and                   measures.
                                                                                       implementation.
                                                                                       The meeting covered the
                                                                                       current grievance channels,    UNDP confirmed that the project’s
                                                                                       accessibility, and potential   GM will be strengthened with
                                                            Grievance Mechanism (GM)   improvements for better        multiple accessible channels and
                                                                                       communication and              regular monitoring to ensure
                                                                                       responsiveness to              transparency and accountability.
                                                                                       community concerns.




                                                            38


                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                         4.2. Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for Stakeholder Engagement
                         The I-WISE Project applies a comprehensive stakeholder engagement approach tailored to the diverse needs, capacities, and influence levels of
                         different stakeholder groups. Engagement methods are designed to ensure inclusive, transparent, and culturally appropriate consultations
                         throughout all project stages, from preparation to implementation and operations.
                         The plan includes targeted outreach to affected parties, disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, and other interested stakeholders such as
                         government institutions, private sector actors, and local civil society. Engagement techniques include community consultations, focus group
                         discussions, public meetings, household visits, workshops, site visits, and the dissemination of accessible communication materials. This approach
                         ensures that stakeholders are not only informed but also actively involved in project planning, implementation, risk mitigation, and monitoring.
                         Table (2) summarizes the planned engagement tools, responsibilities, and frequency by stakeholder group and project phase.
                         Table 2: Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                                                                                                                                      Status
Project Stage                         Target Stakeholders          Topic of Consultation / Message           Method Used              Responsibilities      Frequency/ Timeline    (Completed
                                                                                                                                                                                    /Planned)
                                Government ministries and          Present project objectives,           Formal meetings,          UNDP, UNOPS, and IPs Initial consultations     Completed
                                agencies (MoWE, MoAIF, NWRA,       components, and expected              workshops, technical      (SFD, PWP, UWS -     during design phase;      (July–August
                                CAMA, GSMRB, WEC, MoPIC),          benefits; clarify roles and           working group             PMU)                 updates as needed         2025)
                                local governorate and district     responsibilities; obtain input on     sessions                                       before effectiveness
                                authorities, WUA members,          design and targeting; discuss
                                Irrigation Councils (ICs), and     environmental and social risks




     Preparation stage
                                Agricultural Cooperatives (ACs),   including SEA/SH, labor risks,
                                local CSOs, basin committee        OHS, child labor, and security
                                reps.                              risks.
                                Local communities in target        Introducing project, outline          Community                 IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS -   Initial consultations   Planned
                                basins and urban/peri-urban        potential benefits and impacts,       consultations, focus      PMU)                   before sub-project
                                WASH service areas                 solicit feedback on needs and         group discussions, site                          selection
                                                                   priorities; discuss environmental     visits
                                                                   and social risks including SEA/SH,
                                                                   labor risks, OHS, child labor, and
                                                                   security risks.




                                                                                                        39


                                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                                                                       Status
Project Stage                     Target Stakeholders            Topic of Consultation / Message          Method Used               Responsibilities     Frequency/ Timeline        (Completed
                                                                                                                                                                                     /Planned)
                            Project-Affected People:             Project scope and rationale;         Public meetings;           UNDP, UNOPS, and IPs Prior to project        Planned
                            Farmers, water user                  environmental & social principles    separate meetings for      (SFD, PWP, UWS -     effectiveness and
                            associations, local communities      including SEA/SH, labor risks,       women and                  PMU)                 during design
                            in targeted governorates,            OHS, child labor, and security       vulnerable groups;                              finalization; at
                            vulnerable households (women-        risks; proposed interventions by     focus group                                     community level in each
                            headed, elderly, persons with        component; grievance                 discussions; field                              targeted governorate
                            disabilities, marginalized groups)   mechanism process; expected          visits; disclosure of
                                                                 benefits and risks                   written information
                                                                                                      (brochures, posters,
                                                                                                      flyers); information
                                                                                                      boards at community
                                                                                                      centers
                            Other Interested Parties             Policy alignment; roles and          Formal meetings;           UNDP and UNOPS         Quarterly or as required   Planned
                            (internal): Relevant government      responsibilities; legal and          inter-agency
                            ministries and agencies (MoPIC       compliance issues; monitoring        workshops;
                            and local governorates)              and reporting arrangements           submission of reports
                                                                 Inform on implementation                                                                                          Planned
                                                                 progress, construction




     Implementation stage
                                                                 schedules, potential disruptions,
                                                                 grievance mechanism access;
                                                                                                                                                        Quarterly during
                            Local communities and                cover community health and           Community meetings,        IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS -
                                                                                                                                                        construction and
                            beneficiaries                        safety, OHS risks, labor risks       public notices, leaflets   PMU)
                                                                                                                                                        annually thereafter
                                                                 (including child labor), SEA/SH
                                                                 prevention, security risks, and
                                                                 environmental mitigation
                                                                 measures.




                                                                                                     40


                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                                                        Status
Project Stage         Target Stakeholders           Topic of Consultation / Message             Method Used             Responsibilities     Frequency/ Timeline     (Completed
                                                                                                                                                                      /Planned)
                Project-Affected People:            Work schedules; construction            Community                UNDP, UNOPS, and IPs Monthly during work       Planned
                Farmers, Households, water user     impacts; safety measures;               consultations; on-site   (SFD, PWP, UWS -
                associations, laborers in           environmental and social                meetings; toolbox        PMU)
                worksites, local communities in     mitigation measures including           talks; leaflets at
                sub-project areas                   SEA/SH, labor risks, OHS, child         worksites; grievance
                in project areas, and Local         labor, and security risks;              mechanism notice
                businesses.                         grievance mechanism;                    boards
                                                    community roles
                                                    Tailored information on project                                                                                 Planned
                                                    activities, rights, benefits, and
                                                    grievance channels; gather
                Disadvantaged/vulnerable            feedback on access and                  Dedicated focus group
                groups (women, elderly, persons     inclusion; cover community              discussions,             IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS -   Twice a year, or more
                with disabilities, IDPs,            health and safety, OHS risks,           household visits,        PMU)                   frequently as needed
                marginalized communities)           labor risks (including child labor),    accessible materials
                                                    SEA/SH prevention, security
                                                    risks, and environmental
                                                    mitigation measures.
                Other Interested Parties: Private   Procurement opportunities;              Supplier meetings;       UNDP, UNOPS, and IPs At procurement stages     Planned
                sector suppliers and contractors.   health & safety requirements;           pre-bid briefings;       (SFD, PWP, UWS -     as needed
                                                    environmental and social                workshops; written       PMU)
                                                    compliance; GM process                  guidelines; email
                                                                                            communications
                Basin Committees, Water User        Consult on operational issues,          Coordination                                                            Planned
                                                                                                                     IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS -
                Associations, LWSCs, GARWSP         water allocation, infrastructure        meetings, training                              Quarterly, as needed
                                                                                                                     PMU)
                branches                            management                              sessions




                                                                                           41


                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                                                                                                                                                   Status
Project Stage          Target Stakeholders           Topic of Consultation / Message        Method Used             Responsibilities     Frequency/ Timeline    (Completed
                                                                                                                                                                 /Planned)
                 Project-Affected People: Water      O&M roles; sustainability          Follow-up meetings;      UNDP, UNOPS, and IPs   Semi-annual during     Planned
                 user associations, farmers, local   measures; feedback on system       refresher training; GM   (SFD, PWP, UWS -       O&M phase
                 communities                         performance; grievance             updates; community       PMU)
   Operation &                                       mechanism                          monitoring visits
                 Other Interested Parties:           Project outcomes: lessons          Review workshops;        UNDP, UNOPS, and IPs   Annually, as needed    Planned
   Maintenance   Relevant ministries and             learned; compliance with E&S       dissemination of         (SFD, PWP, UWS -
                 agencies; donors; NGOs              commitments; future                reports                  PMU)
                                                     collaboration




                                                                                       42


                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
4.3. Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the Views of Vulnerable Groups
The Project will conduct targeted and culturally appropriate stakeholder engagement with
vulnerable and disadvantaged groups identified in the stakeholder analysis, including women
(particularly women-headed households), elderly persons, persons with disabilities, internally
displaced persons, marginalized communities, poor and landless households, and unemployed
youth. Engagement will be designed to ensure their views, concerns, and priorities are
meaningfully considered throughout the project life cycle.
To remove barriers to participation, consultations will be conducted at times and locations
convenient for these groups, with gender-segregated sessions where appropriate, female
facilitators and when feasible transport support. Information will be disseminated in accessible
formats and local languages (e.g., Arabic, simplified language, visual aids, oral presentations) to
accommodate low literacy levels and disabilities. Trusted community leaders and local
associations will be engaged to extend outreach, build trust, and facilitate feedback collection.
Capacity-building initiatives will be provided to vulnerable groups, particularly women and WUAs,
to enhance their understanding of water management practices, project benefits, and their rights
and responsibilities.
Dedicated grievance channels will be adapted to meet the needs of vulnerable groups, ensuring
accessibility, confidentiality, and survivor-centered handling of sensitive complaints such as GBV
or SEA/SH. Participation will be regularly monitored, and feedback systematically integrated into
project adjustments to ensure inclusion and accountability.
5. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement

5.1. Implementation Arrangements and Resources
The overall responsibility for the implementation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) lies
with the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) established within each Implementing Agency
(UNDP and UNOPS) for their respective project components and sub-components. Each PIU will
be led by a Project Manager/Coordinator and supported by Environmental and Social Risk
Management (ESRM)/Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) team, including focal points for
stakeholder engagement and grievance redress. These ESRM/ESS team and focal points will be
formally appointed by the respective UN Agencies to ensure clear accountability and adequate
capacity for stakeholder engagement and grievance management.
The Implementing Agencies will be responsible for planning, coordinating, and monitoring
stakeholder engagement activities, ensuring that they are consistent with the requirements of
the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and the SEP. The PIUs will work closely
with their respective local implementing partners, the Social Fund for Development (SFD), the
Public Works Project (PWP), and the Urban Water Supply Project Management Unit (UWS - PMU),
to deliver engagement activities at the community level.
The PIUs will (i) help to supervise and streamline the Grievance Mechanism (GM) management
system based on the experience from field; (ii) provide support to respective project affected
communities in arranging training on SEA/SH related risk mitigation ; (iii) manage the overall
training and capacity-building program; (iv) monitor and supervise all project management
activities; (v) organize monitoring and evaluation activities, including GM management; (vi)
prepare necessary project progress and project completion reports; and (vii) ensure full

                                               43


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
     compliance with World Bank ESF, including the management of child labor risks, occupational
     health and safety (OHS) risks, and relevant UN and national regulations.

    Stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through meeting minutes, consultation
    reports, progress updates, and GM records, which will be compiled by the PIUs and shared with
    the World Bank and other relevant stakeholders as per the agreed reporting schedule.

    Table 3: Role and Responsibilities for SEP Implementation
   Actor / Stakeholder / Responsible
                                                                     Responsibilities
                Person
                                        -   Provide overall oversight of SEP implementation for their respective
                                            components.
                                        -   Ensure compliance with World Bank ESF and national regulations.
                                        -   Review and consolidate monthly consultation reports from IPs.
UNDP and UNOPS (Implementing            -   Provide technical guidance and support to IPs on stakeholder
Agencies)                                   engagement, GM operation, and SEA/SH risk mitigation.
                                        -   Compile and submit Bi-annual stakeholder engagement and GM
                                            reports to the World Bank.
                                        -   Lead coordination with other UN agencies, government bodies, and
                                            donors on SEP-related activities.
                                        -   Plan and conduct stakeholder consultations at the community level
                                            in coordination with local authorities and community
                                            representatives.
                                        -   Facilitate inclusive engagement with vulnerable groups, ensuring
SFD, PWP, UWS-PMU (Implementing             accessibility and cultural sensitivity.
Partners)                               -   Maintain records of all consultations, including participant lists,
                                            meeting minutes, and feedback received.
                                        -   Operate and publicize the GM at the community level.
                                        -   Report consultation and GM activities monthly to the respective UN
                                            agency.
                                        -   Inform local communities about planned work, schedules, and
                                            potential impacts.
                                        -   Maintain open communication with stakeholders during
ESRM/ESS Specialists (appointed by          construction activities.
both UN agencies and IPs)               -   Display GM contact details and project information at worksites.
                                        -   Report any grievances, feedback, or stakeholder concerns.
                                        -   Implement the Contractor’s Code of Conduct, Labor Management
                                            Procedures, and relevant E&S mitigation measures.
                                        -   Support mobilization of community members for consultations.
                                        -   Facilitate coordination between the project and local stakeholders.
Local Authorities (Governorate and      -   Monitor local-level implementation of stakeholder engagement
District Levels)                            activities.
                                        -   Assist in addressing grievances where local authority intervention is
                                            required.
                                        -   Support dissemination of project information to the wider
                                            community.
                                        -   Represent community concerns, priorities, and feedback to IPs and
Community Representatives /
                                            UN agencies.
Leaders/Community Committees
                                        -   Encourage participation of vulnerable groups in consultations.
                                        -   Collaborate in resolving minor grievances and ensuring community
                                            awareness of GM.


                                                    44


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through detailed minutes of meetings,
attendance sheets, photographic records, a dedicated stakeholder engagement log, biannual
progress reports, TPM reports, and mission discussions/presentations. All feedback received,
including grievances, will be systematically recorded and tracked.

The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through the PIU, led by the ESRM
Unit.

The budget estimate for preparing and implementing the SEP is USD 120,000. The budget
breakdown can be found in Annex 2. See the sample budget line items listed in Annex 2.

6. Grievance Mechanism (GM)

A Grievance Mechanism is a system that allows not only grievances, but also queries, suggestions,
positive feedback, and concerns of project-affected parties related to the environmental and
social performance of a project to be submitted and responded to in a timely manner.

6.1. Description of Grievance Mechanism
The project’s Grievance Mechanism (GM) ensures that stakeholders can raise concerns and
receive timely, fair, and effective responses. It is designed to be accessible, confidential,
transparent, and survivor-centered, in line with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Standard 10 (ESS10), the safeguard policies of UNDP and UNOPS, as well as applicable national
laws. The mechanism applies to all project components and is coordinated across three levels.


Grievance Redress Structure
      Level                                          Description
 1. Community       Grievances are first received at community level through Implementing
 Level              Partners (SFD, PWP, UWS - PMU) via designated GM focal points and
                    grievance boxes in project sites. These focal points ensure complaints are
                    logged immediately and acknowledged.
 2. National PIU    If a complaint cannot be resolved at the local level, it will be escalated
 Level              promptly to the PIU Complaint Committee. The Committee, which includes
                    ESRM Specialists and relevant technical staff, is responsible for reviewing
                    and resolving such cases in a timely, confidential, and survivor-centered
                    manner.
 3. UN Agency       UNDP and UNOPS provide technical support, oversight, and consolidation of
 Oversight Level    data from IPs. The ESRM teams within these agencies ensure that the GM
                    operates according to World Bank standards, survivor-centered SEA/SH
                    protocols, and national laws. Complex or unresolved grievances may be
                    escalated to this level for joint decision-making and reporting to the World
                    Bank.




                                               45


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         Grievance Uptake Channels
         Grievances can be submitted through any of the following channels:
               Agency                                         Channels
             UNDP                  Toll-free: 8000939
                                   Email: amani.al-muntaser@undp.org / mohammed.salah@undp.org
                                   Global: project.concerns@undp.org / Call +1-844-595-5206
                                   In person: UNDP Office in Yemen
             UNOPS                 Toll-free: 8000190
                                   SMS: 8000190
                                   WhatsApp: 739888388
                                   Email: grm.yemen@unops.org
                                   In person: UNOPS Office
             SFD                   Toll-free: 8009800
                                   SMS: 771788975
                                   WhatsApp: 771788975
                                   Email: chm_hq@sfd-yemen.org
                                   In person: SFD Office
                                   Suggestion boxes at sub-project sites
             PWP                   Toll-free: 8002626
                                   SMS: 775626262
                                   WhatsApp: 775626262
                                   Email: grm@pwpyemen.org
                                   In person: PWP Office
                                   Suggestion boxes at sub-project sites
             UWS - PMU             Telephone: 02-275585
                                   Email: piuaden@gmail.com
                                   In person: UWS - PMU Office
                                   Suggestion boxes at sub-project sites

         GM Process Flow
      Step                                    Description                                      Timeline             Responsible Party
Sorting,              Any complaint received is forwarded to the                         Upon receipt of           Local GM focal
processing            designated grievance focal point; logged in the                    complaint                 points
                      central GM database; categorized according to the
                      following complaint types: Low, Moderate, and
                      Critical4.
Acknowledgement       Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged to the                    Within 2 – 3 days         Local GM focal
and follow-up         complainant by SMS, phone, email, or written                       of receipt                points
                      note. A grievance ID number is provided.



         4
          Low = inquiries, requests for assistance, or false calls.
         Moderate = operational delays, under-distribution, unclear selection criteria, quality issues, overlapping activities,
         dissatisfaction, labor disputes, technical shortcomings, environmental concerns, or non-critical OHS incidents.
         Critical = staff misconduct, corruption, fraud, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), Gender-Based Violence (GBV), child
         protection violations, abuse of authority, forced displacement, land-related issues, or fatal/serious workplace
         accidents.

                                                                  46


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       Step                          Description                           Timeline         Responsible Party
Verification,     Verification of a complaint is led by the relevant  Within 10 – 14        The Complaint
investigation,    GM focal point or, where necessary, by a            working days          Committee is
action            designated Complaint Committee composed of PIU                            composed of PIU
                  staff and, when appropriate, independent experts, The duration also       GM focal points,
                  with support from technical specialists as needed.                        the ESRM
                                                                      depends on each
                                                                                            Specialist, and
                                                                      case individually,
                                                                                            relevant technical
                  Cases of sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual       based on its type,
                                                                                            staff as required.
                  harassment (SEA/SH) are immediately referred to     circumstances,
                                                                                            SEA/SH cases are
                  a specialized GBV focal point and are not           and sensitivity.
                                                                                            referred directly to
                  investigated by project staff.
                                                                                            the designated GBV
                  For non-SEA/SH cases, a proposed resolution is                            focal point.
                  formulated by the Complaint Committee and
                  communicated to the complainant by the GM
                  focal point in a timely and transparent manner.
Monitoring and    Data on complaints is collected in the GM           Monthly tracking;     PIU GM Focal
evaluation        Information System and reported to PIU              quarterly/bi-         Points
                  management monthly. Consolidated reports are        annually reporting
                  submitted bi-annually to the World Bank.
Provision of      Feedback from complainants regarding their          Upon resolution       GM Focal Point
feedback          satisfaction with complaint resolution is collected of grievance
                  through follow-up calls, SMS, short surveys, or in-
                  person meetings, and documented in the GM
                  Information System.
Training          Training needs for staff/consultants in the PIU,    At start of project   ESRM Team at
                  Contractors, and Supervision Consultants include    and quarterly with    UNDP, UNOPS, and
                  grievance uptake, sorting, recording, response,     refresher sessions    Implementing
                  and feedback mechanisms, with a strong focus on     held annually         Partners (SFD,
                  grievance handling, confidentiality, World Bank                           PWP, and UWS -
                  ESF requirements, SEA/SH survivor-centered                                PMU)
                  protocols, and reporting procedures. Training will
                  also cover communication skills, conflict
                  resolution, and protocols for handling sensitive
                  complaints, with regular refresher sessions.
Appeals process   If a complainant is not satisfied with the proposed Upon request          PIUs at UNDP,
                  resolution, they will have the right to appeal.                           UNOPS, and
                  Appeals will first be reviewed by the PIU through a                       Implementing
                  higher-level Committee and, where appropriate,                            Partners (SFD,
                  an independent third party. If the grievance                              PWP, and UWS -
                  remains unresolved, the complainant may                                   PMU), and World
                  escalate the case to the World Bank’s Grievance                           Bank
                  Redress Service (GRS) or the Inspection Panel. The
                  appeals process will guarantee impartiality,
                  transparency, and timely resolution, while
                  safeguarding the complainant’s rights to
                  confidentiality and protection.


                                                    47


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
6.2. Labor Grievance Mechanism
A dedicated Labor Grievance Mechanism (Labor GM) will be established to address grievances
from all workers engaged under the I-WISE Project. This includes workers hired by contractors,
subcontractors, service providers, implementing partners (IPs), those involved in community
contracting, and individuals under Cash-for-Work (CFW) arrangements. The Labor GM will align
with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standard 2 (ESS2) and applicable national labor
regulations, ensuring that the process is accessible, confidential, transparent, and free from
retaliation.
Structure and Oversight
The Labor GM will be integrated into the broader project grievance system, coordinated by the
IPs (SFD, PWP, UWS-PMU) and overseen by the respective UN agencies (UNDP and UNOPS) based
on component responsibilities. Contractors, subcontractors, and IPs will each designate site-level
grievance focal points (e.g., Site Manager, OHS Officer) to receive, log, and resolve complaints
raised by workers. Grievances that cannot be resolved at the site level will be escalated to the
respective IP or UN agency for review and resolution.
Reporting Channels
Workers may submit grievances through multiple safe and accessible channels, including:
   • Direct submission to on-site grievance focal persons
   • Complaint/suggestion boxes at sub-project locations
   • Toll-free telephone hotlines or SMS services operated by IPs
   • Direct email or walk-in submission to IP/UN agency GM focal points
   • Anonymous reporting options for sensitive cases (e.g., SEA/SH)

All workers will be informed of these channels through regular briefings and training sessions at
project induction and during implementation.
Confidentiality and Protection
The Labor GM will include clear provisions to:
    • Maintain confidentiality of the complainant
    • Allow anonymous submissions
    • Preventing retaliation or discrimination against those raising concerns
    • Ensure survivor-centered response protocols for SEA/SH-related complaints

Scope of Grievances
Grievances addressed under the Labor GM may include, but are not limited to:
    • Non-payment or delayed payment of wages
    • Violations of employment terms or contracts
    • Occupational health and safety (OHS) risks and incidents
    • Poor working or living conditions
    • Workplace harassment or discrimination
    • Incidents of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, or Harassment (SEA/SH)
    • Inadequate access to protective equipment or breaks

SEA/SH cases will be managed under confidential protocols with referral to trained GBV focal
points.


                                               48


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Awareness and Capacity Building
All workers will receive mandatory-induction training on:
     • The Labor GM process
     • Their rights under national and project-specific labor standards
     • The project’s Labor Code of Conduct (CoC)
     • Preventive and response measures related to SEA/SH and workplace misconduct

Resolution and Monitoring
Each grievance will be:
   • Logged and tracked from receipt to resolution
   • Resolved within defined timeframes
   • Followed up with the complainant to confirm satisfaction

Labor grievances will be summarized monthly by the IPs and shared with the respective UN
agency. Consolidated reports will be submitted to the World Bank as part of regular
environmental and social performance reporting.

The Labor GM will be further detailed in the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) of the project.

6.3. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH)
The Project’s Grievance Mechanism (GM) will be fully equipped and trained to receive and
manage complaints related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in
a safe, confidential, and survivor-centered manner. This includes SEA/SH cases involving children,
in line with the World Bank’s Good Practice Note. All partners, including UNDP, UNOPS, and the
Implementing Partners (SFD, PWP, and UWS-PMU), will ensure that their staff are trained in the
ethical handling of SEA/SH complaints, with strict adherence to principles of confidentiality,
informed consent, and non-retaliation. Complaints may be submitted through existing grievance
channels at the community, partner, or UN agency level, and only essential non-identifying details
will be documented

The GM will apply a survivor-centered approach, prioritizing the wishes, needs, and safety of
survivors at every stage. Immediate referral pathways will be established with qualified service
providers to guarantee access to medical, psychosocial, legal, and protection support.
Information on these services and focal points will be made available to all GM operators and
shared with communities through accessible means. Where perpetrators are linked to project
activities, swift action will be taken in accordance with the Code of Conduct signed by all workers,
which may include disciplinary measures such as suspension, termination, or referral to law
enforcement. Discreet and timely handling of cases will be ensured, with reporting to the World
Bank limited to consolidated, non-identifying data on cases received, actions taken, and
outcomes.

Alongside grievance management, the project will invest heavily in training and capacity building.
UNDP, UNOPS, and the IPs will deliver targeted and ongoing training for staff, partners, and
stakeholders, with a focus on SEA/SH risk awareness, safe and confidential reporting, referral
pathways, and reinforcement of the Code of Conduct. This training will be complemented by
refresher sessions throughout the project cycle to ensure that readiness and responsiveness
remain strong.

                                                49


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Awareness-raising and community engagement will also form a core part of the strategy. Regular
campaigns will be conducted to ensure that all community members, particularly women and
vulnerable groups, are aware of their rights, know how to report grievances, and understand the
services available to them. These campaigns will specifically include the dissemination of
information on the legal rights of beneficiaries to strengthen their protection and empower them
to act if violations occur. Moreover, the project will guarantee equitable participation of women
and vulnerable groups in project-related consultations and employment opportunities, thereby
ensuring that engagement goes beyond awareness and extends into meaningful involvement in
decision-making and access to benefits. Community engagement will further emphasize the role
of women-led groups, vulnerable households, and local community structures in reducing risks,
strengthening prevention measures, and building trust in the GM.
The GM for the I-WISE Project will be multi-tiered, allowing for various entry points and resolution
levels to ensure accessibility and effectiveness for all stakeholders, including vulnerable groups.
The mechanism will be designed to be culturally appropriate, transparent, and responsive to
community needs.


7. Monitoring and Reporting

7.1. Summary of How SEP Will Be Monitored and Reported Upon
The SEP will be monitored based on both qualitative reporting (based on progress reports) and
quantitative reporting linked to results indicators on stakeholder engagement and grievance
performance.

SEP reporting will include the following:
  (i)   Progress reporting on the ESS10-Stakeholder Engagement commitments under the
        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
 (ii)   Cumulative qualitative reporting on the feedback received during SEP activities, in
        particular (a) issues that have been raised that can be addressed through changes in
        project scope and design, and reflected in the basic documentation such as the Project
        Appraisal Document, Environmental and Social Assessment, Resettlement Plan,
        Indigenous Peoples Plan, or SEA/SH Action Plan, if needed; (b) issues that have been
        raised and can be addressed during project implementation; (c) issues that have been
        raised that are beyond the scope of the project and are better addressed through
        alternative projects, programs or initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by
        the project due to technical, jurisdictional or excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes
        of meetings summarizing the views of the attendees can also be annexed to the
        monitoring reports.
(iii)   Quantitative reporting based on the indicators included in the SEP. An illustrative set of
        indicators for monitoring and reporting is included in Annex 3.
7.2. Reporting Back to Stakeholder Groups
The SEP will be revised and updated as necessary during project implementation. Quarterly
summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related incidents, together
with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventative actions will be collated


                                                50


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
by responsible staff and referred to the project managers. Specific mechanisms to report back to
stakeholders will include:
   ▪    Number of consultation meetings and public discussions held within the reporting period
        (quarterly or bi-annual), disaggregated by location and participant type (including women
        and vulnerable groups).
   ▪    Frequency and coverage of public engagement activities, including settlements in remote
        or underserved areas within the project area of influence.
   ▪    Number and type of grievances received within the reporting period, and the proportion
        resolved within 14 days timeline, covering both the community GM and labor GM.
   ▪    Number of press or communication materials published/broadcast in local, regional, and
        national media.

Feedback to communities will be provided through public/community meetings, basin committee
briefings, direct communication, and grievance channels. These channels will ensure that
stakeholders, including those in remote areas, are informed of project progress, decisions, and
grievance outcomes.




                                              51


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
  8. Annexes
  Annex 1: Template to Capture Consultation Minutes
      Stakeholder (Group or           Summary of          Response of Project     Follow-up Action/Next Steps
           Individual)                 Feedback          Implementation Team




  Annex 2: SEP Budget Table5
  The following budget is a provisional collective estimate covering all three UN agencies (UNDP
  and UNOPS). Each agency will allocate and manage its share of resources within its respective
  project components.

 Stakeholder Engagement                          Unit Cost                    Total Cost
                                   Quantity                   Times/Years                        Remarks
        Activities                                (US$)                         (US$)
                                                                                            Covered     under
Staff/Consultants salaries             -             -              -              -        Project Consulting
                                                                                            Service Budget
Training on Stakeholder                                        Annual/As
                                  Lump sum           -                        10,000.00
Engagement and GM                                               needed
Stakeholder/Community                                          Annual/As
                                  Lump sum           -                        10,000.00
Meetings in project areas                                       needed
Meetings with District &               2                                                    Institutional
                                                   500           5 years        5,000.00
Governorate Officials            meetings/year                                              engagement
Travel expenses (field visits,
                                  Lump sum           -         Quarterly      80,000.00
consultations)
Communication materials
(posters, brochures, flyers,      Lump sum           -           Annual         5,000.00
billboards, website updates)
GM expenses (committee
                                                                                            GM operation &
meetings, follow-up, hotline      Lump sum           -           Annual       10,000.00
                                                                                            monitoring
costs)
TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:                                          120,000.00




  5
   This budget is a provisional/referential estimate and should not be considered final or fully accurate. It
  provides an indicative allocation of resources for stakeholder engagement and grievance redress activities
  collectively across all participating agencies (UNDP, UNOPS, and Implementing Partners). Each agency will
  manage its own share of resources for SEP and GM implementation within its respective project
  components.

                                                     52


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
           Annex 3: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP
     Key evaluation             Specific Evaluation                                                              Data Collection
                                                                        Potential Indicators
        questions                   questions                                                                       Methods
GM. To what extent         •   Are project-affected       • Usage of GM and/or feedback mechanisms           Records from the
have project-affected          parties raising issues     • Requests for information from relevant           implementing agency
parties been provided          and grievances?              agencies.                                        and other relevant
with accessible and        •   How quickly/effectively    • Use of suggestion boxes placed in the            agencies
inclusive means to raise       are the grievances           villages/project communities.
issues and grievances?         resolved?                  • Number of grievances raised by workers,
Has the implementing                                        disaggregated by gender of workers and
agency responded to                                         worksite, resolved within a specified time
and managed such                                            frame.
grievances?                                               • Number of Sexual Exploitation, and
                                                            Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) cases
                                                            reported in the project areas, which were
                                                            referred for health, social, legal and
                                                            security support according to the referral
                                                            process in place. (if applicable)
                                                          • Number of grievances that have been (i)
                                                            opened, (ii) opened for more than 30 days,
                                                            (iii) resolved, (iv) closed, and (v) number of
                                                            responses that satisfied the complainants,
                                                            during the reporting period disaggregated
                                                            by category of grievance, gender, age, and
                                                            location of complainant.
Stakeholder                •   Were there interests       • Active participation of stakeholders in          Stakeholder
engagement impacts on          and support for the          activities                                       Consultation
project design and             project?                   • Number of actions taken in a timely              Attendance
implementation.            •   Were there any               manner in response to feedback received          Sheets/Minutes
How have engagement            adjustments made             during consultation sessions with project
activities made a              during project design        affected parties.                                Evaluation forms
difference in project          and implementation         • Number of consultation meetings and
design and                     based on the feedback        public discussions where the feedback and        Structured surveys
implementation?                received?                    recommendation received is reflected in
                           •   Was priority                 project design and implementation.               Social media/traditional
                               information disclosed to   • Number of disaggregated engagement               media entries on the
                               relevant parties             sessions held, focused on at-risk groups in      project results
                               throughout the project       the project.
                               cycle?

Implementation             •   Were the activities        • Percentage of SEP activities implemented.        Communication Strategy
effectiveness. Were            implemented as             • Key barriers to participation identified with    (Consultation Schedule)
stakeholder                    planned? Why or why          stakeholder representatives.
engagement activities          not?                       • Number of adjustments made in the                Periodic Focus Group
effective in               •   Was the stakeholder          stakeholder engagement approach to               Discussions
implementation?                engagement approach          improve projects’ outreach, inclusion and
                               inclusive of                 effectiveness.                                   Face-to-face meetings
                               disaggregated groups?                                                         and/or Focus Group
                               Why or why not?                                                               discussions with
                                                                                                             Vulnerable Groups or
                                                                                                             their representatives


                                                              53


                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Annex 4: Project Map




                       54


                            Official Use Only
Annex 5: Photo Documentation of Consultation Workshops
This annex provides photographic documentation of the stakeholder consultation workshops
conducted under the project between July–November 2025.

              Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Hajar – UNOPS (July 14, 2025)




           Stakeholder Consultation with MoWE in Aden – UNDP (July 30, 2025)




                                           55


                                                                                           Official Use Only
Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS
                                 (August 3, 2025)




                                      56


                                                                                  Official Use Only
 Stakeholder Consultation with CAMA in Aden – UNDP (October 30, 2025)




Stakeholder Consultation with MoAIF in Aden – UNDP (November 2, 2025)




 Stakeholder Consultation with CECS in Aden – UNDP (November 2, 2025)




Stakeholder Consultation with GSMRB in Aden – UNDP (November 3, 2025)




                                 57


                                                                        Official Use Only
         Stakeholder Consultation with UWS - PMU in Aden – UNDP (November 5, 2025)




Annex 6: Media Coverage of Stakeholder Consultations
Stakeholder Consultation with MoWE in Aden – UNDP (July 30, 2025)
‫اإلنمائ آليات تنفيذ مشاري ع المياه والبيئة‬ ‫ر نامج‬
                                               ‫ر ي يبحث مع الب‬
                                                          ‫الشجب‬‫ الوزير ر‬- ‫رئاسة مجلس الوزراء‬
                                   ‫ي‬

Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS (August
3, 2025)
‫لمشوع تحسين إدارة المياه والري نف وادي رتين‬
                                         ‫ وزير المياه يفتتح ورشة عمل تشاورية ر‬- ‫رئاسة مجلس الوزراء‬
           ‫ي‬
Annex 7: Attendance sheet from Stakeholder Consultation
Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Tuban – UNOPS (July 14, 2025)



   Stakeholder
Consultation in Wadi Hajar – UNOPS (July 14, 2025).pdf

Stakeholder Consultation with the IPs in Aden – UNDP (July 28, 2025)



   Stakeholder
Consultation with the IPs in Aden – UNDP (July 28, 2025).pdf

Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS (August
3, 2025)


 Joint Stakeholder
Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in Aden – UNDP and UNOPS (August 3, 2025).pdf

Stakeholder Consultation with the CAMA, CECS, and GSMRB in Aden – UNDP (October 30 –
November 5, 2025)



    Stakeholder
Consultation with the CAMA, CECS, and GSMRB in Aden – UNDP (October 30 – November 5, 2025).pdf




                                                        58


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Annex 8: Stakeholder Consultation Summary
UNDP - Conducted Consultation with Implementing Partners (IPs) – Senior Management

On 22 July 2025, UNDP conducted a stakeholder consultation in Aden at the UNDP Office with its
key Implementing Partners (IPs), namely the Social Fund for Development (SFD), the Public Works
Project (PWP), and the Urban Water Supply Project Management Unit (UWS-PMU). The meeting
brought together 16 participants, including 3 women, representing management and senior
officers of the IPs. The objective of the consultation was to present the project’s objectives,
components, and expected outcomes, while also gathering feedback from IPs to inform project
design and implementation.

The consultation emphasized four main themes: project objectives and communication, sub-
project selection criteria, timelines and preparatory work, and inclusion of vulnerable groups.
Stakeholders expressed appreciation for being engaged early in the design process and
highlighted the importance of clear, continuous communication. Concerns were also raised
regarding the criteria for sub-project selection, the need for sufficient preparatory work, and the
meaningful inclusion of disadvantaged groups such as women, IDPs, and marginalized
households.

Consultation Results:

    •   Stakeholders welcomed the early engagement and emphasized the importance of
        transparent communication regarding project objectives, components, and outcomes.
    •   IPs requested greater clarity on the criteria and process for identifying and prioritizing
        sub-projects.
    •   Concerns were raised about the timelines and the need for preparatory work such as
        technical studies and safeguards assessments before implementation.
    •   Participants highlighted the importance of ensuring the inclusion of vulnerable groups in
        both planning and implementation stages.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

    •   The project team confirmed that clear and continuous communication will be maintained
        through regular update meetings.
    •   Sub-project selection criteria will be developed jointly with IPs and validated with
        community representatives to ensure transparency and fairness, drawing on thematic
        criteria such as IPC classification, population density, and the presence of IDPs.
    •   Technical studies and safeguards assessments will be conducted before implementation
        to minimize risks and ensure quality outcomes.
    •   Specific measures will be introduced to guarantee the participation of vulnerable and
        disadvantaged groups, including gender-responsive consultations and targeted outreach
        strategies.

UNDP - Conducted Consultation with Implementing Partners (IPs) – Technical and ESRM


                                               59


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
On 28 July 2025, UNDP conducted a stakeholder consultation in Aden at the UNDP Office with the
technical and Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) teams of its Implementing
Partners (SFD, PWP, and UWS-PMU). A total of 13 participants, including 4 women, attended. The
meeting focused on strengthening coordination between IPs, addressing environmental and
social risk management challenges, and ensuring inclusivity and cultural sensitivity in project
design and implementation.

The discussions highlighted the need for effective coordination among IPs, improved quality and
efficiency in the clearance of Environmental and Social Action Plans (ESAPs), and practical
mechanisms to ensure sustainability and community ownership of sub-projects. Gender inclusion,
stakeholder consultations, and conflict-sensitive approaches for water management were also
key areas of concern.

Consultation Results:

   •   Coordination Between IPs and Implementation Modality: Stakeholders noted limited
       coordination among IPs. It was agreed to establish a Project Coordination Committee to
       oversee collaboration, supported by monthly coordination meetings (later shifting to bi-
       monthly) and annual joint work planning. This will ensure clarity on sequencing,
       responsibilities, and location-based implementation.

   •   Environmental and Social Risk Management: Challenges in preparing and clearing ESAPs
       were raised, including low quality of initial submissions, missing data, and delays due to
       multiple separate submissions. To address this, UNDP will group sub-projects to reduce
       submission volume, introduce an ESRAC system for low-risk sub-projects, and prepare
       quarterly/bi-annual submission plans with IPs. Standardized templates, a WB-cleared
       ESAP format, and targeted capacity-building will be provided. The goal is to achieve WB
       clearance within one or two rounds of review.

   •   ESF Requirements: IPs requested clarity on all ESF requirements. UNDP confirmed that
       all requirements will be outlined in a comprehensive framework, and a workshop will be
       organized to explain ESF instruments (SEP, SMP, LMP, etc.) and their application in
       practice.

   •   High-Risk Sub-projects (e.g., dams over 15m): Recognized as carrying significant OHS and
       social risks. These will require full ESIA, with strong mitigation and monitoring measures.

   •   Water Conflicts (Upstream vs. Downstream): Risks of reduced downstream flow and
       conflicts were highlighted. The project will establish water committees, apply conflict-
       sensitive design, and ensure equitable allocation of water across communities.

   •   Stakeholder Consultations: Concerns were raised about photos of women during
       consultations due to cultural sensitivities. It was agreed that photos will not be required
       for ESAPs; instead, gender-disaggregated attendance, feedback, and key issues will be
       documented.

                                              60


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    •   Community Ownership and Maintenance: Sustainability will be strengthened by
        involving communities from the outset in need identification, planning, and
        implementation. Training will be provided to community committees on operation and
        maintenance of infrastructure.

    •   Women’s Participation and Inclusion: While many sub-projects are labor-intensive,
        opportunities will be created for women by designing women-friendly roles, providing
        training, and leveraging successful models such as PWP’s women community contractors
        (50 trained, 20 licensed and active). Their contact lists will be used for future sub-projects.

    •   Cultural and Traditional Sensitivities: The project team reaffirmed that all activities will
        respect local cultural and traditional norms.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

    •   Establish a Project Coordination Committee to manage IP coordination.
    •   Group ESAP submissions, apply ESRAC for low-risk sub-projects, and standardize
        templates.
    •   Organize an ESF requirements workshop for IPs.
    •   Require full ESIA for substantial-risk sub-projects (e.g., dams).
    •   Engage communities to prevent upstream-downstream water conflicts.
    •   Document consultations without photos to respect cultural sensitivities.
    •   Train community committees for O&M of infrastructure.
    •   Expand women’s participation by creating tailored opportunities and drawing on PWP’s
        contractor experience.

UNDP - Conducted Consultation with Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE)

On 31 July 2025, UNDP conducted a high-level stakeholder consultation at the Ministry of Water
and Environment (MoWE) office in Aden. The meeting was chaired by the Minister of Water and
Environment and attended by the Deputy Ministers for the Water and Environment Sectors, the
UWS-PMU Director of Contracts and Consultations, the PMU General Director, and the Climate
Unit Director. A total of 10 participants, including 2 women, were present.

The consultation focused on clarifying institutional roles, addressing potential social tensions,
ensuring community health and safety, and embedding long-term development and climate
resilience into the project’s design and implementation.

Consultation Results:

    •   Clarity of Roles and Responsibilities: The Minister emphasized the need for clearly
        defined roles and responsibilities for all parties, including UN agencies, local
        implementers, government entities, stakeholders, and beneficiaries. UNDP confirmed
        that a formal document will be developed during the project design phase to define these
        roles and ensure transparency and accountability.


                                                 61


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
    •   Avoiding Social Tensions from Project Targeting: Concerns were raised about targeting
        specific areas while unmet needs exist nationwide, which could create social tensions. It
        was agreed that coordination with MoWE and its branch offices will be central to ensuring
        fairness and transparency. Sub-project selection will be based on assessed needs, and
        multi-level consultations will be conducted with both national authorities and direct
        beneficiaries.

    •   Strategic Vision and Development Impact: The project was recognized as an important
        intervention to meet urgent community needs while also contributing to broader
        development goals. UNDP confirmed its commitment to aligning project interventions
        with long-term national development strategies and vision.

    •   Climate Considerations: The Climate Unit stressed that climate change impacts must be
        fully integrated into project design. UNDP confirmed that the Climate Co-Benefits (CCB)
        approach will be applied, ensuring activities support both resilience and sustainability.

    •   Community Awareness and Engagement: Participants emphasized the importance of
        community understanding of project objectives, targeting rationale, and feedback
        mechanisms. UNDP committed to continuous stakeholder consultations throughout the
        project cycle, with issues addressed through the established Grievance Mechanism (GM)
        and needs assessments conducted jointly with government authorities.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

    •   Develop a formal roles and responsibilities framework for all actors.
    •   Coordinate closely with MoWE and its branch offices to ensure fair targeting and avoid
        social tensions.
    •   Apply site-specific mitigation and awareness measures to address health and safety risks.
    •   Align interventions with national development strategies for long-term impact.
    •   Mainstream climate change adaptation and resilience measures through the CCB
        approach.
    •   Strengthen community awareness, consultations, and GM use to ensure accountability
        and transparency.

UNDP and UNOPS – Conducted Joint Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for Wadi Tuban in
Aden

On 3 August 2025, UNDP and UNOPS organized a joint stakeholder engagement workshop at the
Panorama Hotel in Aden. The workshop brought together representatives from the Ministry of
Water and Environment (MoWE), Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Fisheries (MoAIF),
Implementing Partners (SFD, PWP, UWS-PMU), Water User Associations (WUAs), Irrigation
Councils (ICs), Agricultural Cooperatives (ACs), local CSOs, and basin committee representatives.
A total of 62 participants attended, including 16 women.



                                              62


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
The workshop aimed to present the project’s objectives, components, and expected outcomes;
discuss potential environmental and social impacts; raise awareness of grievance mechanisms;
and ensure inclusivity and equitable participation of all stakeholders, including women, IDPs, and
vulnerable groups.

Consultation Results:

    •   Project Indication (Components and Objectives): Participants agreed that the project
        would improve livelihoods through better water use, land protection, enhanced farming
        capacity, job creation, and improved incomes. They stressed the need for fair water
        distribution, irrigation repair, and active engagement of Water User Associations. The
        project team confirmed that water use optimization, irrigation system rehabilitation, and
        farmer capacity building would be prioritized, with equitable benefits ensured through
        stakeholder engagement and WUA support.

    •   Potential Environmental and Social Impacts: Most participants expressed confidence in
        the project’s positive impacts if implemented with accurate studies, proper safeguards,
        and strong monitoring. Some noted potential risks, including air and water pollution,
        climate impacts, and groundwater contamination if sanitation projects are nearby. The
        project team committed to conducting ES assessments, applying mitigation measures in
        line with the ESF, and safeguarding water, soil, and biodiversity resources.

    •   Awareness of Grievance Mechanisms (GM): Participants showed strong awareness of
        multiple GM channels (hotlines, complaint boxes, direct communication with IPs, emails,
        WhatsApp, social media, local authorities, and associations). They emphasized the need
        for local-level accessibility, designated community focal points, and diverse methods for
        inclusiveness. The project team confirmed that multiple grievance channels will be
        publicized, focal points established, and timely resolution of complaints ensured.

    •   Inclusivity and Equitable Participation: Participants highlighted that inclusivity of
        women, men, IDPs, elderly, persons with disabilities, and marginalized groups is critical
        for project success. Women’s role in agriculture, particularly in Wadi Tuban, was
        emphasized, along with the potential of IDPs as a labor force and the value of elderly
        farmers’ knowledge. The project confirmed that inclusive measures will be embedded,
        with gender-responsive consultations and safeguards to ensure all groups benefit.

    •   Women’s Economic Empowerment: Stakeholders noted the project’s potential to
        significantly enhance women’s economic conditions by increasing their income,
        participation, and leadership in agriculture. They stressed setting participation targets,
        supporting women-led initiatives, and ensuring fair benefit distribution. The project team
        confirmed that women’s empowerment will be mainstreamed through training, capacity
        building, and gender-responsive indicators to track results and sustain impact.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:


                                               63


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
   •   Prioritize equitable water distribution and irrigation repair with active WUA engagement.
   •   Conduct comprehensive ES assessments and apply mitigation to prevent negative
       environmental and social impacts.
   •   Strengthen and diversify grievance mechanisms with clear community focal points.
   •   Guarantee inclusivity and equitable participation across all groups, including vulnerable
       populations.
   •   Mainstream women’s economic empowerment with specific targets, training, and
       monitoring indicators.

UNDP - Conducted Consultation with UWS-PMU

On 12 August 2025, UNDP held a consultation meeting with the Urban Water Supply Project
Management Unit (UWS-PMU) at the PMU Office in Aden. A total of 11 participants attended,
including 4 women.

The meeting served to introduce the PMU team, discuss collaboration modalities, and ensure
alignment with World Bank (WB) and UNDP safeguard requirements.

Consultation Results:

   •   Introduction and Alignment: UWS-PMU presented their staff structure, current activities,
       and readiness to engage in project implementation. They emphasized their commitment
       to aligning with WB and UNDP standards.
       UNDP confirmed its support in establishing collaboration mechanisms from the outset to
       ensure smooth implementation.

   •   Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM): The PMU acknowledged the need
       for clear procedures and updated manuals for ESRM application.
       UNDP committed to reviewing and updating manuals, frameworks, and guidelines with
       the PMU to ensure compliance with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).

   •   Grievance Mechanism (GM): PMU stressed the importance of having an accessible and
       effective GM prior to start-up.
       The project team confirmed that GM procedures will be finalized, publicized, and adapted
       to ensure inclusivity and responsiveness in all target areas.

   •   GBV/SEA/SH Safeguards: PMU highlighted the need for awareness and preparedness to
       address risks of GBV, SEA, and SH.
       UNDP committed to delivering targeted capacity-building sessions and incorporating
       preventive and responsive measures in all project frameworks.

   •   Capacity Building and Operational Readiness: PMU expressed the need for tailored
       training to strengthen staff knowledge on ESRM, safeguards, and operational procedures.




                                             64


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        UNDP confirmed that structured capacity-building sessions will be conducted on ESRM,
        GM, and GBV/SEA, while clear guidelines will be jointly developed and operationalized
        before project start-up.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

    •   Joint review and update of all PMU operational manuals, frameworks, and guidelines.
    •   Establish a structured collaboration mechanism (coordination meetings, clear lines of
        communication).
    •   Conduct targeted training on ESRM, GM, and GBV/SEA/SH safeguards.
    •   Ensure all procedures and tools are finalized before field implementation.

UNOPS – Conducted Stakeholder Consultation in Wadi Tuban
Total number of participants: 63 (51 male, 12 female)
Key stakeholders consulted: MoWE, WUA members, local CSOs, basin committee reps
The date of the consultations: 14July 2025

The key findings: The key points expressed by stakeholders:

    •   Sanitation: There is a strong interest in expanding sanitation services, particularly in the
        wadi areas, to improve public health and prevent pollution.
    •   Water Supply and Coverage: A comprehensive study is needed to extend water,
        sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services to all populated areas along the Wadi.
        Additionally, stakeholders suggested completing unfinished drinking water supply
        schemes to make them operational.
    •   Quality Control: The technical specifications outlined in assessment studies must be
        strictly followed by contractors and closely monitored by all partners to ensure the
        project's success and beneficiary satisfaction.
    •   Communication & Reporting: Stakeholders requested stronger communication channels
        between central coordination and field teams, as well as clearer guidance on reporting
        formats, timelines, and data-sharing.
    •   Operational Challenges: Concerns were raised about delays in funding and procurement,
        which could impact project timelines. Challenges were also noted regarding site access
        due to security, logistical issues, or local restrictions.

Capacity Building: There is a need for more technical training and support for local staff.
During the consultation UNOPS team discussed the following topics with participants:
Climate Action and Sustainability:
      • UNOPS has developed a comprehensive Climate Strategy and Action Plan for 2025-2029
         to guide its efforts in climate mitigation and adaptation.
      • UNOPS aims to integrate climate risk screening into 100% of its infrastructure projects
         by 2030.



                                                65


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
      •   UNOPS is working to reduce damage to critical infrastructure and essential services
          from climate-induced hazards.
      • UNOPS plans to explore carbon removal projects (technology-based and nature-based
          solutions) to address hard-to-abate emissions.
      • UNOPS integrates climate change considerations into projects, such as improving WASH
          infrastructure to reduce exposure to climate-induced diseases, rehabilitating roads and
          parks for flood mitigation and urban heat island effect reduction, and replacing fossil
          fuel-based electricity with renewable energy.
      • UNOPS committed to climate neutrality and offset emissions using certified emission
          reductions.
Project Implementation and Management:
      • UNOPS acts as an implementing agency within the UN system, bridging climate policies
          with practical implementation.
      • UNOPS manage projects that contribute to various Sustainable Development Goals
          (SDGs), including poverty eradication, water and sanitation, affordable and clean
          energy, and sustainable cities and communities.
      • UNOPS has implemented 895 sub-projects, with a focus on tertiary municipal services,
          road rehabilitation, water and sanitation infrastructure, electricity provision for critical
          services, and solid waste management.
      • UNOPS engage in capacity-building activities for local institutions to enable them to
          manage their activities and assets independently.
      • UNOPS emphasizes stakeholder engagement, establishing plans and conducting
          consultations throughout the project cycle.
      • UNOPS has a GIS platform to display sub-project status and interventions, and a
          Grievance Mechanism (GM) for beneficiaries to communicate concerns.
Partnerships and Technology:
      • UNOPS prioritizes partnerships with national authorities, UN entities,
          intergovernmental institutions, and regional/multilateral financing institutions to
          amplify climate efforts.
      • UNOPS collaborates with the private sector for disaster risk reduction tools, early
          warning systems, carbon accounting platforms, and sustainable infrastructure.
      • Technology is a key enabler, with UNOPS utilizing platforms like Impact for corporate
          emissions data management and exploring automation tools for value chain emissions
          calculations.
      • UNOPS is enhancing ERP capabilities for product carbon footprint assessments and
          expanding Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to map project-specific climate risks.


UNDP - Conducted Consultation with the Civil Aviation and Meteorological Authority (CAMA)
On 30 October 2025, UNDP held a stakeholder consultation with the Civil Aviation and
Meteorological Authority (CAMA) under the Ministry of Transport. The meeting gathered eight
participants, including one woman, representing key technical and management staff. The
discussion focused on strengthening climate and water data systems, addressing technical
capacity needs, ensuring integration with existing infrastructure, and maintaining effective
coordination mechanisms. CAMA emphasized that developing a reliable and integrated Climate

                                                 66


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
and Water Information Management System is a top institutional priority, noting challenges with
outdated data, limited monitoring coverage, and insufficient early warning capabilities.

UNDP confirmed that Component 1 of the project directly responds to these priorities through
data recovery, consolidation, digitization, and system enhancement. CAMA also highlighted the
need for tailored technical training in data management, monitoring station operation, and
climate-water modeling. UNDP agreed to conduct a capacity needs assessment to inform targeted
training and explore options for upgrading equipment in coordination with national priorities.

CAMA requested early involvement in project design and technical planning, particularly in
selecting observation station locations and technical specifications to ensure alignment with
national systems. UNDP confirmed CAMA’s inclusion in the design and planning stages. The
institution also reaffirmed its commitment to gender inclusion, noting that women already
participate in technical units without social or institutional barriers; an approach that UNDP will
continue to promote through gender-responsive engagement.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:

      •   Integrate CAMA into the early design and planning of CWIMS to ensure alignment with
          existing national networks.
      •   Conduct a detailed capacity needs assessment and develop tailored training programs.
      •   Ensure gender-responsive participation throughout implementation.
      •   Ensure full compliance with land and GM procedures under UNDP and World Bank
          standards.

UNDP - Consultation with the Centre of Environmental and Climate Studies (CECS), Aden
University

On 2 November 2025, UNDP conducted a stakeholder consultation with the Centre of
Environmental and Climate Studies (CECS) at Aden University. The meeting brought together
eleven participants, including four women, representing the Director of the Training Unit, Director
of the Centre, Director of the Consulting Department, Secretary of the Centre, Director of Studies
and Research, and other technical staff members.

CECS confirmed that this type of project is a high priority for the community, farmers, and
government institutions, emphasizing that improved climate and water information systems are
essential for climate-resilient agriculture, water management, and national planning. UNDP
acknowledged CECS’s assessment and confirmed that the project directly responds to these
national and community priorities related to climate resilience, sustainable water use, and
agricultural productivity.

The Centre further stressed that ensuring long-term project sustainability requires strong
capacity-building activity targeting staff and entities involved in data collection, analysis, and
system operation. UNDP confirmed that capacity development is a core component of the
project, with tailored technical and managerial training to be provided for relevant institutions
and personnel.

                                               67


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Regarding operation and maintenance (O&M), CECS recommended that the project establish or
strengthen O&M teams to ensure the continuous functionality of infrastructure and data systems
after implementation. UNDP agreed on the importance of post-implementation sustainability and
confirmed that maintenance mechanisms and institutional roles will be clearly integrated into the
project design. Finally, CECS proposed enhancing collaboration and knowledge exchange with
national capacity-building institutions and expressed readiness to share their expertise and
research experience in climate and environmental studies.

Agreed Follow-up/Recommendations:

      •   Ensure post-implementation O&M mechanisms are clearly defined and
          institutionalized.
      •   Establish collaboration and knowledge-sharing arrangements with CECS and other
          research institutions.

UNDP - Consultation with the Yemen Geological Survey and Mineral Resources Board (GSRMB)

On 3 November 2025, UNDP conducted a stakeholder consultation with the Yemen Geological
Survey and Mineral Resources Board (GSRMB) under the Ministry of Oil and Minerals. The
meeting brought together nine participants, including two women, representing the Head of
GSRMB, the Deputy Head, the Head of the Information Management Unit, the Information
Management Officer, and other technical staff members.

GSRMB confirmed that this type of project is a high priority for the community and will generate
significant institutional benefits. UNDP acknowledged the importance of the intervention and
confirmed that it aligns closely with national and local development priorities, particularly in
strengthening data systems. Participants emphasized the importance of regular coordination and
engagement during implementation, noting that in previous projects they were often consulted
only for information and not fully engaged throughout the process. UNDP agreed to ensure
continuous collaboration and engagement with GSRMB during all phases of the project to
enhance ownership and participation.

GSRMB also stressed the need for a strong capacity-building component to strengthen staff skills
and ensure effective performance and sustainability of project outcomes. UNDP confirmed that
capacity building and technical training for partners form an integral part of the project and will
be implemented to support long-term institutional capacity. The institution further expressed its
readiness to collaborate with UNDP and other authorities to facilitate smooth and effective
implementation. UNDP welcomed this commitment and confirmed that collaboration will be
formalized through regular joint coordination and reporting mechanisms. Finally, GSRMB
confirmed that the project is not expected to generate any social or community conflicts. UNDP
took note of this assurance and reaffirmed its commitment to maintaining a conflict-sensitive and
inclusive approach throughout implementation.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:




                                               68


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
      •   Maintain continuous coordination and engagement with GSRMB throughout project
          design and implementation.
      •   Integrate targeted capacity-building and technical training for GSRMB staff.
      •   Establish formal collaboration and joint reporting mechanisms between UNDP and
          GSRMB.

UNDP - Consultation with the Urban Water Supply Project Management Unit (UWS-PMU)

On 5 November 2025, UNDP conducted a stakeholder consultation with the Urban Water Supply
Project Management Unit (UWS-PMU) under the Ministry of Water and Environment –
Hadramout Branch. The meeting brought together five participants, including two women,
representing the Head of UWS-PMU, the Coordinator, and the Technical Specialist.

Discussions began with the clarification of roles and responsibilities under both Component 1 and
Component 2 of the project. PMU and UNDP agreed on the importance of clearly defining who
will lead, support, and coordinate specific activities to ensure smooth and efficient
implementation. UNDP confirmed that detailed roles and deliverables for each component will
be outlined in the updated plan and coordination framework to avoid overlaps and ensure
accountability.

The teams also discussed the implementation modality, focusing on operational coordination
between PMU-UWS, local partners, and other implementing entities. It was agreed that a joint
implementation plan will be finalized to define timelines, communication channels, and reporting
procedures to ensure effective coordination among all partners.

PMU shared their previous experience in Wadi Hajer, outlining key achievements and lessons
learned that could inform current project implementation. UNDP appreciated these insights and
emphasized the importance of integrating successful practices and lessons learned into the
project’s design and delivery.

Discussions also addressed social inclusion and community engagement, with PMU highlighting
the need to ensure meaningful participation of affected populations in project planning and
implementation. UNDP confirmed that inclusive participation, gender responsiveness, and
stakeholder engagement are core principles of the project and committed to providing continued
guidance on social inclusion plans. Finally, the meeting reviewed the Grievance Mechanism (GM)
and explored opportunities to enhance its accessibility and responsiveness. UNDP confirmed that
the GM will be strengthened through multiple accessible channels and regular monitoring to
ensure transparency, accountability, and effective handling of community concerns.

Agreed Follow-up / Recommendations:
     • Clearly define roles and responsibilities for each project component in the updated plan
         and coordination framework.
     • Strengthen social inclusion and gender-responsive stakeholder engagement
         throughout implementation.
     • Enhance the accessibility and effectiveness of the Grievance Mechanism through
         regular monitoring and feedback loops.

                                              69


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
