Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-May-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01321




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                         WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                       Poultry and Aquaculture
                          Congo, Republic of                                         P505271
                                                         AFRICA                                                    Development Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         30-Apr-2026                 25-Jun-2026                   Agriculture and Food
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Agriculture
                          Republic of Congo
                                                         Livestock and Fisheries

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          To improve competitiveness and resilience of target poultry and aquaculture value chains in Congo.

                          Components
                          Strengthening Sector Foundations
                          Strengthening the Policy and Regulatory Framework
                          Expanding Access to Finance
                          Project Management
                          Contingency Emergency Response Component

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                          69.30

                            Total Financing                                                                                               69.30
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 60.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


                                                                                                                                            Page 1
                                  The World Bank
                                  Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                                International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                25.00
                                International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 35.00
                                  IDA Credit                                                                                                35.00
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                Other Sources                                                                                                9.30
                                  Local Beneficiaries                                                                                        9.30




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@ffiprocessing#doctemplate

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate




_For Official Use Only_
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                           Other Decision (as needed)

                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context
                          The Republic of Congo (ROC) faces a dual crisis of high unemployment1 and deepening food insecurity, rooted in its
                          heavy dependence on hydrocarbons and a fragile agricultural sector. Despite the country’s considerable natural resource
                          wealth, economic diversification remains severely limited - with oil accounting for approximately 42 percent of Gross
                          Domestic Product (GDP), 80 percent of total exports, and 60 percent of domestic revenues. Because oil extraction is
                          capital-intensive rather than labor-intensive, it offers very few direct employment opportunities. Currently, only 0.29
                          percent of total employment in the country is in the extractives sector. The manufacturing sector remains small-scale,
                          averaging only 6.5 percent of GDP, while the services sector, though the second-largest contributor to GDP, suffers from
                          low productivity. Structural issues such as capacity gaps, suboptimal business enabling environment and governance
                          further constrain the creation of wage jobs and productive employment. Consequently, the formal labor market is notably



                          1 Youth unemployment stands at about 42 percent, and broader unemployment is estimated at roughly 21.8 percent.



                                                                                                                                              Page 2
                                  The World Bank
                                  Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          small, consigning a large proportion of the population - estimated between 75 percent to 80 percent - to low-productivity,
                          informal, or subsistence activities.

                          Additionally, food security remains a persistent problem, with nearly one in three people currently food insecure and
                          20 percent of children under five suffering from stunting, despite high agricultural potential 2. Increasing demand for
                          food is met via expanding imports valued at around US$670 million per year3, accounting for about 16 percent of total
                          imports. Structural diversification towards agriculture presents a pathway to simultaneously resolve ROC’s twin crises of
                          unemployment and chronic food insecurity. Modernizing agriculture can create a vast array of jobs—not just in on-farm
                          production, but across the entire value chain, including the input segment, processing, logistics, and retail. It would also
                          enhance food security through increased local production, reduce dependence on expensive food imports, and strengthen
                          the resilience of the economy against volatility that characterizes the oil sector.

                          The proposed Project is designed to catalyze the expansion of the poultry and aquaculture sectors to drive job creation
                          while strengthening national food security. The Project supports ROC’s aspirations to diversify the national economy,
                          create jobs, and meet national demand for poultry and aquaculture products, as outlined in the National Development
                          Plan (NDP) 2022-2026. The Project advances the objectives of the World Bank Group (WBG)'s Mission AgriConnect,
                          focusing on the structural transformation of smallholder agriculture and the expansion of the agrifood sector to drive
                          sustainable employment and food and nutrition security. It will contribute to delivery on ROC’s commitments under its




_For Official Use Only_
                          Mission AgriConnect Compact, currently under preparation. In line with the WBG’s overarching strategy for addressing
                          the global jobs challenge, it will focus interventions across three areas that are critical to unlocking the potential of the
                          two sectors for job creation by (i) strengthening relevant foundations (including both physical and human infrastructure);
                          (ii) strengthening and refining priority policies; and (iii) mobilizing private capital/investment into the sectors.

                            Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          Agriculture is of vital importance to ROC’s national development aspirations. First, because of its inherent broad-based
                          multiplier effects that can foster overall economic expansion, it is the most viable pathway to moving ROC’s economy
                          away from a heavy reliance on the extractive sector. The sector is also critical to job creation and income growth, especially
                          for the poor. Already, close to 40 percent of the population is engaged in agriculture - although mostly at the subsistence
                          level, and for the 30 percent of Congolese living in rural areas, farming is often the only available source of income and
                          livelihood. Given the country’s favorable natural endowments, the sector can deliver more jobs. Unlike the oil sector,
                          which is capital intensive and employs relatively few people, agriculture is labor-intensive and capable of absorbing a
                          larger share of the work force. It also stimulates forward and backward links with other sectors - upstream, it creates
                          demand for input such as fertilizer, machinery and feed, and downstream, it supports agro-processing and other value-
                          added manufacturing, transport services, and marketing enterprises. Modernized farming, agribusiness, and value-added
                          processing can attract young people, especially when linked to training, digital tools, and financing opportunities. The
                          sector is also fundamental to achieving food and nutrition security as it has the potential to reduce the country’s
                          dependence on food imports- in line with the government’s import substitution agenda and ensure a stable supply of
                          affordable, nutritious products for urban and rural consumers.

                          Within the broader agricultural sector, poultry and aquaculture stand out as value chains with significant potential to
                          support economic diversification, create jobs, increase incomes of producers, and improve national food and nutrition
                          security. First, as indicated in the WBG Country Private Sector Diagnostic (CPSD, 2025), ROC’s ecological, climatic, and
                          hydrological characteristics confer it with a comparative advantage for these value chains and thus potential to expand

                          2 Over 10 million ha of arable land of which one-third is uncultivated, abundant water resources and favorable climate.
                          3 According to the 2024 External Trade Statistics Bulletin published by the National Institute of Statistics of the ROC.



                                                                                                                                                     Page 3
                                   The World Bank
                                   Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          these value chains at a lower opportunity cost than its trading partners. Second, both are labor-intensive, adaptable to
                          smallholder systems, and capable of generating quick returns compared to other forms of livestock or crop production
                          because of their short production cycle. They generate jobs at multiple levels – pond/poultry housing construction,
                          hatcheries, feed production, harvesting, processing, and marketing and have strong linkages to crop farming, particularly
                          maize4 and soybeans used in feed production, thereby stimulating crop demand and creating additional job opportunities.
                          The value chains are also critical pillars of food and nutritional security, providing the most accessible and affordable
                          sources of high-quality animal protein. Together, they play a transformative role in combatting chronic malnutrition—
                          which currently affects nearly 20 percent of children under five in ROC.

                          Demand for both poultry and aquaculture products has grown rapidly with urbanization and population growth, driven
                          by changing diets and rising incomes. Annual demand for fish in ROC is estimated at 163,000 tons while current local
                          production stands at about 62,000 tons (60,000 tons from capture fisheries and 2,000 tons from aquaculture)5. Local
                          production of table eggs and poultry meat meets only 37 percent and 0.4 percent respectively of annual domestic demand.
                          Consequently, most of the demand is currently met through imports with poultry and fish being the two main imports
                          into ROC, standing at US$222 million and US$125 million, respectively in 2024.6 Closing the national deficit through
                          increased local production can create over 650,000 direct and induced jobs. The net import position of ROC’s neighbors -
                          Democratic Republic of Congo, Central African Republic, and Gabon points to another gap that local producers in ROC can
                          fill with attendant increases in jobs created.




_For Official Use Only_
                          Realizing the potential of the poultry and aquaculture sectors for better-job creation, and enhanced food security hinges
                          on improving competitiveness of local production relative to imports. Currently, local producers struggle to compete
                          with imports mainly from China, India, Oman, and Malaysia for fish, and USA, Brazil, Turkey and Poland for poultry meat.
                          As an example, poultry imports mainly in the form of frozen, mechanically deboned dark meat often land in the ROC
                          market at less than US$1,000 per ton compared to much higher local production costs often exceeding US$2,000 per ton7.
                          Because market prices of fish and poultry products are fixed by cheap imports, an effective way to raise competitiveness
                          of these value chains is by reducing production costs for domestic producers – i.e., by increasing the cost-effectiveness
                          and profitability of production. This requires attention to three sets of critical issues: (i) the sectors’ foundations, (ii) the
                          policy and regulatory environment, and (iii) access to finance.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           The Development Objective is to improve competitiveness and resilience of target poultry and aquaculture value chains
                           in Congo. Competitiveness emphasizes reduced input costs and improved production efficiency by adopting the best
                           practices and innovative technologies. Given market prices of fish and poultry products are fixed by cheap imports, an
                           effective way to raise competitiveness of outputs within these value chains is by cost reduction – i.e., by increasing the
                           cost-effectiveness and profitability of production. Resilience will address risks to climate shocks on poultry and
                           aquaculture value chains by mainstreaming climate-smart agriculture (CSA) solutions and other measures along the
                           value-chains to improve ability to address climate risks on poultry and aquaculture productivity and health.



                          4 Maize is among the subsectors identified in the WBG CPSD (2025) as having the potential to contribute to growth and jobs.
                          5WBG Country Private Sector Diagnostic, 2025.
                          6 The National Institute of Statistics (INS) of the Republic of Congo, 2024.
                          7 The domestic sector holds a significant competitive advantage in the "freshness premium" market.



                                                                                                                                                        Page 4
                                  The World Bank
                                  Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                            Key Results
                          Proposed key outcome level indicators include Improve competitiveness: (i) reduction of production cost per commodity
                          (percentage); (ii) share of Project beneficiaries in targeted value chains demonstrating an increase in annual turnover
                          (percentage); and (iii) Farmers benefiting from activities that improve production, value-addition, and market linkages
                          (number). Improve resilience: (i) farmers and value chain actors adopting practices to improve resilience to climate-
                          induced risks (number); and (ii) people benefiting from climate-resilient infrastructure (number).

                            D. Project Description
                          Component 1: Strengthening Sector Foundations (US$40 million)
                          The objective is to enhance availability and accessibility of high-quality and cost-effective inputs, strengthen sectoral skills
                          and technical capacity and provide critical infrastructure requisite for fostering competitiveness. Support will be provided
                          through four subcomponents:
                          Subcomponent 1.1. Support to increased feed availability (US$23 million)
                          This subcomponent will support: (i) increasing the production and availability of competitively priced maize and soybean
                          for aquaculture and poultry feed; and (ii) expanding commercially viable processing of raw materials into feed. This agenda
                          will be supported through structured matchmaking, advisory support on commercial models, and facilitation of
                          partnerships with (producer organizations (POs) and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), including Productive




_For Official Use Only_
                          Alliance (PA)/Contract Farming/Out-grower arrangements, which are already being implemented by feed firms in ROC.
                          The Project will support the registration/formalization of POs and the establishment of PAs/Out-grower arrangements
                          between POs and the feed manufacturers. This will be delivered mainly through facilitation and information services.
                          Using tools and curricula under IFC Agribusiness Leadership Program (ALP) - public sector track project (#610261)8 local
                          service providers, trained and supervised by the IFC ALP team, will deliver capacity-building to strengthen PO governance,
                          management and business capabilities.
                          POs will be supported to increase maize and soybean supply to meet offtaker demand by improving productivity and
                          expanding cultivated area. Support will include access to quality, climate-resilient seed, soil health inputs, mechanization
                          and land development services, and advisory support to promote climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and strengthen
                          post-harvest handling. Investments will be financed through one-off “Feed Production Grants” of up to 70 percent of PO
                          business plan costs, prioritizing CSA technologies that reduce climate exposure and emissions. ALP tools—including the
                          Financial Potential Assessment (FPA), Financial Management training, and business planning, will be used to assess
                          readiness and prepare POs for grant implementation. In parallel, informed by early sector mapping9, IFC’s AgriConnect
                          Global Platform (formerly AAAP) will be deployed to enable a digital ecosystem through which POs can access services
                          such as mechanization, digital advisory, and in-kind loans aligned with the agricultural calendar, with repayment
                          structured through controlled harvest sales. IFC will provide technical assistance to banks and AgTechs, co-invest in
                          selected loan portfolios, and support digitization of lending. “Feed Production Grants” are designed as transitional,
                          risk-sharing instruments to enable first-time commercial investments and adoption of climate-smart practices and are not
                          intended to substitute for longer-term private financing.
                          The IFC’s Local Champions Initiative (LCI ROC #609678) will support the growth and expansion of feed manufacturing SMEs
                          sourcing from the POs. The support will focus on strengthening financial management and record keeping; enhancing
                          business planning skills such as business plan development, pitching, proposal writing, feasibility and market studies; and


                          8 ALP provides standardized capacity building tools linked with ISO 18716 - Professional Farmer Organization guidance. It builds business management

                          capabilities of POs through four sequenced steps of assessment, training, coaching, re-assessment.
                          9 Designed to analyze value chain dynamics and identify key stakeholders e.g., AgTechs and financial institutions, etc.



                                                                                                                                                                         Page 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          building basic risk management capabilities. Training will also help SMEs to understand financing options, improve credit
                          score literacy, and develop the skills needed to navigate lender relationships. Compliance support will cover formal
                          business registration, adherence to tax and regulatory requirements, and asset registration. Following the successful
                          completion of LCI training, the SMEs will qualify for a business plan competition. “Feed Production Grants” under LCI are
                          intended to bridge early-stage investment gaps and prepare SMEs for engagement with commercial lenders, rather than
                          to provide ongoing financing support. Winners will receive competitive “Feed Production Grants”- covering up to 50 percent
                          of total costs - to fund critical investments e.g., processing equipment, storage facilities, energy solutions, and working
                          capital required to launch or expand commercial operations. Larger feed manufacturers may benefit from direct firm
                          advisory on IFC’s account. Separately, women and youth groups will be supported to produce and commercialize black
                          soldier fly larvae (BSF), a climate-smart protein source in poultry and aquaculture feed, to replace traditional ingredients.
                          This support will be provided in collaboration with Agricultural Innovation Mechanism for Scale (AIM for Scale) a
                          partnership financed by the United Arab Emirates and the Gates Foundation to scale evidence-based, cost-effective
                          innovations for smallholder farmers in low- and middle-income countries.
                          Subcomponent 1.2. Support to fingerlings and day-old chick production (US$3 million)
                          The objective is to increase the capacity to produce high quality fingerlings and DOCs, the most critical determinants of
                          competitiveness in aquaculture and poultry.10 In the case of fingerlings, project support will be two folds: (i) provision of
                          public goods necessary to ensure availability of quality fingerlings; and (ii) incentivizing private sector led multiplication
                          and sale of fingerlings to producers. In case of public goods, the project will support ongoing efforts at genetic resource




_For Official Use Only_
                          improvement and broodstock management at two research stations in Djoumouna and Madingou, including: (i)
                          rehabilitation and expansion of hatchery and nursery infrastructure with due consideration to climate resilience and
                          improved energy efficiency; (ii) accessing resilient germplasm11; (iii) diversification of fish species; and (iv) increased
                          biosecurity and quarantine capacity. The project will also strengthen public sector capacity to ensure quality of fingerlings
                          available to farmers through regulation, certification, licensing and supervision of private nurseries.
                          The project will identify and strengthen the capacity of already existing private nurseries in areas proximal to the ZAPs to
                          support their multiplication and supply of fingerlings. The technical capacity building activity will be led by the Ministry of
                          Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF) in partnership with WorldFish, while IFC’s ALP will support the
                          professionalization and management aspects. Nurseries that successfully complete both tracks will be eligible for
                          competitively awarded “Nursery Grants” - capped at 50 percent of business plan costs - to modernize or expand their
                          operations to meet fingerlings demand.
                          With respect to poultry, project support will be limited to sourcing and testing the adaptability and performance of
                          improved breeds to the ROC context and facilitating the import and access of private sector players to parent stock of
                          selected breeds for commercial DOC production and sale to farmers.
                          Subcomponent 1.3. Support to skills and technical capacity strengthening (US$2 million)
                          The objective is to bridge the skills and technical capacity gaps within the value chains as well as introduce new and
                          superior production technologies for producers. The potential of high-quality inputs including feed, fingerlings, and DOCs
                          can only be realized through precise management of nutrition, biosecurity, and environmental factors. First, the project
                          will finance the upgrade of 4 agricultural stations - Djoumouna and Madingou for aquaculture, and Imvoumba and Nkouo
                          for poultry - into Reference Centers (RCs) 12 to function as technology and innovation hubs for the sectors and autonomous
                          administrative, financial management and resource generation entity to ensure efficiency of operations and sustainability
                          of financing. Among others, support will go towards core laboratory and scientific infrastructure (biotechnology, genetics,

                          10 Poor quality stock leads to weak growth, high mortality, low feed efficiency, and low profitability regardless of the quality of management.
                          11 Discussion on the access to the genetically improved farmed tilapia for improved efficiency has been initiated with WorldFish.
                          12 In the case of aquaculture, the reference centers will host the hatchery and nursery infrastructure proposed under subcomponent 1.2.



                                                                                                                                                                            Page 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          disease and diagnostic labs, feed analysis facilities); capacity strengthening of staff in critical areas (e.g., nutrition and
                          disease management); acquisition of new technology (e.g., superior germplasm from other countries); creating
                          partnerships with other innovation centers (e.g., WorldFish, the Poultry Expertise Center of Netherland, etc.); business
                          and commercial partnerships; and collaboration with the MALF extension and advisory services for climate-smart
                          technology transfer purposes.
                          Second, the project will provide support to improving the delivery and outreach capacity of relevant extension, advisory,
                          and animal health services. This will include skills upgrades for staff; deployment of digital platforms for advisories (e.g.,
                          market information, climate); and strengthening animal health surveillance for biosecurity and disease control.
                          Third, support for demonstration and introduction of new innovations and CSA practices necessary to promote
                          intensification of production. These include the more water-efficient Bioflocs/recirculating aquaculture systems that allow
                          for high-density fish farming with limited land or water and with potential to produce up to 25 times more fish than
                          traditional ponds; the more energy efficient cage aquaculture systems, and alternative/novel feeds, smart feeding and
                          watering systems, novel feeds, manure-to-biogas conversion to reduce energy costs as well as greenhouse gas (GHG)
                          emissions, and renewable energy systems etc. To accelerate the adoption of innovative production technologies,
                          “Technology Adoption Grants” will be provided to smallholder POs, and women and youth groups. These grants will cover
                          up to 50 percent of business plan costs, in the logic of utilizing public funds to share perceived risks investing in climate-
                          smart technologies. As a prerequisite, POs must complete ALP training to ensure they have the management capacity to
                          deploy the capital effectively. Large firms involved in production may also benefit from direct advisory from IFC. These




_For Official Use Only_
                          grants are justified by the higher perceived risks and longer payback periods associated with new technologies and are
                          intended to enable market entry and demonstration, not permanent public financing.
                          Subcomponent 1.4. Support to productive climate resilient infrastructure (US$12 million)
                          The objective is to alleviate critical physical infrastructure bottlenecks that currently inflate the prices of domestically
                          produced poultry and aquaculture products. The focus will be on eight ZAPs to achieve economies of scale. Beyond
                          fostering productivity gains and lowering costs of locally produced aquaculture and poultry products, infrastructure
                          development in the ZAPs has strong multiplier effects including promoting youth employment and encouraging private
                          investment. Investment will target the following critical infrastructure using a cascading approach, ensuring that public
                          resources are used strategically to address non-commercial risks and viability gaps, thereby creating conditions for
                          subsequent private investment, including through PPPs where feasible: (i) reliable power supply - including solar energy -
                          for production purposes and reduction of GHG emissions, cold chain development, and value addition/processing; (ii)
                          climate-resilient market infrastructure (including rehabilitation of the central poultry slaughterhouse) where post-project
                          operation and management arrangements are clear and acceptable to the Bank; and (iii) last mile digital connectivity
                          where possible to facilitate modernization and competitiveness of the sectors. The selection criteria for infrastructure to
                          be financed will be elaborated in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). Where possible, the Project will facilitate PPPs
                          to attract private investment in market, power and digital connectivity infrastructure. IFC matchmaking and facilitation
                          platform will be a source of innovative technologies that the project could finance in partnership with the private sector.
                          All infrastructure will be developed with due consideration to both climate adaptation and mitigation imperatives.
                          Component 2: Strengthening the Policy and Regulatory Framework (US$9 million)
                          The objective is to create a policy and regulatory environment that is conducive to competitive and sustainable poultry
                          and aquaculture value chains growth. Among others, policy and regulatory priorities to be supported include: (i) enforcing
                          the OHADA law to strengthen cooperative institutions13 including using simplified, agriculture-specific registration
                          procedures that allow producer groups to formalize; (ii) streamlining procedures for breeding and brood stock import; (iii)

                          13 The OHADA Law grants legal status to POs a recognition which expand their eligibility for financing, improve access to markets, and enables them

                          to enter formal contracts with buyers and partners.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          strengthening the licensing and regulation of nurseries and hatcheries for quality assurance and biosecurity; and (iv)
                          environmental and social compliance. The Project will explore supporting improvements to the legal and regulatory
                          framework for agent networks and supply chain financing, to facilitate the proliferation of AgTech business models, as
                          well as reforms to the legal and regulatory framework needed to encourage the uptake of innovative agricultural insurance
                          products, where market signals indicate that further reforms are necessary.
                          Additionally, the Project will facilitate establishment of a formal Public-Private Sector Dialogue platform to institutionalize
                          structured communication and bridge the persistent trust gap between the government and the private sector. The
                          platform will serve as a high-level consultative mechanism for addressing systemic business climate constraints, refining
                          sectoral regulations, and co-creating or ensuring that government policy remains responsive to market realities. The
                          dialogue will be complemented by IFC’s newly launched Private Sector Council, which brings together government leaders,
                          business executives, and IFC experts to strengthen the national business environment, inter alia.
                          Component 3: Expanding Access to Finance (US$5 million)
                          Component 3 operationalizes the Project’s finance pathway, recognizing that limited bankability, weak risk management,
                          and shallow financial markets currently constrain private lending to poultry and aquaculture value chains. This component
                          is designed with a phased and adaptive implementation approach, reflecting the early stage of agricultural finance markets
                          in the ROC and the need to progressively strengthen both demand‑ and supply-side readiness, while crowding in private
                          capital. This adaptive and evidence‑driven design is intended to minimize implementation risk, avoid premature scaling of




_For Official Use Only_
                          untested instruments, and ensure efficient use of IDA and IBRD resources in a nascent agricultural finance market.
                          Phase 1: Upstream market development and capacity building (US$5 million)
                          The upstream interventions will improve the creditworthiness of value chain actors, strengthen the capacity of
                          participating FIs to design agri-finance products and to assess and manage agri-finance risks. These activities will include
                          investment readiness support, development of sector‑specific credit appraisal tools, and targeted training of loan officers,
                          with close monitoring of deal flow quality and early portfolio performance. Activities will be implemented with hands-on
                          technical support from IFC, including the design of tools, curricula, and operating models, and close supervision of pilot
                          implementation. IFC’s role will be to ensure technical rigor, good global practice, and alignment with market realities,
                          while the project will retain responsibility for fiduciary management and day-to-day execution. At this stage, the objective
                          is to prepare markets and institutions, rather than to mobilize private capital on a scale.
                          IFC will support two banks and two micro FIs to strengthen their capacity to better serve producers and agribusinesses
                          along the value chains. The support will be designed and overseen by IFC and implemented by the project. Envisaged
                          activities include inter alia: (i) diagnostics to assess capacity and readiness of the FIs; (ii) establishment and
                          operationalization of AgriDesks to develop sector-specific credit appraisal tools and design financial products tailored to
                          the cash flow patterns and risk profiles of the value chains; (iii) training of loan officers in agricultural finance and
                          strengthening risk management frameworks; (iv) supporting partnerships with AgTechs, including operating models,
                          product design, credit processes, farmer journey protocols, and legal documentation; (v) monitoring pilot implementation
                          and supporting scaling-up. The appraisal tools and training of loan officers will also incorporate climate risk assessments.
                          Leveraging AgTechs, IFC will also provide support to FIs to strengthen operational capacity and farmer onboarding
                          readiness. This will include: (i) improving farmer profiling and Know Your Customer (KYC) systems to enhance farm data
                          reliability and access to finance; (ii) developing/strengthening agri-agent networks to improve field support to farmers
                          during campaigns; (iii) facilitating partnership frameworks with FIs and value chain actors.
                          The Project will also support the introduction and scaling of agricultural insurance as a risk‑management tool to improve
                          resilience and unlock access to finance for POs. This activity will help unlock the potential for agricultural lending to the
                          Project’s direct beneficiaries by developing a tech-enabled insurance solution which will respond to the needs of the target
                          POs. Recognizing that insurance markets are nascent in ROC, the Project will combine product development with explicit

                                                                                                                                                    Page 8
                                 The World Bank
                                 Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          premium support mechanisms to encourage early adoption and build trust. With IFC support, the Project will implement
                          the following activities: (i) assessing existing agricultural and climate risk products and identifying gaps; (ii) supporting
                          development of tech-enabled (e.g., satellite-based) insurance solutions; (iii) facilitating partnerships for distribution to
                          smallholder farmers; and (iv) supporting awareness campaigns and trust-building among producers and financial
                          institutions. Finally, the Project will provide “Agri-Insurance Premium Grants” to cover the agri-insurance premium to eligible
                          beneficiaries. Given the need to develop the agricultural insurance market largely from the ground up, the Project will
                          mobilize strong impact evaluation capabilities to enable ongoing monitoring, learning, and course correction as evidence
                          and market signals emerge. Insurance activities are designed as market‑building interventions, will not confer exclusivity
                          to any insurer or financial institution, and will be adjusted based on uptake and performance evidence.
                          IFC will support the Project to foster digitization of aquaculture and poultry value chains. This will enhance service delivery,
                          traceability, data generation, and digital payments by integrating mobile and electronic payment solutions into input
                          supply, output marketing, and public support mechanisms. This shift away from cash-based transactions will improve
                          transparency and efficiency while enabling producers to build digital transaction histories, thereby expanding access to
                          formal financial services and contributing to enhanced financial inclusion among rural and peri‑urban value‑chain actors.
                          Activities include: (i) identification and prioritization of use cases (e.g., payments, subsidies, credit); (ii) design and
                          implementation of 1–2 pilots; (iii) providing recommendations for scale-up.
                          Phase 2: Downstream financing (US$0 million)




_For Official Use Only_
                          Subject to satisfactory progress at Mid‑Term Review (MTR), the Project will deploy a targeted line of credit and
                          complementary risk mitigation mechanisms. These instruments will only be scaled up if upstream capacity building and
                          impact evaluation results demonstrate sufficient readiness and effectiveness. Subject to meeting its applicable investment
                          criteria at MTR, IFC may consider providing its own financing or risk‑mitigation support to FIs or value‑chain actors. MTR
                          assessment will determine scaling‑up, redesign, or discontinuation based on performance evidence. This conditionality
                          reflects the Project’s evidence-based approach to private capital mobilization, ensuring that downstream financial
                          instruments are deployed only where market readiness is demonstrated.
                          Line of credit. Subject to confirmation at MTR, the Project would support the establishment of a targeted line of credit for
                          commercial banks to expand their engagement in agricultural finance.14 The intervention is conceived as a downstream
                          instrument to complement earlier project activities that will generate a pipeline of bankable MSMEs and strengthen the
                          enabling environment for agri-finance. At present, commercial banks face both a thin deal flow of viable projects and
                          limited internal capacity to understand, assess, structure and manage agricultural lending products. Over the first years
                          of implementation, the Project is expected to address these constraints through above-mentioned targeted advisory
                          support to enhance FIs’ ability to analyze agricultural enterprises, design suitable loan products, manage portfolio risks,
                          and integrate sound agricultural lending practices into their operations.
                          Building on this foundation, the line of credit would unlock medium- to long-term resources to participating banks,
                          addressing a key market failure in the availability of longer tenors for productive asset investments. By aligning maturity
                          with the investment horizon of target value chain MSMEs and reinforcing banks’ capacity to manage sector-specific risks,
                          the credit line would support the gradual crowding-in of commercial finance to value chains. IFC could build on the existing
                          US$25 million line of credit with a local commercial bank and proactively seek opportunities to provide both guarantees
                          and additional lines of credit. IFC’s potential financing will be contingent upon strengthening the institutional capacity of
                          partner FIs. If this instrument is not effective at MTR, the activity will be dropped. Together, these interventions are
                          expected to progressively crowd in private finance by reducing risk, strengthening capacity, and improving deal flow
                          quality, rather than through upfront public lending.

                          14 In collaboration with the Sustainable Congo Basin Forest Economies project (P505923), the World Bank is exploring potential financial
                          intermediaries to administer a line of credit, including regional institutions such as the BEAC Nationale.

                                                                                                                                                             Page 9
                                 The World Bank
                                 Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          Component 4: Project Management (US$6 million)
                          This component will strengthen capacities for Project management, monitoring and evaluation (including, inter alia, the
                          areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant services, training, and
                          financing of incremental operating costs.
                          Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million)
                          This component provides a mechanism within the Project to finance a response to a natural disaster, disease, or other
                          eligible emergencies should one occur.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




_For Official Use Only_
                          The environmental risks associated with the project include: - Environmental Risks: i) occupational health and safety (OHS),
                          ii) potential increase in the use of pesticides in agricultural areas, production of wastewater and agricultural waste, iii)
                          depletion of soil nutrients, iv) water pollution and air pollution (from improper disposal of poultry waste/manure; v)
                          degradation of soil quality and increased erosion if sustainable practices such as crop rotation or cover crops are not
                          implemented.; (vi) significant use of water and increase in greenhouse gas emission - Social Risks: i) Economic and physical
                          displacement due to land acquisition or restrictions on land use; (ii) risk of elite capture (due to information asymmetry),
                          reducing the opportunities of traditionally underserved populations; (iii) risk of barriers to access or outright exclusion
                          from participating in project benefits for indigenous peoples (and among them, indigenous women) because of their
                          cultural and linguistic differences and their specific disadvantaged situation for accessing technology and the knowledge
                          needed to apply for competitive grants; and (iv) risk of sexual harassment/sexual exploitation and abuse (SH/SEA) among
                          the beneficiaries and local population during the preparation/implementation of subprojects (mainly in subprojects
                          located in remote communities, with low levels of monitoring/supervision). However, these risks are not expected to be
                          significant and can be managed in a predictable manner.

                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          The Project will be implemented under the oversight of MALF. There will be a Steering Committee (SC) set up before
                          Project effectiveness responsible for providing strategic direction, operational supervision, and overall governance of the
                          Project. This will include: (i) reviewing and approving the Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs); (ii) approving progress
                          and financial reports; (iii) ensuring compliance with the objectives and intervention strategy of the Project; (vi) facilitating
                          the coordination of Project activities between the entities involved in the implementation; and (v) ensuring the coherence
                          of the PADeP interventions with the relevant sectoral programs and strategies of the ROC.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
                                 The World Bank
                                 Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)


                          The SC will be chaired by a representative of MALF and will include a representative of the Presidency of the Republic and
                          of other relevant ministries, a representative of the National Confederation of Producers' Organizations of Congo, CNOP-
                          Congo. It will meet twice a year, and secretariat services will be provided by the Project Management Unit (PMU).
                          A PMU under MALF will be responsible for the strategic coordination of activities, monitoring and evaluation, financial
                          management, procurement, knowledge management, communication, and reporting. The PMU staff will include a Project
                          Coordinator and relevant specialists. There will be three Department Support Units” (PDSUs) in Ouesso, Djambala and Dolisie
                          charged with day-to-day management of activities in their respective jurisdictions. The Agence pour le Developpement
                          des Petites et Moyennes Entreprises (ADPME) will oversee the delivery of the matching grants to POs/MSMEs. The
                          matching grant management procedures will be detailed in the PIM.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Manievel Sene
                             Senior Agriculture Economist




_For Official Use Only_
                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Republic of Congo

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                           APPROVAL


                           Task Team Leader(s):                       Manievel Sene

                           Approved By

                           Practice Manager/Manager:                  Abel Lufafa                              10-Apr-2026

                           Country/Division Director:                 Cheick Fantamady Kante                   01-May-2026


                                                                                                                                                Page 11
                          The World Bank
                          Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                  Page 12
