Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 07/03/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04347




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 05, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505093                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      PWS MPA - MVCS               2026

                     Operation Name            Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Peru                      Peru                                    LATIN AMERICA AND            Water
                                                                                       CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Peru          Ministry of Housing Construction and    22-Jul-2025                  11-Sep-2025
                                               Sanitation , Safe Water Program for
                                               Lima and Callao - PASLC, National
                                               Urban Sanitation Program - PNSU




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     27-May-2025               266,400,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Introduce circular economy principles in the WSS sector and increase access to inclusive and climate resilient WSS in
                     selected basins


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project (Phase I) comprises two main components: (i) Infrastructure and (ii) Governance and Project Management.
                     The Infrastructure component focuses on the rehabilitation and expansion of water supply and sanitation (WSS)
                     infrastructure in the Lake Titicaca and Lurín basins. This includes retrofitting designs and executing works for the
                     drinking water and sewer networks in Puno, developing engineering designs for seven wastewater treatment plants
                     (WWTPs) in the Lake Titicaca and Lurin basin, and implementing a Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR) pilot in the Lurín

                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     basin. The project aims to enhance climate resilience, service efficiency, and sustainability by integrating circular
                     economy principles, reducing non-revenue water (NRW), increasing energy efficiency, and reducing greenhouse gas
                     (GHG) emissions. Project Management will finance goods and services for implementation support, including technical
                     assistance and administrative support for M&E, procurement, FM, and E&S management. Meanwhile, the Governance
                     component aims to support the implementation of the WSS circular economy roadmap at a national scale. This involves
                     strengthening the capacity of key institutions under the Ministry of Housing, Construction, and Sanitation (MVCS) to
                     incorporate circular economy principles in infrastructure design and service delivery. The component will also build the
                     capacity of selected utilities to manage WSS infrastructure services and create an enabling environment for scaling up
                     initiatives aimed at reducing NRW, increasing energy efficiency, and reclaiming and reusing water. The project will
                     ultimately enhance climate adaptation and mitigate the climate impact of WSS service delivery.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Scope. The Project targets specific locations, with Component 1 financing engineering services and works in urban and
                     peri-urban areas of Puno city (Lake Titicaca basin) and two districts in the Lima region (Lurin basin). In Puno, activities
                     include retrofitting designs and works to rehabilitate and extend WSS networks (referred to as works under Agreement
                     25), and preparing procurement strategies, basic engineering designs, and bidding documents for five WWTPs, including
                     one to serve Puno city and replace two existing underperforming plants. In the Lurin basin, the Project will finance a
                     reclaimed water MAR pilot and related studies aimed at informing regulatory frameworks and estimating potential
                     gains in water availability. Additional activities include technical studies, basic engineering designs and bidding
                     documents for the Julio C. Tello and José Gálvez WWTPs, and detailed designs for the construction of WSS networks in



Public Disclosure
                     Pachacamac Cercado district (served by Julio C. Tello WWTP), and the wastewater reuse schemes for park irrigation in
                     Villa Maria del Triunfo (located in the vicinity of the plant).

                     Urban context. Agreement 25 works are concentrated in urban Puno, involving road excavations for water and sewer
                     network upgrades and installation of household connections (excluding intra-residential works). Upgrades will also
                     occur on Empresa Municipal de Saneamiento Básico de Puno Sociedad Anónima (EMSAPUNO) owned sites where 10
                     reservoirs are located. In Lurin, while MAR pilot locations are not yet defined, they will likely be in two 900-700 m2 sites,
                     one located on the riverbank (state land) and the other near the Cieneguilla WWTP. The basin is undergoing rapid
                     urbanization, which has strained outdated water infrastructure.

                     Social conflicts. Puno has a high level of social conflicts, particularly related to political protests, boundaries between
                     communities, environmental issues and local demands not attended by the Government. As of February 2025, Puno had
                     18 active conflicts and was the second highest region in the country. Lurín presents lower levels, although there are
                     significant territorial demarcation issues with the district of Pachacamac.

                     Indigenous peoples (IPs). Certain areas in Puno, presents IPS (associated to WWTPs in Moho, Juli, Umasuyo and Ayaviri).
                     They belong to the Aymara and Quechua ethnic groups, and are known for their connection to the traditional Andean
                     Culture. They maintain ancestral customs, languages, and community practices. Their livelihoods are often based on
                     agriculture, livestock, and artisan crafts, and they place great importance on communal work and spiritual ties to the
                     land and the nature. In Lurín basin there are no IPs, although there are peasant communities in the middle and upper
                     watershed. However, Project activities are focused downstream in urbanized zones.


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     Environmental challenges. Some infrastructures to be developed under Agreement 25 (one reservoir, five drainage
                     pumping station, and the intake), will be located in buffer zones of the Titicaca National Reserve. The Titicaca Lake, a
                     Ramsar and UNESCO site, currently receives the wastewater effluents generated in Puno Region and faces pollution due
                     to poor waste treatment. The Project aims to improve WSS services and will contribute to reducing water pollution and
                     eutrophication. The Lurín basin faces overexploitation of its aquifer, vulnerability to climate change, and inadequate
                     domestic and industrial wastewater discharges. The MAR pilot is expected to inform the adoption of best practices to
                     increase water availability and reduce pressure on the aquifer.

                     Cultural Heritage. In Puno, project efforts prioritize the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, thereby minimizing any
                     impact on cultural heritage. In Lurín, the Pachacamac Archaeological Sanctuary is adjacent the Julio C. Tello WWTP;
                     however, no physical interventions are planned in the vicinity of the sanctuary during Phase I. The only potential
                     physical intervention in Lurín is the MAR pilot project, whose exact location is not yet determined.

                     Community organization. Puno has strong community organizations, in local levels. In the Lurin basin there have been
                     initiatives to improve water access and sanitation practices, with the support of organizations like UNICEF, WWF, and
                     Water for People. However, limited institutional coordination and lack of integrated panning have constrained these
                     efforts.

                     New intake in Lake Titicaca. The Project includes the construction of a new water intake system (Chimu III), drawing 566
                     l/s from 20 meters depth in Lake Titicaca. It will connect via a 369-meter suction pipeline to a lakeside pumping station
                     and convey water to the expanded Aziruni Drinking Water Treatment Plant (DWTP), then to new and upgraded




Public Disclosure
                     reservoirs. The intake will require lakebed dredging 100 meters from shore. This intervention aims to raise potable
                     water access—currently limited to 10.4 hours/day—and reduce waterborne diseases.

                     Wastewater Management during Transition Phase. Puno’s current sewer system discharges 13.623m3/day to El Espinar
                     and Yanamayo WWTPs, which are underperforming and noncompliant with discharge standards (specially coliforms and
                     phosphorous). If the new Puno WWTP is delayed, increased wastewater flows from improved WSS services could
                     worsen the situation. The engineering design includes decommissioning Yanamayo (to be converted into a pumping
                     station) and channeling flows to El Espinar. The new Puno WWTP will be built on El Espinar’s premises in Phase II, to
                     begin upon finalization of designs and bidding documents. To mitigate environmental risks during the transition,
                     EMSAPUNO is dredging the El Espinar stabilization ponds to restore nominal capacity, which is not part of the Project.
                     The rehabilitation of the WSS network in already served areas in Puno is contingent on dredging completion and
                     procurement for network expansion in unserved areas will only proceed after construction of the new WWTP begins.
                     PNSU is assessing interim pollution control measures to ensure Lake Titicaca is not adversely impacted in case of delays.
                     The Loan Agreement will include specific covenants to ensure that these measures and sequenced work are
                     implemented on schedule in Phase I.

                     Procurement. Agreement 25 will be implemented under three contracts: (i) Construction of water supply infrastructure
                     (intake, DWTP, pumping stations, mains, reservoirs), sewer mains, and pumping stations; (ii) Rehabilitation of existing
                     DMAs and wastewater networks; and (iii) Expansion of WSS networks to unserved areas. Contracts 1 and 2 will improve
                     continuity without increasing pollutant loads, while Contract 3 could increase both flow and pollution, reinforcing the
                     need to sequence works alongside El Espinar dredging and new WWTP construction.



                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     Environmental Assessment. Agreement 25 works have an Environmental License based on a semi detailed
                     Environmental and Social Impact Study (ESIAsd) approved by the MVCS in July 2021 and valid until July 2026. MAR pilot
                     activities will require a determination during design phase regarding the type of Environmental Assessment.

                     WWTP Design Studies in Puno. Phase I will finance the basic engineering design studies for WWTPs in Puno city, Moho,
                     Ilave, Juli, and Ayaviri. These facilities aim to expand treatment coverage in the Lake Titicaca basin, reduce pollutant
                     loads and improve water quality, restore aquatic ecosystems, and boost water availability for human and agricultural
                     use. The Final Studies (for the Investment Phase) and the Construction will occur under Phase II, subject to the approval
                     of the national authorities for the technical designs and the E/S management documents.




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Phase I of the MPA will be led by the Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation (MVCS), through the General
                     Directorate of Construction and Sanitation Programs and Projects (DGPPCS). DGPPCS will be responsible for designing
                     the MPA; providing overall technical oversight; preparing terms of reference (ToR) for governance activities under
                     Component 2 (C2); coordinating with benefiting entities (DGPRCS, DGPPCS, DGAA, SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO) and the
                     Project Implementation Units (PIUs); and leading monitoring and evaluation efforts, including the consolidation of
                     technical reports in line with loan agreement requirements.
                     Project implementation will be carried out by two PIUs. The Water Security Program for Lima and Callao (PASLC) will
                     implement infrastructure investments in the Lurín basin and studies and technical assistance activities to strengthen the




Public Disclosure
                     capacity of Lima’s water utility (SEDAPAL) to adopt circular economy principles for service delivery. The National Urban
                     Sanitation Program (PNSU) will be responsible for implementing all remaining governance-related activities under C2
                     (those involving MVCS directorates and EMSAPUNO), as well as engineering designs and infrastructure works in the
                     Lake Titicaca basin.
                     PASLC develops WSS projects within SEDAPAL’s service area. Once construction is completed, the infrastructure is
                     handed over to SEDAPAL for operation. While SEDAPAL has experience with Bank’s safeguards policies, neither PASLC
                     nor SEDAPAL have worked with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). Although SEDAPAL’s teams responsible
                     for operating the Julio C. Tello and José Galvez WWTPs and PASLC’s team in charge of implementing projects in the
                     Lurin area include staff specialized in environmental and occupational health and safety (OHS), they lack expertise in
                     social management. PASLC will therefore appoint environmental, social, and OHS specialists, who will be trained by the
                     WB E&S specialists in the ESF. The Project (Phase I) will concentrate on technical studies and pilot implementation
                     within the Lurin basin in close coordination with SEDAPAL. However, it is in Phase II that potential larger scale
                     interventions are anticipated, with SEDAPAL interactions expected to be relevant for construction and operations.
                     Arrangements for Phase II delivery are not describe in detail within the scope of this project (Phase I), but will be
                     addressed in Phase II.
                     PNSU has experience managing Bank-financed projects. Since 2019, it has been implementing the “Modernization of
                     Water Supply and Sanitation Services” (P157043), a project involving large-scale works under Bank’s safeguards policies.
                     This project has been extended and is currently expected to close in December 2025. According to the latest supervision
                     mission, the PIU's performance in environmental, and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) aspects is satisfactory,
                     reflecting a solid and well trained management team that includes an environmental specialists and an OHS
                     professional. This team has also acquired experience in: (i) preparing bidding documents applying World Bank
                     procedures; (ii) incorporating appropriate procedures for works supervision, including training for contractors and


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     supervision companies, regular site inspections, evaluation and updating of matrices and measures to manage OHS
                     risks; (iii) implementing World Bank incident response procedures; and (iv) managing and reporting for the proper
                     closure of works as they come to an end.
                     However, the Social Safeguard Performance is currently rated as “Unsatisfactory”, due to certain delays and limitations
                     in implementing three Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), which, because of such delays, have had consequences for the
                     implementation of two Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) in two subprojects, despite the diligent efforts of the PIU’ Social
                     Team. These issues are essentially caused by the limitations and the lack of resources of Institutions other than the PIU
                     (the Water and Sanitation Service Provider, EPS by its Spanish acronym, and the local governments) which were
                     responsible for the acquisition of land and easements and appear to have limited capacity to provide these
                     compensations and to respond on time. This situation has been identified as a lesson learned, and for this MPA is being
                     addressed by creating an expenditure category under the Loan Agreement to cover the entire implementation of the
                     Resettlement Plans (“Land Expenditures”) from the side of the PIU.

                      In parallel, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) is financing a project in Juliaca focused on water and sanitation
                     infrastructure led by PNSU and implemented in collaboration with the local utility (SEDA Juliaca). The context and scope
                     of this project are very similar to the ones considered under the scope of the MPA for the city of Puno, and therefore it
                     will provide valuable lessons. As part of project preparation, the Bank and PNSU carried out a field visit to Juliaca, met
                     with local actors including the IDB’s PIU and utility officials and discussed about the importance of sequenced works to
                     ensure that no incremental environmental impact is caused to Lake Titicaca as a consequence of the projects.

                     MCVS has shown commitment and ability to manage environmental and social aspects of World Bank financed




Public Disclosure
                     operations, though currently, responsibilities are scattered across different teams. This will be resolved once PIUs are
                     operational, each of which will have an environmental and a social specialist with clear responsibilities. PNSU will also
                     include an EHS specialist.
                     While EMSAPUNO is not a PIU, it plays an important role in implementing ongoing maintenance activities aimed at
                     recovering treatment capacity at El Espinar WWTP. This is key to minimize project environmental risks while the new
                     Puno WWTP is designed, constructed and commissioned. These responsibilities will be formally included in the
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), with PNSU tasked with monitoring and supporting EMSAPUNO to
                     ensure adequate implementation.

                     Other institutions involved in the Project include Municipalities of Puno and of Villa Maria del Triunfo, which will also
                     participate in certain components and are key beneficiaries of project activities.
                     All institutions and directorates involved in project implementation -DGPRCS, DGPPCS, DGAA, SEDAPAL, EMSAPUNO-
                     and the PIUs will receive training on the Bank's ESF. This training will strengthen their ability to prepare TOR, develop
                     and apply E&S instruments (e.g., ESMPs), and to integrate these tools in procurement, implementation, and supervision
                     processes. Additional training will be provided during implementation, as needed. PIU’s E&S specialists will also be
                     responsible for cascading this training to contractors, consultants, and newly hired personnel. This permanent capacity-
                     building process and requirements will be reflected in the ESCP.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)




                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     The Project’s environmental risk rating is Substantial, primarily due to potential risks and impacts from infrastructure
                     activities under C1. Activities under subcomponents 1.3 and 1.4—covering analytical work and engineering designs—
                     will undergo environmental and social risk screening. This includes the review of Terms of Reference and deliverables
                     for wastewater reuse systems, two WWTPs, and associated WSS networks, which may pose risks such as pollution,
                     habitat disturbance, community health concerns, and temporary disruptions. The Project seeks to enhance E&S
                     conditions by upgrading wastewater management, water supply, and sanitation networks, but it also poses E&S
                     risks—especially during construction, the transition to the new treatment system (El Espinar and Puno WWTP), and
                     operations. The construction and rehabilitation works of the water supply and sanitation networks in Puno, as well as
                     the MAR pilot in the Lurín basin, may cause site-specific, temporary, and reversible impacts, with moderate
                     probability of major adverse effects on human health or the environment. Anticipated potential environmental risks
                     and impacts relate to: (i) Increase of pollutants’ concentration in Lake Titicaca, due to the expected increase of
                     wastewater flows and potential increase in pollutants loads collected in Puno city, and the limited treatment capacity
                     of El Espinar WWTP during the transition phase. This will be addressed through the design and operation of the new
                     Puno City WWTP, to be developed under phase II of the MPA. WSS network expansion works will not be bided until
                     the construction of the new treatment facility starts. (ii) Overall nuisances to the communities and health and safety
                     risks due to excavations, noise and vibration, dust, traffic congestion, waste, and visual disturbances; (iii) Sludge
                     Management. Sludge will be dredged from the treatment lagoons of the existing El Espinar WWTP before the start of
                     Agreement 25 construction to increase treatment capacity and minimize the project's environmental risks to Lake
                     Titicaca. While these activities are not part of the project, the dredged sludge must be properly managed and



Public Disclosure
                     disposed of. The potential impacts of this activity include increased odors, increased input of pollutants to the lake,
                     primarily through TSS, disruptions to local traffic during sludge transport, and soil and water contamination at the
                     sludge disposal site;(iv) aquatic and benthic habitat disturbance due to dredging as part of the new water intake in
                     the Titicaca lake; (v) No significant risks are foreseen from the implementation of the MAR pilot or from the
                     consulting work to be performed under components 1 and 2, which, on the contrary, will strengthen WSS
                     management. These risks are exacerbated by PNSU’s lack of experience managing E&S aspects under the Bank’s ESF,
                     and the reliance on the progress of phase II activities and on operation and maintenance works to be performed by
                     EMSAPUNO to improve the performance of El Espinar WWTP. However, these risks are mitigated by: (i) the fact that
                     EMSAPUNO is already performing dredging activities to recover treatment capacity; (ii) the phased approach adopted
                     for the procurement of Agreement 25 construction works; and (iii) the inclusion in the ESCP of performance
                     monitoring requirements for El Espinar WWTP and the obligation of implementing pre-identified complementary
                     mitigation measures (to be defined in the corresponding ESMP) if this performance is failing to met the expected
                     target. In the operational stage mainly positive impacts are expected, such as an improvement in the quality of life of
                     the population due to the increase in water supply and sewage coverage; a reduction in the existing levels of
                     contamination of natural water bodies and a reduction in odor levels for the population. Potentially negative impacts
                     would be associated with the generation of sludge from treatment and network maintenance. These will be
                     addressed in the S-ESIA.
                                                                                                                                   Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is considered Substantial based on the project scope, that include works under component 1 (in
                     Puno and Lurin) and technical assistance activities under component 2 (which could have a national scope), the


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     sensitiviy of the social context (mainly in Puno), and the potential need for land acquisition. The main social risks and
                     impacts that contribute to this rating include: (i) potential physical and economic displacement for the civil works
                     caused by the acquisition of land or the imposition of easements in Puno and/or Lurín; (ii) potential opposition from
                     local communities to the construction or improvement or expansion of wastewater treatment plants in Puno, or to
                     the use of reclaimed water for the aquifer recharge in Lurin; (iii) a high sensitivity of the social and political context in
                     Puno with high levels of citizen participation and mobilization capacity, recent experiences of social conflicts with the
                     government, and high urgence/interest for the project; (iv) misinformation activities from the local media and press in
                     Puno; (v) presence of indigenous peoples in 03 (of 05) Wastewater Treatment Plants in Puno (Ayaviri, Juli and Moho)
                     for which the Project will finance the engineering designs and the social and environmental studies (works would be
                     executed in phase II); (vi) regular impacts associated to the execution of works which can affect the relationship with
                     local communities, such as noise, dust, odors and traffic disruptions; (vii) risks of non-compliance with labor issues
                     covered by ESS2, including hiring modalities of project workers and occupational health and safety risks; (viii)
                     potential exclusion of vulnerable groups and water users from project benefits; (ix) low institutional capacity of
                     certain EPSs (EMSAPUNO) and Puno local government; (x) the national scope of the activities under C2 (Governance).


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      The E&S due diligence for this project consited in the review of technical, environmental, health, safety and social



Public Disclosure
                      documentation submitted by the Borrower, as well as in the analysis of first-hand information gathered during the
                      site visits performed to Puno and Lurin. The documents reviewed included a category II semi-detailed Environmental
                      Impact Assessment (EIAsd), approved in 2021 for the works to be performed under Agreement 25. As part of the
                      preparation, the Bank, together with the Borrower, conducted an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), which
                      included a gap analysis of the EIAsd. Gaps and risks identified include: (i) If works do not start by July 2026, the
                      environmental license will expire and a new license would have to be requested. (ii) The EIAsd does not consider
                      critical habitats for the definition of the area of influence and impacts. (iii) Impacts and risks related to ecosystem
                      services provided by the lake are not analyzed. (iv) The approved Environmental License does not assess risks
                      associated to wastewater treatment. Key considerations for the ESCP are: (i) An Environmental and Social
                      Supplementary Impact Assessment (ESIA-S) must be carried out to fill the gaps identified in the Environmental and
                      Social assessment (ESA). The ESA includes the ToR for the development of this supplementary study. (ii) El Espinar
                      WWTP is not considered an associated facility as it does not meet applicable criteria. However, the ESCP includes
                      provisions regarding maintenance activities currently been performed by EMSAPUNO to recover the treatment
                      capacity and to monitor the performance of El Espinar WWTP. While these activities will not allow for the treatment
                      facility to comply with applicable discharge standards, they are expected to prevent any incremental environmental
                      impacts associated to the implementation of the Project while the new Puno WWTP is constructed. (iii) The ESCP
                      includes a condition to ensure the timely design and development of the new Puno WWTP by PNSU, according to
                      which the construction should start before the works for the expansion of the WSS network to currently unserved
                      areas of the city of Puno. In addition to the risks described in section A.1, the infrastructure works in Puno for the
                      expansion and rehabilitation of the water supply and sanitation systems under Agreement 25 (C1), will also entail
                      risks and impacts typically associated with construction activities such as: (i) health and safety of the community and


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                         Page 8 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      workers due to emissions of particulate matter, odors, combustion gases, noise, vehicular traffic and risks inherent to
                      the work, such as those from the excavation of trenches; (ii) temporary impacts on economic activities, mainly due to
                      interventions in roads and public spaces; (iii) risks of social exclusion and disproportionate impacts on vulnerable
                      communities; (iv) potential needed for permanent or temporary land taking activities for the development of
                      infrastructure, particularly reservoirs. Specific gaps identified in the Environmental Assessment are related to:
                      wastewater treatment, cumulative impact assessment, environmental and social baseline, GHG estimation, labor
                      management, grievance and complaint procedures, stakeholder engagement, monitoring and supervision, OHS and
                      training. The supplementary ESIA will address these gaps, considering pre-construction, construction and operation
                      phases, and the ESCP will require that this instrument is finalized and disclosed prior to the bidding process for the
                      works. Both the Espinar and the planned Puno WWTPs were assessed to determine if they qualify as Associated
                      Facilities under the ESF. The analysis concluded that the ongoing interventions at the Espinar WWTP do not meet the
                      definition. While Espinar could potentially serve the Project in case of delays in the construction of the new Puno
                      WWTP, the plant was not developed contemporaneously with the Project and was not constructed nor expanded
                      because of the Project. In contrast, the new Puno WWTP, that will be build in Phase II, will treat effluents generated
                      by the Project, is planned to be implemented in parallel with the works under Agreement 25; and is essential for the
                      viability of the Project’s current design. Since the basic design of the Puno WWTP-including its ESA-will be developed
                      under Phase I, the ESCP will include a commitment to ensure the ESA meets ESF requirements. A similar commitment
                      will be included in the ESCP regarding the ESA to be developed for the other six WWTP (which basic design and
                      bidding documents will be prepared under phase I of the MPA) and for the assessment of the MAR pilot and the
                      water reuse scheme for park irrigation in Villamaria del Triunfo that will be designed in this phase. The ESCP will also
                      require the review of the ToRs to be developed for the analytical work and technical assistance activities included




Public Disclosure
                      under Component 2 of the Project, in order to assess potential environmental and social risks and impacts, and the
                      eventual need to develop and adopt instruments to comply with ESF regulations.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      The PIU, with the support of the Bank, has prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that applies to all project
                      activities. The SEP incorporates differentiated participatory mechanisms based on project progress, type of
                      intervention, and geographical location. A draft of the SEP will be publicly disclosed on the Borrower’s website and
                      the Bank’s external portal prior to appraisal, and the final version will be disclosed no later than 60 days after project
                      effectiveness. In Phase 1 of the MPA, under C.1.1., the project will finance infrastructure interventions works for the
                      expansion and rehabilitation or water supply and sewerage system (within the city of Puno) and technical designs for
                      05 WWTPs (in different provinces of the Department of Puno). Additionally, under C.1.2. the project will finance the
                      technical designs of the WWTPs in Lurin (Julio C. Tello and José Gálvez), and C.1.4. the studies and execution of works
                      for a Pilot Project to Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR) in Lurín River Basin, and also the technical studies for the
                      extension and rehabilitation of the drinking water supply and sewer network of the Pachacamac district. Finally,
                      under C2, the project will finance Technical Assistance activities, with national scope. The SEP identifies stakeholders
                      for each project component, reviews previous participatory processes developed and outlines actions to share
                      project information, mitigate potential social conflicts or misunderstandings about project impacts or benefits and
                      gather feedback. The SEP also includes: (i) a stakeholder identification and analysis (including project affected-parties
                      and other interested parties); (ii) a summary of the consultations performed, including the results or conclusions of
                      these processes; (iii) a strategy on how information disclosure will take place throughout the project; (iv) the
                      methodologies that will be implemented to engage with stakeholders; (v) a proposed timeframe for engagement


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                       Page 9 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      throughout the project cycle; (vi) who will be responsible for this engagement; (vii) an estimated budget and a
                      timeline; and (viii) a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The most advanced activities fall under Component C.1.1.
                      (excluding the five WWTPs) for which technical studies and the ESIA (known also as EIAsd) have been finished,
                      including consultations with different stakeholders. However, during the review of the participatory processes
                      described in the ESIA, the Bank identified documentation gaps in the ESIA, specifically, insuficient registers of the
                      stakeholders interventions and feedback (questions, comments, concerns, and responses). To address this, the SEP
                      includes new participatory processes that will be carried out when the technical studies and the ESIA are updated. It
                      also identifies key stakeholders in Puno and proposes complementary meaningful consultations, ensuring
                      participation is properly documented. Translation into Quechua or Aymara will be available, upon request.
                      Additionally, the SEP includes provisions for stakeholder engagement for the preparation of engineering designs, and
                      related ESIAs/ESMPs, for the five WWTPs in Puno, Moho, Ilave, Juli, and Ayaviri. During the preparation of these
                      studies, participatory processes will be implemented in line with both with ESS 10 (meaningful consultation) and ESS
                      7 for Indigenous Peoples communities whose territories are within the project's area of influence (i.e., for the
                      Quellahuyo Pomaoca community in Moho, the Huaquina-Sapijicani in Juli and the Umasuyo in Ayaviri). Additionally,
                      during the World Bank's preparatory missions, the existence of a Supervisory Committee in the city of Puno for this
                      project was noted. The committee represents local commuities throughout the city of Puno and is charged with
                      facilitating consultations concerning Agreement 25 activities. The committee members expressed the support to the
                      project activities and the urgency of their implementation since a significant part of the population still lacks access to
                      water services and has faced repeated delays. Activities under C.1.2. and C.1.4. in Lurín basin and Pachacamac
                      district, are still in the early planning phase, with no studies yet conducted. Nevertheless, the SEP outlines
                      participatory mechanisms for these activities. Similarly, activities under Component C.2 (Governance) will also involve




Public Disclosure
                      consultations and participatory processes. The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), included in the SEP, requires: (i)
                      different ways in which users can submit their grievances (in person, by phone, by whats app, by e-mail, by a web
                      platform, and by the use of the social media, among other channels); (ii) a registry of the grievances; (iii) procedures
                      stating the time users can expect to receive an acknowledgement or a response about the resolution of their
                      grievances; (iv) an appeals process to which unsatisfied grievances may be referred when resolution of a grievance
                      has not been achieved. Additionally, the SEP includes operational and budgetary arrangements as well as a schedule
                      of activities.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      The project will rely on the borrower framework and will not prepare an LMP, since the national labor regulation is
                      materially consistent with the objectives of this ESS2. The project will involve “direct workers” (in the PIUs and other
                      implementation agencies), “contracted workers” and “primary supply workers”. It is not anticipated the participation
                      of “community workers”. The main risks identified include: (i) “disguised employment” (if project workers are hired
                      without the right type of contract that they should be according to the natioanl law and the nature of the work they
                      will perform, hiding the real employment relationship under civil contracts, which would have the effect of depriving
                      project workers from the benefits and the protections they are due under national law and ESS2); (ii) risks that
                      project workers will not receive a written copy of their employment contracts, as well as clear and understandable
                      information and documentation on the terms and conditions of employment, working hours, wages, overtime,
                      remuneration, and benefits; (iii) risks of discrimimation or barriers of access to employment opportunities mainly for
                      vulnerable people; (iv) risks of OHS during the implementation of civil works and operation of WWTPs; (v) risks of
                      SEA/SH risks between project workers during the execution of works, the preparation of studies or the supervision or


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      monitoring activities; (vi) risks that the project will not have a dedicated GRM for labor issues, including SEA/SH; (vii)
                      minimal risks of forced labor or child labor. To address theses potential risks, specific measures will be indicated in
                      the ESCP and reflected in the ESIA, including: (i) provisions to avoid disguised employment or at least to assure that
                      project workers will receive the same protections and benefits they should under this ESS2 and the national law; (ii)
                      specific measures to protect the workforce (including via minimum wage protections, an obligation to receive a
                      written copy of their contracts, and clear and understandable information about the terms and conditions of the
                      employment); (iii) provisions for non-discrimination and equal opportunities; (iv) specific measures to promote health
                      and safety in the workplace will be included in the ESIAs and ESMPs, using the WBG Environmental, Health, and
                      Safety (EHS) Guidelines, and other national regulations as needed; (v) the preparation and implementation of
                      Occupational Health and Safety Management Plans (OHSMPs, or PGSSTs in Spanish) for each civil works component
                      of the Project where such risks are relevant, to assess and manage the occupational health and safety risks and
                      impacts appropriately; (vi) measures to prevent and address cases of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual
                      harassment (SH) in the workplace including a dedicated GRM and a Code of conduct; (vii) worker’s organizations and
                      freedom of association, occupational health and safety for workers; (viii) prohibition of child labor and forced labor in
                      the ESCP. Additionally, the Project will have a specific area of Human Resources responsible for ensuring compliance
                      with national labor regulations and managing a separate grievance redress mechanism for direct workers. The Labor
                      GRM will include special considerations for vulnerable workers (such as women, people with disabilities, migrant
                      workers, indigenous peoples, and Afro-descendants). The Project will also adopt a “Worker’s Code of Conduct”
                      outlining the obligations of all project workers, adherence to which will be a condition of their employment. This
                      Code will explicitly address issues of SEA/SH and include provisions to prevent discrimination, as well as a dedicated
                      grievance mechanism (GM) for Project workers. The ESCP will include provisions requiring contractors and sub-




Public Disclosure
                      contractors to effectively manage labor-related risks and comply with national labor regulations, including the
                      establishment of a grievance mechanism, consistent with ESS2.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      C1 includes the construction of a new water intake on Lake Titicaca to feed the rehabilitated and expanded potable
                      water networks. The construction of this subaquatic intake, located approximately 100m away from the shoreline,
                      will require the performance of dredging activities. The gap analysis carried out within the Environmental and Social
                      Assessment has identified the following gaps related to ESS3, all of which will be addressed in the S-ESIA: (i) The EIAsd
                      does not analyze the impact on water sources in relation to supply. The S-ESIA will evaluate the risk of water scarcity,
                      considering the historical decline in water levels in Lake Titicaca, which is expected to be the project's primary water
                      source. (ii) It does not specifically cover the E&S impacts of the construction of the underwater intake at the bottom
                      of Lake Titicaca, nor the installation of the adduction pipeline to the lake's coast, which requires dredging. (iii) No
                      measures are proposed to promote the rational use of water during the construction and operational phases of the
                      project. However, the rehabilitation of the drinking supply network that will be implemented under the Project will
                      contribute to significantly reduce technical water losses in the distribution system. Non-revenue water levels are
                      expected to decrease from the current rate of 44% to 25%. (iv) The EIAsd does not evaluate the cumulative impacts of
                      water use on local communities, other users, or the surrounding environment. (v) Although works under Agreement
                      25 include the expansion of the wastewater collection system, The EIAsd does not look into wastewater treatment
                      issues, and it does not consider the construction of the new Puno WWTP nor the ongoing major maintenance
                      activities to recover treatment capacity of the Espinar WWTP. As a result, effluents may be directed to the existing
                      plant and it may be unable to treat the increased pollutant loads, potentially exacerbating pollution in Lake Titicaca.


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      As explained above, the ESCP contemplates measures to manage this risk, such as the acceleration of the
                      construction of the Puno WWTP, maintenance works to improve the performance of El Espinar WWTP, monitoring of
                      the performance of El Espinar, and phasing of network expansion and rehabilitation works to accommodate to actual
                      improvements of wastewater treatment capacity. (vi) The EIAsd does not include an estimate of the project's GHG
                      emissions. (vii) The project may involve the removal and demolition of asbestos-cement pipes in the distribution
                      network; however, the EIA-sd does not estimate the quantity of this material or propose measures for its safe
                      handling, risk management, and final disposal. The environmental impacts from the discharge of treated effluents will
                      be mitigated through the new Puno WWTP which will be constructed in the premises where the Espinar WWTP is
                      located. To mitigate the risk associated with potential delays in the construction of this WWTP, the contract for the
                      implementation of the network expansion works (3rd package) will only be awarded after the construction of the
                      Puno WWTP has started. Similarly, the start of the works for the expansion of bulk water supply capacity and the
                      rehabilitation of the WSS network in served areas will be contingent on the completion of dredging activities
                      currently under implementation by EMSAPUNO to recover the treatment capacity of El Espinar WWTP. This will
                      ensure that project activities in Puno do not result in any incremental environmental impact associated with the
                      implementation of the Project. Additional complementary preventive measures to ensure appropriate O&M of the
                      treatment facility and monitoring of effluent discharges will be established in the corresponding ESMPs, as
                      established in the ESCP. Overall, the Project aims to reduce methane and nitrous oxide fugitive emissions from onsite
                      sanitation systems by enhancing access to improved sanitation solutions and implementing activities to change
                      community behavior. Water supply investments will further enhance water use efficiency and minimize specific
                      energy consumption, contributing to climate change mitigation by lowering (commercial and operational) NRW
                      losses, improving energy efficiency in operations, and reducing GHG emissions related to energy use and water




Public Disclosure
                      tanker usage. Due to this, the project is expected to achieve emission reductions of 59,797 tCO2eq/yr over 20 years,
                      from 158,365 tCO2e in the baseline to 98,838 tCO2e in the project scenario. The project will support the climate
                      adaptation of WSS service delivery in the Lake Titicaca and Lurin basins, and elsewhere through activities aimed at
                      creating and enabling governance environment for the adoption of circular economy principles in service delivery at
                      national scale. These principles are closely related to the ESS3 aim of resource efficiency by considering the
                      promotion of water reuse for the diversification of water sources, rehabilitation and expansion of drinking water
                      supply capacity, reduction of technical water losses through NRW reduction, optimization of water use including
                      under projected climate change scenarios, and recovery of aquifer levels adopting MAR practices and reducing
                      pollution and pressure on natural water bodies. The reduction of infiltration due to the rehabilitation and expansion
                      of sewer networks will also contribute to increasing resilience against floods of wastewater collection and treatment
                      services and improve public health outcomes. On the other hand, wastewater reuse will strengthen drought
                      resilience by increasing water availability while reducing reliance on freshwater. C1 infrastructure works will require
                      water and construction materials (wood, stone materials for fill and concrete, concrete, asphalt, and iron for
                      construction), generating debris and solid and liquid waste. The complementary ESIA for Agreement 25 works will
                      quantify the expected consumption of natural resources, and will establish measures for their rational use. MAR
                      activities could involve pollution of the aquifer Lurin aquifer. As established in the ESCP, an environmental
                      assessment will be performed as part of the design of the MAR pilot to characterize this risk and identify preventive
                      and mitigation measures to be adopted during implementation. Although OP 7.50 Operations on International
                      Waterways is triggered, the Program is not expected to cause any significant impact on Lake Titicaca nor any other
                      international waterway. Indeed, the MPA is expected to have positive social and environmental benefits, as it will




                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      provide inclusive and resilient access to safely managed drinking water supply and sanitation services under phase I
                      and will improve wastewater treatment capacity and reduce pollutant discharges into the lake under phase II.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      Infrastructure works under Agreement 25 in Puno—including the expansion and rehabilitation of water and
                      sanitation networks, construction of a new water intake in Lake Titicaca, and various pumping stations—are expected
                      to increase exposure of nearby communities to risks such as traffic disruptions, open ditches, dust, noise, and
                      potential road accidents. While the semi-detailed EIA (EIAsd) identifies temporary impacts on traffic and proposes a
                      traffic diversion plan, it does not sufficiently assess health and safety risks for vulnerable groups such as children, the
                      elderly, and persons with disabilities. These gaps will be addressed through the preparation of a supplementary
                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (S-ESIA), which will include tailored mitigation measures following the
                      mitigation hierarchy, with specific attention to vulnerable populations. In addition, the Project may generate adverse
                      impacts on ecosystem services critical to community health and safety—particularly those related to the provision
                      and regulation of water—risks that could be exacerbated by climate change. These include alterations in water
                      quality and availability, which may affect both human health and livelihoods. The S-ESIA for Agreement 25 will also
                      assess these potential impacts and propose corresponding mitigation measures. The Project will ensure that
                      emergency response protocols are in place and that design and construction practices incorporate climate resilience
                      and community safety considerations, in line with the objectives of ESS4. No large labor influx and armed security
                      guards are expected, although there might be some risks of SEA/SH and other inappropriate behavior from workers,
                      that could affect local communities. Risk management measures concerning community health and safety (CHS),
                      including SEA/SH, will be included in the supplementary ESIA/ESMP that will be finalized before the bidding process



Public Disclosure
                      begins as provided for in the ESCP. CHS and SEA/SH risks will be assessed in the ESIAs for the 7 WWTPs, and in the
                      equivalent environmental instrument for the MAR pilot (after its definition). For the WWTPs, this will include
                      measures to manage CHS risks from sludge storage, transport, and reuse/disposal; and from the technical side, the
                      WWTPs design will include odor control equipment (bio-filters). A strong communication and engagement plan is
                      expected to be developed to address the phasing of the network works in Puno city. It is expected the works will
                      restrict accessibility for cars, pedestrians, vulnerable groups, including access to local businesses and houses/garages.
                      Among the ESMPs an Emergency Response Plan, with focus on communities associated with the Project footprint,
                      will be developed and put in place during project implementation. Project ESS4 risks will be assessed during project
                      preparation and risk management measures included in the respective instruments, including the ESCP and in site-
                      specific plans and contracts.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      The project may require the acquisition of land and could cause physical and economic displacement. Although the
                      areas needed for the works under C.1.1. in Puno (excluding the five WWTPs), are already acquired and payed,
                      because this is a condition for the local government to receive financing from the national investment system
                      (INVIERTE Peru System), it is likely that some land already acquired for the works some years ago, would be occupied
                      by people at the moment of the execution of works, and they should be relocated. Additionally, it is also possible that
                      certain changes in the design will arise during project implementation, resulting in new requirements for land
                      acquisition. On this regard, during the Bank due diligence, in the last field visit, were the opinion of the technical
                      specialists in EMSA-Puno and the Municipality of Puno that there should be a change at least in one of the accesses to
                      a reservoir, and this will result in a new requirement for land acquisition, with the possibility of expropriation and


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                       Page 13 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      physical and economic displacement. If such need is confirmed, the PIU will need to prepare a Resettlement Plan, in
                      accordance with this ESS 5. Additionally, there could be another need to acquire land in Lurín, under C.1.4., for the
                      pilot project to recharge aquifers (MAR) near the Cieneguilla WWTP, which requires a 750-900 m² site, because the
                      current WWTP does not have such space available. Therefore, it will be necessary to acquire land for these purposes.
                      If the acquisition is made in a willing buyer and willing seller situation, it would not be necessary to prepare a
                      Resettlement Plan under the requirements of ESS 5, but a report would be required to certify that the acquisition was
                      made under those terms (without the possibility of expropriation and with freedom to buy and sell). However, if the
                      acquisition is obtained through expropriation, or with the possibility of expropriation, and the acquisition becomes
                      “involuntary” (because the owner cannot refuse) the PIU or the implementing agency should prepare a Resettlement
                      Plan, in accordance with the ESS 5. Finally it is important to consider that there are certain gaps between ESS5 and
                      the national regulation. To cover such gaps, specific measures will be included in the ESCP, that include: (i) Cash
                      compensation payments at replacement cost (as defined in ESS5); (ii) payments done before land taking; (iii) the
                      preparation of Resettlement Plans before the bidding processes; (iv) compensations offer to all affected persons, as
                      defined in ESS5, including affected persons who do not have formal legal rights to land or assets, but have a claim to
                      land or assets that is recognized or recognizable under national law; (v) specific measures for assistance to vulnerable
                      people; and (vi) avoid forced eviction, among other measures. If the relocation of “occupants” is needed, a
                      Resettlement Plan must be prepared in accordance with ESS 5 of the ESF, which, among other things, avoids forced
                      eviction as much as possible, provides prior notification and dialogue processes with occupants, and considers at least
                      support measures for the relocation of such persons, if applicable. In cases where land acquisition has already taken
                      place, a “due diligence” report must be prepared demonstrating that such acquisition has been carried out in
                      accordance with the provisions of ESS 5 (mainly for Agreement 25). In order to ensure that the project has sufficient




Public Disclosure
                      and timely resources to guarantee the free availability of the affected areas on the necessary dates and in compliance
                      with EAS 5 of the MAS of the WB, it is recommended that the Loan Agreement establish an “Expenditure Category”
                      for the acquisition of land and the implementation of the project's Resettlement Plans.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      Most of the works will be carried out primarily in urban areas, and therefore they are not expected to cause
                      significant impacts on biodiversity. However, some of the infrastructure to be developed under Agreement 25 will be
                      located in the buffer zone of the Lake Tititaca National Reserve and in the Lake Titicaca itself (intake). For this reason,
                      the National Parks Authority (SERNANP) reviewed the EIAsd developed for Agreement 25 works, and has granted is in
                      principle non-objection to the works to be implemented in the buffer zone. However, the gap analysis carried out as
                      part of the ESA identified the following gaps: (i) The EIAsd did not assess cumulative impacts related to the discharge
                      of treated effluents in Lake Titicaca and the potential impacts on endangered species, nor did it include a Biodiversity
                      Action Plan (BAP). Both the assessment of the impacts on biodiversity due to the discharge of treated effluents, and
                      the preparation of the BAP will be addressed in the Environmental Assessment to be performed for the Puno WWTP.
                      It can not be addressed through the S-ESIA as the information on the effluent to be discharged will only become
                      available with the technical studies and basic engineering designs that will be developed under the Project for the
                      WWTP. (ii) The potential impacts on biodiversity resulting from the new infrastructures to be constructed in the
                      buffer zone (reservoir, pumping station, and intake), were not assessed in the EIAsd. These impacts will be addressed
                      in the S-ESIA, which will be prepared and submitted to the WB for its No Objection prior to the contracting of the
                      works of Agreement 25. (iii) Approximately 1.8 ha will cleared to install new infrastructures under Agreement 25. Of


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      these, 0.33 ha are within the boundaries of the Titicaca National Reserve. However, these areas have been previously
                      disturbed by agriculture activities and its vegetation mostly consist of non-endangered species (Stipa ichu and
                      Distichlis sp Phil). A more detailed assessment will be conducted in the S-ESIA. (iv) The EIAsd does not specify the
                      compensation for these vegetation clearing activities, nor does it specify the species to be used for compensation
                      and/or landscaping, as required under this ESS. This will also be addressed in the S-ESIA. The seven WWTPs to be
                      designed under the Project will adopt proven technologies that can guarantee compliance with the discharge
                      standards, which would allow for low risks to natural water bodies. For the five Lake Titicaca WWTPs, the risks of
                      nutrient input and lake eutrophication will be considered, and measures to prevent and mitigate these risks will be
                      established in the design and environmental management instruments to be developed under the Project to be
                      implemented in phase II of the MPA. This risk will be assessed within the instruments of each WWTP (ESMP).
                      Environmental risks associated to the proposed MAR pilot will be further assessed once the design is completed,
                      determining potential impacts to vegetation and management instruments/plans required. During project
                      preparation compensation requirements as well as compensation sites will be determined if needed, including
                      measures for the monitoring and maintenance of compensation zones. The design of the water reuse schemes to be
                      developed in Villa Maria del Triunfo for parks irrigation will also adopt the requirements of this ESS if determined
                      relevant.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Indigenous Peoples have been identified within the area of influence of three (03) of the five (05) Wastewater
                      Treatment Plants (WWTPs) considered under C.1.1. (iv) – Infrastructure, in Puno. These communities are: the



Public Disclosure
                      Quellahuyo Pomaoca community in the WWTP of Moho, the Huaquina-Sapijicani community in the WWTP of Juli, and
                      the Umasuyo community in the WWTP of Ayaviri. Since the scope of this component in the current Phase 1, is only to
                      finance the engineering designs for the facilities of the WWTPs, at Pre-Investment level, and considering that the
                      Final Studies and the execution of works will be implemented in Phase 2, an Indigenous Peoples Plan will not be
                      required at this stage. However, the mentioned IPs will be consulted during the preparation of these pre-investment
                      studies, in a manner consistent with this ESS7, including the disclosure of information and meaningful consultations,
                      in a culturally appropriate and gender inclusive manner. The specific measures for this process, will be indicated in
                      the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and specific obligations will be included in the ESCP. Additionally, the
                      technical assistance activities considered under C.2. Governance, will include explicit provisions for the identification
                      and assessment of risks and potential impacts on Indigenous Peoples at national level, as well as requirements for
                      culturally appropriate engagement strategies throughout the planning and implementation stages. Finally, no other
                      IPs are present in the areas of the other Project Components (like the Expansion and rehabilitation of the water
                      supply and sewage systems in Puno City, and the Lurín River Basin, in Lima).

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The standard is relevant and chance find procedures will be reflected in the ESCP and site-specific ESMPs. The site-
                      specific ESMPs will also include any other mitigation measure identified during subproject design. This is particularly
                      relevant for the Julio C. Tello WWTP in Lurin, which is adjacent to the Archaeological Sanctuary of Pachacamac and is
                      within its buffer zone. This site forms part of the Cultural Heritage of the Nation and is administered by the Ministry
                      of Culture (MC). Broadly there are 3 types of heritage classifications: cultural, administered by the MC; documentary,
                      administered by the National Library; and natura,l administered by the National Parks Authority (SERNANP). The


                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      Pachacamac site has a Management Plan which was approved by Supreme Decree 004-2014-MC. Current protection
                      measures and plans for this site will be assessed during preparation of the designs of the Julio C. Tello WWTP, in
                      consultation with the MC. A Cultural Heritage Management Plan will be prepared or updated, as needed. Lake
                      Titicaca is included in the indicative list of the World Heritage of the UNESCO Convention of 1972 as a mixed site
                      under the criteria M ii, iii, v, vi, x. This means that the site has both cultural and natural value. It meets the criteria of
                      exhibiting an important exchange of human values, providing exceptional testimony to a cultural tradition, being an
                      example of human interaction with the environment, being associated with events or traditions of universal
                      significance, and containing important natural habitats for the conservation of biological diversity. The recognition as
                      a World Heritage site helps to promote sustainable activities and conservation efforts, and brings international
                      attention and support for initiatives aimed at protecting the lake from environmental challenges such as pollution
                      and climate change.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                       Not Currently Relevant

                      This is standard is not currently due to the nature and scope of the MPA.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                              Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                        No




Public Disclosure
                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               In Part
                       The Project will partially use the Borrower’s Environmental and Social (E&S) Framework, specifically for ESS2 – Labor
                       and Working Conditions, as Peru’s national labor legislation is materially consistent with the objectives of this
                       standard, although there are some minor gaps in implementation or practical application (cfr. World Bank: Peru -
                       Evaluación General del Marco Legal, Institucional y de Políticas para la Gestión Ambiental y Social : Resumen
                       (Spanish). Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group. In:
                       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099354306262577151). Accordingly, the Project will not prepare a
                       standalone Labor Management Procedure (LMP), but will rely on the national legal framework to regulate aspects
                       such as employment terms and OHS, but specific provisions and measures to address identified gaps and risks (such as
                       disguised employment, discrimination, and SEA/SH risks in the workplace and a dedicated GRM for labor issues), will
                       be incorporated into the ESCP and the ESIA, to ensure full alignment with ESS2.

                       For the remaining Environmental and Social Standards, the Borrower’s framework will not be used, as the Bank’s due
                       diligence identified significant gaps compared to the ESF. These include insufficient cumulative impact assessment,
                       limited documentation of stakeholder engagement processes, lack of biodiversity action planning, and gaps in labor
                       risk management outside the direct scope of ESS2. Given these gaps and the limited ESF implementation experience
                       of key entities such as PASLC and SEDAPAL, the Project will rely on World Bank-led instruments—such as the ESCP,
                       SEP, and supplementary ESIA—to ensure compliance with the ESF and the effective management of environmental
                       and social risks.



                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                          Page 16 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)




                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                            No
                       Not applicable.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The following instruments have been prepared and disclosed:
                     (i)       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).
                     (ii)      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
                     (iii)     Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) of the works of Agreement 25 (Puno city WSS network
                     rehabilitation and expansion works).
                     (iv)      Guidelines for the preparation of the Supplementary Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (S-ESIA) for
                     Agreement 25 works.
                     During implementation and prior to initiating the bidding process, site-specific management plans will be prepared for
                     all infrastructure activities, including:
                     (v)       Supplementary Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (S-ESIA) for the Agreement 25 works.
                     (vi)      ESMPs for works to be implemented under phase I (MAR pilot and Puno city WSS network rehabilitation and
                     expansion works).



Public Disclosure
                     (vii)     Resettlement Action Plans (if needed).
                     (viii)    Archeological Management Plan for the Julio C. Tello WWTP to be designed under phase I
                     (ix)      Archeological “chance and find” procedures for works to be performed in the City of Puno.
                     (x)       Environmental Assessments for the 7 WWTPs to be designed under the Project. The ESA of the Puno WWTP will
                     include a biodiversity assessment for impacts on Lake Titicaca.
                     Through the bidding documents, contractors will be required to prepare Contractors ESMPs, including provisions for
                     stakeholder engagement and labor management and grievance mechanism. These shall be approved prior to the start
                     of construction activities.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Malva Baskovich                       Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                 mbaskovich@worldbank.org




                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                                Page 17 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      TTL Contact:            Zael Sanz Uriarte                  Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  zsanz@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Malva Baskovich, Zael Sanz Uriarte

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Fiorella Cristina Pino Luna

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                Piero Antonio Galluccio Chiri




Public Disclosure




                    Jul 05, 2025                                                                                             Page 18 of 18
