Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2025 | Report No: PIDPA00172




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                               EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                       South Africa Metro Trading
South Africa                                                P505813
                               AFRICA                                                     Services Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               31-Mar-2025                  30-Apr-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Nelson Mandela Bay
                               Metropolitan Municipality,
                               Buffalo City Metropolitan
                               Municipality, City of
The Republic of South          Tshwane, City of
Africa                         Johannesburg, eThekwini
                               Metropolitan Municipality,
                               Magaung Metropolitan
                               Municipality, City of Cape
                               Town, City of Ekurhuleni

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to improve the accountability, financial and operational performance of trading services
in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                   3,000.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           927.31
    Total Program Cost                                                                                        925.00


                                                                                                                    Page 1
           The World Bank
           South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


         Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                                                                2.31
       Total Financing                                                                                                                                927.31

       Financing Gap                                                                                                                                     0.00

    FINANCING
       Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                                               925.00
         World Bank Lending                                                                                                                           925.00
       Total Government Contribution                                                                                                                     2.31


    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
    Decision
    The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




    B. Introduction and Context
    Country Context
    1.     South Africa's eight metropolitan municipalities (metros) 1 are home to 22 million people across 30,000 square
    kilometers and generate 85% of the country’s economic activity. 67% of South Africans live in urban areas and this
    proportion is expected to increase to 77% by 2050. Recognized in the National Development Plan 2030, metros form the
    backbone of the national economy, providing essential services like water supply and sanitation (WSS), electricity, and
    solid waste management (SWM), collectively known as ‘trading services’, to both residents and industrial customers.
    Trading services are services for which consumption charges are levied and determined with the intention to make a
    surplus (profit) on the delivery of the services. Given the revenue-generating nature of WSS, electricity and solid waste
    trading services, they are referred to as ‘businesses’ in the South African context. Urbanization compounded with the
    enduring legacy of apartheid spatial planning have led to pronounced spatial challenges and inefficiencies. These include
    spatial injustice and inequality, where the urban poor tend to settle in peripheral urban areas far from social and
    economic opportunities.

    2.      South Africa's metros are facing a crisis in the provision of basic services, marked by declining safety, reliability,
    and accessibility. This significant decline over the last 10 years is due to several factors: i) low collection rates resulting
    in loss of revenues; ii) trading services departments not having full control of the revenue cycle (governance failures); iii)
    lack of financial transparency and suboptimal procurement processes; iv) lack of proper asset management; and v)
    underinvestment in infrastructure operations and maintenance. In many metros, the sustained deterioration of trading
    services infrastructure has been associated with poorly defined lines of accountability, with support services such as
    finance and collections, human resources, supply chain management, information technology, and fleet management,
    often fragmented under separate units (e.g., Executive Directors or Heads of Departments) of the metro administration.2

1
    Namely Buffalo City, City of Cape Town, City of Ekurhuleni, City of Johannesburg, City of Tshwane, eThekwini, Mangaung, and Nelson Mandela Bay.
2 WB, DBSA (2023) ‘Going beyond the Infrastructure Funding Gap: A South African Perspective’, World Bank and Development Bank of Southern Africa; Eberhard, R.

(2023) State of Water in Cities: The Case for Change. A report produced for National Treasury’s Cities Support Programme by the WB.


                                                                                                                                                           Page 2
         The World Bank
         South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 Urgent action is needed to reverse the rapid deterioration and increasing vulnerability to shocks of urban services and
 support the turnaround of trading services to improve the quality of life and resilience for metropolitan residents.

  Sectoral and Institutional Context
 3.      At the national level, the National Treasury (NT) is taking a leading role driving policy implementation and
 enhancing performance of metropolitical municipalities. For more than a decade, NT has been implementing an
 umbrella program through its Intergovernmental Relations (IGR) division to enable cities to address the inefficiencies in
 the built environment and drive meaningful change. The Cities Support Program (CSP) focuses on strengthening the
 intergovernmental environment for this agenda, improving performance and strengthening governance towards
 inclusive economic growth. Considering the multi-sectoral challenges that are faced by the metros, IGR coordinates and
 collaborates with government stakeholders across the three spheres of government.

 4.     There has been a significant decline in WSS services in most of South Africa’s metros. About 46% of households
 lack access to a safely managed water supply and 49% lack access to safely managed sanitation services.3 The largest
 share of the water gap to meet safety and reliability objectives, as per the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), is due
 to quality and reliability issues, while the largest sanitation gap is due to inadequately managed faecal sludge.4 Poor
 resource allocation and underinvestment in infrastructure over the past five to ten years have led to infrastructure
 collapse and unaffordable backlogs for maintenance and new projects. Among the key challenges faced by South Africa’s
 WSS are the high levels of non-revenue water (NRW), at 41% of the system input volume. About 85% of NRW is due to
 technical losses (leaks, bursts, illegal connections), and the remaining to commercial losses (low collection rates).5

 5.     The electricity sector in South Africa has been experiencing challenges for the last 10-15 years but, until recently,
 most of the attention has been focused on power generation given the supply deficit evidenced by persistent
 loadshedding6. Poor performance of the national utility (Eskom) in recent years severely impacted municipalities via
 frequent supply interruptions of bulk electricity (i.e. foregone revenue) and damage to municipal equipment due to
 recurrent power stoppages and restarts. This deterioration is a major concern given that revenue from electricity trading
 services is key for overall financial health of municipalities. Most metros indicate aging infrastructure as one of their main
 challenges. Although the institutional arrangements and performance in the metros differ widely, most metros have a
 challenge with available capital for refurbishment. The problem has become so acute that some metros only invest on
 refurbishment and replacement using grant funding. Metro’s electricity service departments are caught in a vicious cycle
 of underperformance, as poor financial viability and operational inefficiency lead to poor service delivery.

 6.     South Africa’s municipal solid waste sector faces critical challenges across institutional frameworks, waste
 generation, service coverage, and financing. The country generated an estimated 122 million tons of waste in 2022, yet
 integrated solid waste management systems remain elusive, with many landfills running out of airspace and failing
 compliance audits and licensing conditions. Uneven service coverage, particularly in underserved and informal areas,
 exacerbates inequality and public health risks. Financing remains a key obstacle, with waste services accounting for just
 4% of metro operating budgets. Many metros lack functional weighbridges, basic fleet and route optimization, and
 robust waste collection and disposal data systems (e.g. Management Information System) needed to monitor waste
 flows, ensure accurate disposal, and comply with national reporting requirements, such as Integrated Waste


3 World Bank (WB) and Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA), (2023). Going Beyond the Infrastructure Funding Gap: A South African Perspective; Stats SA

(Statistics South Africa), 2019. General Household Survey 2019. Statistical Release P0318. Stats SA, Pretoria.
4 WB and DBSA (2023), Ibid.
5 DWS, 2018. National Water and Sanitation Master Plan (NWSMP). DWS, Pretoria.
6 Load shedding is scheduled shutdown of electric power in a part or parts of a power-distribution system, generally to prevent the failure of the entire system when

the demand strains the capacity of the system.


                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
         The World Bank
         South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


 Management Plans. Poor service delivery and insufficient waste management has also led to stormwater drainage system
 blockages causing urban flooding.7

 PforR Program Scope
 7.      The Government Program (the Metro Trading Services Program, MTSP) will consist of a new targeted
 performance-based fiscal transfer (grant) to the Metros (the Metro Trading Services Grant, MTSG) that will be
 allocated to metros on achievement of specific results over the next six years. To participate in the Program, Metros
 will prepare sector-specific PIAPs for each trading service which adhere to prescribed templates developed by NT. The
 PIAPs will reflect clear targets as well as a six-year budget envelope for proposed activities to achieve those targets, with
 sources of funding identified (MTSG and other sources). Metros will obtain Council approval for each PIAP as a sign of
 stakeholder commitment and submit the plan to NT for national government technical review and approval in order to
 be considered eligible for inclusion in the program and receive grant allocation.

 8.      The PIAPs account for the heterogeneity of the metros’ institutional, technical, and financial circumstances and
 baselines. The PIAPs will consolidate recent efforts by metros outlining their reform interventions for water supply and
 sanitation, and electricity, respectively, which to date have included trading service turnaround strategies, institutional
 reforms roadmap, and business and investment plans. The proposed operation supports the MTSP and the
 implementation of PIAPs through the provision of funds to the metros with the aim of improving the accountability,
 financial and operational performance of the trading services. Given Metro capacity constraints, the scope of the MTSP
 preparation by NT and other stakeholders over 2024-25, and the “reform readiness” of the Metros, the WSS and
 Electricity TSs will, by default, enter the Program from inception (first wave of metro participation, 2025/26), whereas
 entry of the SWM TS will be delayed by a year.

 9.     Program Boundary and Result Areas: (a) Results Area 1: Improve Accountability Performance of Metro Trading
 Services. Reforming the Recipients institutional structures and governance processes to improve the management of the
 Trading Services businesses through establishment of a single point of management accountability for each trading
 service; (b) Results Area 2: Improve Financial Performance of Metro Trading Services, and (c) Results Area 3: Improve
 Operational Performance of Metro Trading Services- Water and Sanitation (WSS) operations, Electricity and Energy
 operations, and Solid Waste Management (SWM) operations.

 10.     The key financing mechanism within the MTSP is the new performance-based fiscal transfer, the MTSG, which
 comprises the PforR that the proposed operation will support. The PforR scope and boundary is identical to the
 Government program in all respects except the total financing envelope; the Government program includes central
 government financing as well as financing provided by metros from their own sources to support the implementation of
 PIAPs while the PforR comprises only the part financed by the central government. The Government program includes:
 (i) financing envelope of the MTSG (US$3 billion) to support implementation of PIAPs for water supply and sanitation,
 electricity, and solid waste services, and (ii) all Metro expenditure from their own revenues and borrowing across the
 three trading services to implement the PIAPs (currently projected at ~US$6 billion), for a total Government program size
 of ~US$9 billion. The PforR comprises only the Metro Trading Services Grant (US$3 billion), which includes IBRD financing
 (US$1 billion) and NT financing (US$2 billion). The PforR expenditures are all those under the MTSG, but do not include
 the MTSP expenditures financed by the Metros from their own resources. Based on an analysis of grant parameters
 compared to existing metro capex investment in the trading services, the funding level is assessed to be adequate to



7 Water Research Commission (2020). Detection and Removal of Illegal Discharges into Stormwater Systems. WRC Report No. TT 808/19. Water Research
Commission; Dube, K., Nhamo, G., & Chikodzi, D. (2022). Flooding trends and their impacts on coastal communities. GeoJournal, 87(Suppl 4), 453-468.


                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
      The World Bank
      South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


incentivize the metros to undertake reforms in governance and accountability, operational and financial performance
improvement.

11.     The Government expenditure on the Program is the expenditure on the MTSG. Consistent with South African
national and IMF accounting practices, this expenditure occurs at the time that the grant is disbursed by NT to the
metros. The MTSG funds received by the Metros will be used to support capital and operating expenditures in the Trading
Service sectors to achieve the results of the PIAP. Hence, the MTSG constitutes the Program expenditure framework. The
World Bank will monitor the disbursement of the MTSG to the metros to ensure that the Government’s expenditure on
the grant is greater than the amount disbursed by the Bank to finance the grant over the life of the operation. MTSG
funds will be appropriated by NT using the national budget framework, and the Division of Revenue Act (DORA) will
provide the legal and budgetary basis for the disbursement of the grant. The DORA, passed annually by Parliament as
part of the budget, generally includes a summary framework for conditional grants with annual and medium-term budget
envelopes and allocation and eligibility criteria for local governments. NT has prepared a conditional grant framework for
the MTSG for inclusion in the annual budget for FY2025/26 and medium-term expenditure framework for the next three
FYs. The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement issued by NT on October 30, 2024, describes GoSA’s intention to
introduce this new grant ‘to incentivize reforms to trading services and unlock additional infrastructure financing’.

12.     Permitted investments funded by the MTSG fully align with the Government Program and include technical
 assistance to support the consolidation, adoption, and implementation of the metro’s trading services Turnaround
 Strategies and accompanying institutional reform roadmaps, investment plans, and capacity building at both central
 and local levels. Permitted expenditures of the use of MTSG funds include capital investments and operations and
 maintenance costs incurred by metros to achieve their PIAP targets; these expenditures will be costed by Metros and
 included in their annual budgets. Permitted investments also consist of low-risk physical investments to support
 institutional strengthening across the TSs (e.g., rehabilitation or expansion of distribution networks, fleet optimization).
 However, investments that may cause significant adverse impact on the environment and/or nearby population as
 defined in the WB Policy and Directive on PforR Financing will be excluded. All works, goods, and consultancy contracts
 above the Operations Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) thresholds of US$25m will be excluded.

13.     Given the scale of the reform across these critical trading services, select development partners have expressed
an interest and willingness to support the MTSP through either financing or technical assistance. The Agence Française
De Développement (AFD) has confirmed willingness to provide co-financing in a first tranche of US$105 million (€100
million) through a Multi-Tranche Facility (MTF). AFD’s support to the MTSG is within the Program’s boundary, including
the same DLIs and with a focus on the electricity sector. Two additional tranches of €100 million are proposed to be
approved in 2026 and 2027. Similarly, firm interest in supporting the Program is expressed from the New Development
Bank (NDB) up to US$1 billion, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) up to US$500 million, and the Kreditanstalt
für Wiederaufbau (KfW) Development Bank up to US$219 million (€200 million). This financing has the potential to
leverage an additional US$78 million in grant funding from the above-mentioned development partners to provide
technical assistance for program implementation. The Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Cooperation (SECO), who
have supported the CSP for over a decade, have indicated interest in providing technical assistance to MTSP with a
specific emphasis on the institutional and infrastructure thematic areas of the Program. The WBG - including International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) - is uniquely positioned to support the GoSA reform, including enhancing the
potential role of the private sector.




                                                                                                                        Page 5
      The World Bank
      South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
Program Development Objective(s)

The development objective is to improve the accountability, operational and financial performance of trading services
in South Africa’s metropolitan municipalities.

14. The following outcome indicators will be used to measure the achievement of the PDO:
   • PDO Indicator #1: Number of metros with improved accountability, financial and operational performance in
      water and sanitation services.
   • PDO Indicator #2: Number of metros with improved accountability, financial and operational performance in
      electricity services.
   • PDO Indicator #3: Number of metros with improved accountability, financial and operational performance in
      solid waste management services.

D. Environmental and Social Effects
15.      The environmental and social risk rating is considered Substantial. While the exact details of the activities which
require physical interventions and supported will only be known during implementation, it is anticipated that the
activities will largely take place at existing facilities, therefore the environmental and social impacts and risks will be site
specific, medium to short term in duration and not likely to lead to significant adverse direct, indirect, or cumulative
impacts to human health or the environment. There is a minor risk of some resettlement associated with the water
sector infrastructure scheduled for expansion or re-habilitation. However, this can be avoided by utilizing existing
wayleaves. Some risk to informal settlements may occur but the South African Prevention of Illegal Eviction and Unlawful
Occupation of Land Act (Act 19 of 1998) would offer some protection even in this eventuality. Activities of high
environmental and social risks and impacts will not be eligible for grant support consideration. A list of activities not
eligible for support and those that will require further E&S screening is included in the ESSA. Once more details on the
designs and locations of activities are available, it will be screened using an environmental and social screening list,
included as part of the POM, to exclude activities considered high in environmental and social risks and to determine
eligibility for support. Overall, the outcome of the Program is expected to result in substantial environmental benefits as
it will result in more climate resilient infrastructure, improved air, soil and water quality and water and energy use
efficiencies.
16.     The Program risks are mostly considered to be predictable and not as complex as high-risk activities, while
impacts associated with the eligible infrastructure support will be site specific, medium to short term in duration and
not likely to lead to significant adverse direct, indirect, or cumulative impacts to human health or the environment.
The Program is not likely to impact on areas of high value or sensitivity as most works will take place at existing facilities
belonging to the metropolitan municipalities. Typical environmental impacts include soil and water pollution, generation
of construction waste and potential health and safety impacts. These risks and impacts are considered manageable by
applying existing policies, laws, norms and standards. An area of concern may be the approach applied by various
municipalities to the registration of waste -pickers, and the potential for this to exclude vulnerable persons from
participation or reduce access to their resource streams. No activities of high environmental and social risk will be
financed. Certain types of infrastructure will be considered ineligible and placed put on a “negative” (or prescribed)
investment list – these will include infrastructure items that are likely to have a significant negative social or
environmental impact(s). There is a minor risk of some resettlement associated with the water sector infrastructure
scheduled for expansion or re-habilitation. However, this can be avoided by utilizing existing wayleaves. Some risk to
informal settlements may occur but the South African Prevention of Illegal Eviction and Unlawful Occupation of Land Act
(Act 19 of 1998) would offer some protection even in this eventuality.

                                                                                                                           Page 6
       The World Bank
       South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)



 17.    The draft Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) has been consulted with different stakeholders
 on January 20 and 21, 2025 and disclosed on February 11, 2025. The ESSA is being finalized and will be redisclosed after
 receiving final comments from stakeholders.

 18. Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a
 Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the
 existing program grievance mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that
 complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and
 individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses
 the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance
 with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with
 the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after
 concerns have been brought directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity
 to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit
 https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability
 Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 19. Gender: The historical legacy of social exclusion in South Africa includes a low representation of women in
 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and technical sectors including water supply and
 sanitation, electricity and solid waste management. An estimated 13% of graduates in STEM fields are women, and
 23% of employed individuals in STEM professions are women. The project seeks to narrow this gender gap by
 supporting the inclusion of more women in STEM professions within the WSS, electricity and SWM sectors. The GoSA
 Employment Equity Act No. 55 of 1998 (EEA) provides a framework for increased inclusion of women in the labor
 market and the Commission of Employment Equity reviews progress annually.

 20. The PIAP Operational Indicators include periodic performance gender targets for each sector as reflected in
 the DLIs. Program activities will increase the number of women hired in technical positions (see PIAP indicator A5,
 Annex 3). Metros are required to track progress toward gender targets annually, and the degree of improvement will
 impact disbursement in the final allocation for the program. Due to project complexity, with differentiated baselines
 by city and sector, limited baseline gender data is available in the three focus sectors. To address these gaps, the
 operation will include a gender assessment as a program activity to inform metro A1: Institutional Roadmap revisions.
 The assessment will inform both baseline data and end targets, and technical assistance will be provided to metros
 to ensure the A1 plans include measures for increasing inclusion, such as training and mentorship programs.

E. Financing
                                         Program Financing (Template)

                             Source                                Amount (US$, Millions)            % of Total

      Counterpart Funding                                                         2,000.00                     66.67%

        National Government                                                       2,000.00                     66.67%




                                                                                                                     Page 7
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
                                                             1,000.00   33.33%
    (IBRD)

                  Total Program Financing                    3,000.00



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Eric Dickson
 Lead Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Diego Juan Rodriguez
 Lead Economist

 Tatyana Vladimirovna Kramskaya
 Senior Energy Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 The Republic of South Africa
 Ulrike Britton
 Head: Policy Coordination (ODG)
 ulrike.britton@treasury.gov.za

Implementing Agencies




                                                                             Page 8
    The World Bank
    South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality
Mandla George
Acting City Manager
cm@mandelametro.gov.za

Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality
Mxolisi Yawa
City Manager
MxolisiY@buffalocity.gov.za

City of Tshwane
Johan Mettler
City Manager
Citymanager@tshwane.gov.za

City of Johannesburg
Tshepo Makola
City Manager
Makolat@joburg.org.za

eThekwini Metropolitan Municipality
Musa Mbhele
City Manager
Musa.Mbhele@durban.gov.za

Magaung Metropolitan Municipality
Sello More
City Manager
sello.more@mangaung.co.za

City of Cape Town
Lungelo Mbandazayo
City Manager
Lungelo.Mbandazayo@capetown.gov.za

City of Ekurhuleni
Imogen Mashazi
City Manager
City.Manager@ekurhuleni.gov.za

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                            Page 9
     The World Bank
     South Africa Metro Trading Services Program (P505813)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Eric Dickson, Diego Juan Rodriguez, Tatyana Vladimirovna Kramskaya

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Peter D. Ellis                        04-Feb-2025

Country Director:                      Satu Kristiina Jyrintytar Kahkonen    27-Mar-2025




                                                                                                            Page 10
