Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                      Date Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04397




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505093                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     PWS MPA - MVCS              2026

                     Operation Name            Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Peru                      Peru                                   LATIN AMERICA AND           Water
                                                                                      CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Peru          Ministry of Housing Construction and   10-Mar-2025                 17-Jul-2025
                                               Sanitation , Safe Water Program for
                                               Lima and Callao, National Urban
                                               Sanitation Program - PNSU




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     25-Jun-2024               273,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Increase access to safely managed drinking water and sanitation, improve water security in selected basins and
                     strengthen government capacity for mainstreaming circular economy principles for WSS service provision


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     MPA summary The proposed MPA is a comprehensive, four-phase multisectoral program designed to enhance water
                     security in Peru through the application of circular economy principles and integrated water resources management
                     (IWRM). Spanning a 10-year implementation period, it facilitates overlapping IPF operations led by MVCS and MIDAGRI.
                     Each phase focuses on distinct but interrelated objectives, ensuring sustainable water management practices tailored to
                     urban and rural contexts. Recognizing that advancing innovative water management approaches, including circular

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     economy principles, requires a phased and adaptive strategy, the MPA is designed to foster sustainable transformation
                     and institutional alignment. Through iterative learning, it will promote intersectoral coordination, strengthen regulatory
                     frameworks, and develop capacity-building tools to mainstream circular economy principles across WSS services,
                     irrigation, and water resources management. By implementing pilot projects, refining management models, and
                     engaging private sector participation, the program will enable the testing and scaling of solutions tailored to diverse
                     contexts, ensuring resilient and sustainable water resource management. IPF (first phase) summary Phase I of the MPA
                     establishes the groundwork for integrating circular economy principles in urban WSS services. It targets two distinct
                     basins: the water-scarce Lurín Basin in Lima's southern metropolitan region and the deteriorated Lake Titicaca Basin in
                     Puno. These basins represent diverse challenges, from aquifer overexploitation and urban flood risks in the Lurín Basin
                     to degraded ecosystems and limited access to safe water in Lake Titicaca. In particular, the IPF will: (i) Implementing the
                     National WSS Circular Economy Roadmap by enhancing governance frameworks, developing technical standards, and
                     building the capacity of sector entities such as MVCS and utilities like SEDAPAL and EMSA Puno. Key activities include
                     strategic planning, improving wastewater management models, and creating Circular Economy Master Plans to optimize
                     resource use, energy efficiency, and water reuse. (ii) Infrastructure rehabilitation and expansion in the Lake Titicaca and
                     Lurín basins to reduce pollution and enhance water availability, integrating CE principles. This includes designing and
                     building wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) with nutrient recovery and water reclamation features, piloting
                     managed aquifer recharge (MAR) to combat water scarcity in Lurín, and modernizing Puno’s water supply systems. This
                     first phase also ensures effective project implementation by supporting technical assistance, monitoring, and capacity
                     building within key executing units.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview



Public Disclosure
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Phase I of the MPA will finance infrastructure and studies for circularity projects in the Lurín basin (Component 1 (C1))
                     and support the improvement of MVCS’ institutional capacity of wastewater management and circular economy
                     governance frameworks (C2). The project management component will finance the procurement of equipment and
                     tools, the hiring of specialized personnel, and consulting services for the two implementing units of Phase I. Phase II will
                     finance irrigation infrastructure under the Sub-sectoral Irrigation Program and water resources monitoring by the
                     National Water Authority, with three coastal basins being considered: Acarí, Tambo, and Zaña. Phase III’s intervention
                     area will be identified in Phase I, and Phase IV will support circular economy approaches in climate-smart agricultural
                     and irrigation for the Lurín basin and in a new basin to be decided.

                     Phase I will target the Lurín river basin, the southern expansion area of the Lima Metropolitan region. Total water
                     demands in the Lurin basin are 86% for agricultural purposes and 14% for population, industrial and mining uses. Only
                     20% of the agricultural water demand is covered during the dry period and according to the latest water balance the
                     Lurin aquifer is slightly overexploited. This basin faces challenges of: insufficient quantity and low quality of water;
                     strong anthropogenic pressure and vulnerability to climate change; domestic and industrial wastewater discharges,
                     waste disposal, and extractive activities. 78% of the basin’s population lack a WWTP.

                     The middle and upper parts of the basin are occupied by peasant communities, many from indigenous and pre-Hispanic
                     populations now integrated with broader society due to their proximity to Lima. The area is rich in cultural heritage,
                     including the Archaeological Sanctuary of Pachacamac adjacent to the Julio C. Tello WWTP. The nearest towns are
                     Comunidad Campesina Santa Rosa de Manchay, Sector Pampachica and Julio C. Tello settlement.


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Phase I of this MPA will be led by the Ministry of Housing, Construction, and Sanitation (MVCS), through the General
                     Directorate of Construction and Sanitation Programs and Projects (DGPPCS). The DGPPCS will play a dual role: i) the
                     MPA’s Formulation Unit, and ii) the Project Implementing Unit (PIU) for C2 Governance. C1, focusing on infrastructure,
                     will be implemented by an autonomous agency under the MVCS, responsible for developing water supply and sanitation
                     (WSS) infrastructure in the Lima Metropolitan area, the Water Security Program for Lima and Callao (PASLC). The PASLC
                     will hire a Project Management Office to support the Project’s implementation and supervision.

                     The PASLC develops WSS projects exclusively within the service area of Lima’s WSS utility, SEDAPAL. Upon completion
                     and commissioning, the infrastructure is operated by SEDAPAL. While SEDAPAL has experience with the Bank’s
                     safeguard policies, the PASLC does not, and neither of the agencies have experience with the ESF. However, SEDAPAL
                     and PASLC teams responsible for the current Julio C. Tello and Manchay WWTPs have personnel responsible for
                     environmental and occupational health and safety (OHS) issues, but not for social issues. Therefore, PASLC must appoint
                     environmental, social and OHS management specialists, who can be trained by the WB in the ESF.

                     Another autonomous agency under the MVCS, the National Urban Sanitation Program (PNSU), which has a national
                     scope with the exception of Lima and Callao, has some relevant experience in working with WB financed projects. Since
                     2019 the PNSU has been implementing the “Modernization of Water Supply and Sanitation Services” involving civil,
                     electromechanical, mechanical works, and overall plant construction under the Bank’s safeguards policies. It is possible
                     that PNSU will be responsible for the infrastructure to be carried out under phase III, if determined to be in a basin
                     outside Lima or Callao.




Public Disclosure
                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is Substantial due mainly to risks and impacts from infrastructure activities under C1.
                     While the Project aims to improve E&S conditions by enhancing wastewater management and reducing disease and
                     water pollution, it also presents risks. The decommissioning of the two existing WWTPs and the construction of the
                     new ones in the same location (including their associated facilities for water reclamation, energy cogeneration, and
                     sludge treatment), may cause medium-scale, site-specific, temporary, and reversible impacts with a low to moderate
                     probability of major adverse effects on human health or the environment. Potential impacts and risks during
                     construction arise from: i) resources consumption, ii) debris disposal, iii) traffic changes, iv) dust and noise nuisances,
                     v) air quality deterioration, v) affectation of archaeological remains including the Pachacamac Archaeological
                     Sanctuary, vi) risks to community and workers safety, and vii) outages or overflows during commissioning of the new
                     plants. Potential risks and impacts from the operation of the new WWTPs and associated facilities include: i)
                     underperformance of the WWTPs and impacts on the receiving water body, ii) risks from sludge reuse or disposal, iii)
                     safety risks from energy cogeneration, and iv) OHS risks from the sludge treatment, accidents and chemical exposure.
                     Risks from water reclamation will be further assessed during Project Preparation. Risks and impacts associated to the
                     construction and operation of the aquifer recharge infrastructure and the minor WSS infrastructure that will serve
                     rural communities located in the upper end of the Lurin basin are preliminary related to: water quality, land use,


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     hydrological changes, and regulatory and management challenges. More precision on these will be given as more
                     information is available. No negative impacts or risks are envisioned from the development of technical studies as
                     they aim to improve WSS management.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is currently considered Substantial based on proposed project activities and uncertainties about
                     the scope of these at concept stage. The main social risks and impacts that contribute to the rating include: (i)
                     potential minor physical and economic displacement for the civil works; ii) potential opposition from community
                     members to the expansion of the two wastewater treatment plants or to the use of reclaimed water for aquifer
                     recharge or for irrigation or watering green spaces; iii) disturbances to local communities during civil works, such as
                     noise, dust, odors and traffic disruptions; (iv) occupational health and safety risks for project workers; and (v)
                     potential exclusion of vulnerable groups and water users from project benefits or planning activities under the
                     governance component to support the improvement of MVCS’ institutional capacity and wastewater management
                     governance frameworks. WWTP operation may involve health and safety risks and nuisances for communities and
                     workers. Moreover, the implementing agencies do not have experience in managing social risks under the Bank’s ESF.
                     The social risks and impacts will be re-assessed and appropriate mitigation measures and instruments identified
                     during preparation as project activities and scope will be defined in more detail.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards



Public Disclosure
                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      C1 WWTPs and associated facilities will involve E&S risks and impacts that will need to be assessed and mitigated.
                      These include: i) potential river water quality deterioration, ii) community and workers H&S, iii) temporary impacts on
                      economic activities, and iv) potential land acquisition, as well as risks of social exclusion and disproportionate impacts
                      on vulnerable communities. Julio C. Tello WWTP’s environmental license was updated in 2021 through an
                      Environmental Adjustment and Management Program (EMAP), and the Manchay WWTP´s EIA was updated in 2020.
                      Both plants will need updated EMAP/EIA for their proposed expansion, to be prepared during project
                      implementation. These instruments will either comply with the ESF or supplementary studies will address gaps. The
                      approach for managing E&S risks and impacts of other activities under Component 1 and of the TA activities will be
                      assessed during project preparation, potentially using a Strategic ESA for the WSS masterplan development.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement (SE) is critical for all project activities, including for the expansion of existing, and
                      construction of new, wastewater treatment infrastructure (with potential opposition from communities) and for the
                      planning activities to strengthen the management of water resources and wastewater. Key stakeholders include local
                      communities near the treatment plants, water users and their associations in the Lurin river basin (C1), CSOs and
                      government agencies at national, regional and local levels (components 1 and 2). A SEP will be prepared and
                      consulted on by appraisal, including with stakeholders for the two WWTPs already identified. It will include a
                      grievance mechanism, identify stakeholders in detail and include plans for SE for all project activities during



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      implementation, including special attention to vulnerable stakeholders. Platforms to support SE in relevant planning
                      activities will be considered for all MPA phases (e.g., for governance of aquifer recharge).

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The project will involve direct workers, workers of contractors and primary suppliers. It is not expected that it will use
                      community workers but this will be assessed during project preparation. Risks to workers mainly concern OHS during
                      civil works and operation of WWTPs which includes risk from chemical and high organic content exposures. Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared prior to effectiveness or prior to the engagement of project workers,
                      whichever comes first, with provisions to manage OHS risks, SEA/SH risks and contractual aspects. The risk of forced
                      or child labor is minimal, but the LMP will include provisions to prohibit the hiring minors and to abide with national
                      legislation and ESS2, along with a code of conduct. The LMP will include the grievance mechanism for workers. The
                      ESCP will include provisions for contractors and sub-contractors to manage labor related risks and abide by national
                      labor laws, including a grievance mechanism, consistent with ESS2.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      C1 infrastructure works will require water and materials consumption, generating debris, and solid and liquid waste .
                      During WWTP operation (including water reclamation, energy cogeneration and sludge treatment), risks come from
                      treated water discharges into the Lurin River, sludge and odor generation. Improved technology (through the use of
                      biofilters) at the new WWTPs is expected to reduce odor in neighboring areas. The Project’s circularity approach
                      ensures resource efficient resource use, aiming to reduce wastewater and sludge. Sludge treatment has been




Public Disclosure
                      discussed, but disposal plans has not been discussed yet. A water balance of the Lurin basin has been performed by
                      the ANA. Aquifer recharge infrastructure works and activities could involve pollution of the aquifer, and potential
                      pollution from rural WSS and sludge disposal will be assessed as more information becomes available.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      Key ESS4 risks revolve around the construction and operation of the wastewater treatment plants. During
                      construction there may be increased community exposure to noise, dust and other air pollutants. There may also be
                      some traffic disruptions and potential road accidents, and risks from the presence of workers in the community.
                      While no large labor influx is expected, there may be some risks of SEA/SH and other inappropriate behavior from
                      workers. During operations, the community may be exposed to noise and odors from the WWTP and to hazardous
                      chemicals being transported and used for the plants. There will be risks from sludge storage, transport, and
                      reuse/disposal. The design of both WWTPs contemplate odor control equipment (bio-filters). Project ESS4 risks will
                      be assessed during project preparation and risk management measures included in the respective instruments,
                      including the ESCP, the LMP and in site-specific plans and contracts.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      The standard is relevant as the preliminary assessment during the Bank’s identification mission indicates that there
                      may be some ESS5 related impacts for the expansion of the Manchay site involving an estimated five to ten informal
                      houses situated outside the project site; impacts, if any, to these houses will be assessed in detail. It is not known
                      whether the aquifer recharge and/or rural water supply and sanitation infrastructure in the Lurin basin may involve
                      any physical or economic displacement. If so, impacts are estimated to be minor. While not likely, temporary impacts


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                      on businesses or land use may also occur during construction. ESS5-type impacts will be assessed in more detail
                      during project preparation and a decision on the most appropriate instrument, if any (e.g., a Resettlement Plan), will
                      be made prior to appraisal and documented in the ESCP.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                       TBD
                      Resources

                      The relevance of this standard will be further assessed during project preparation. Works to be carried out for the
                      WWTP are not expected to have impacts on biodiversity, as these will be site-specific within a fenced area. However,
                      once more information is available during preparation this will be further assessed. Works in the upper Lurin basin
                      have not yet been determined (neither their locations) and could potentially affect green areas and natural
                      environments. This will be further assessed during project preparation and any required environmental assessment
                      and/or instrument determined and described in the ESCP. Finally, the proposed WSS and aquifer recharge
                      infrastructure will also be further assessed to determine potential impacts to vegetation and management
                      instruments/plans required. During project preparation compensation requirements as well as compensation sites
                      will be determined, including measures for the monitoring and maintenance of compensation zones.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                  TBD
                      Local Communities

                      There are no social groups meeting the indigenous peoples criteria of ESS7 in the areas of the two identified WWTPs.
                      Preliminary assessment also indicates that there are no indigenous peoples in the rural areas of the Lurín river basin,




Public Disclosure
                      upstream of SEDAPAL's service area, where the project will finance civil works to improve the drinking water supply
                      and sanitation. However, this will be assessed in more detail during project preparation along with an assessment of
                      potential risks and implications for indigenous peoples for activities under the governance component to strengthen
                      wastewater management at the sectoral level through the adoption of circular economy principles with a territorial
                      approach. The choice of instrument and risk management measures, if ESS7 is deemed relevant, will be determined
                      during project preparation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      The standard is relevant and chance find procedures will be reflected in the ESCP and site-specific ESMPs. The site-
                      specific ESMPs will also include any other mitigation measures identified during Project preparation and subproject
                      design. This is particularly relevant for the Julio C. Tello WWTP in Lurin which is adjacent to the Archaeological
                      Sanctuary of Pachacamac and is within its buffer zone. This site forms part of the Cultural Heritage of the Nation and
                      is administered by the Ministry of Culture (MC) - broadly there are 3 types of heritage, cultural administered by the
                      MC, documentary administered by the National Library, and natural administered by the National Parks Authority
                      (SERNANP). The site has a Management Plan which was approved by Supreme Decree 004-2014-MC. Current
                      protection measures and plans for this site will be assessed during preparation in consultation with the MC and a
                      Cultural Heritage Management Plan will be prepared or updated.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           TBD
                       The use of borrower framework will be assessed during project preparation.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following instruments will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal:
                     -        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).
                     -        Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), draft version to be prepared by appraisal. Final version will be finalized and
                     adopted sixty days after effectiveness, incorporating beneficiary communities from the Lurin river basin.



Public Disclosure
                     -        Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) for the decomissioning and the construction of the two
                     WWTPs, in draft version. These ESMP will also cover any associated facilities for these plants.
                     -        Environmental and Social risk and impact analysis, of the other proposed initiatives for Phase I activities
                     identified by appraisal: WSS infrastructure in the upper Lurin basin and aquifer recharge infrastructure.

                     Prior to effectiveness:
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP).

                     During implementation and prior to initiating the bidding process, site-specific management plans will be prepared for
                     all infrastructure activities, including:
                     -         Updated EIA and EMAP for the WWTP following Peruvian regulation.
                     -         ESMP, integrating provisions for stakeholder engagement and labor management.
                     -         Following strategy to de defined during Project preparation, potentially ESMPs for the aquifer
                     recharge/wastewater reuse infrastructure as well as for the rural WSS infrastructure.
                     -         Resettlement Action Plans (if needed).
                     -         Archeological Management Plan for the Julio C. Tello intervention.

                     Through the bidding documents, contractors will be required to prepare Contractors Environmental and Social
                     Management Plans, including provisions for stakeholder engagement and labor management and grievance
                     mechanism. These shall be approved prior to construction activities.




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management And Circular Economy (P505093)



                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Malva Baskovich                    Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  mbaskovich@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Zael Sanz Uriarte                  Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  zsanz@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Malva Baskovich, Zael Sanz Uriarte

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Fiorella Cristina Pino Luna

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                Piero Antonio Galluccio Chiri




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                               Page 9 of 9
