Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                              Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01246




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
        Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID               Operation Name
                                                                                       Guiyang Green Urban
China                          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        P506807
                                                                                       Development Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date    Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               26-Mar-2025                  25-Jun-2025                Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Guiyang Municipal
People’s Republic of China
                               Government

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance nature-positive urban development in Guiyang.

Components
1: Low-Carbon Urban Mobility for Enhanced Livability
2: Nature-Positive Urban Solutions for Climate Mitigation, Adaptation, and Biodiversity
3: City-Wide Institutional Strengthening for Low-Carbon and Nature-Positive Urban Development

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        343.40

  Total Financing                                                                                             343.40
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           250.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

DETAILS


                                                                                                                 Page 1
         The World Bank
          Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



      World Bank Group Financing
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                                                       250.00
      Non-World Bank Group Financing
       Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                                  93.40
          Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                                                         93.40




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Substantial


    Decision
    The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

      1. China's rapid urbanization is associated with significant economic growth but at high environmental costs. Over
         the past four decades, nearly 800 million people have been lifted out of poverty,1 with the urban population
         increasing from 459 million in 2000 to about 932 million in 2023 (66 percent of the population).2 However, this
         growth has severely impacted natural assets like forests and wetlands, fragmenting ecological land and reducing
         connectivity between landscapes and cities. This weakens ecosystem services and affects urban livability. If China
         continues this model, approximately 65 percent of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (US$9 trillion in annual
         economic output) is at risk due to nature loss.3 Conversely, a 'nature-positive' economy could generate US$1.9
         trillion in additional annual revenue and create 88 million jobs by 2030.4

      2. China's urban areas contribute up to 85 percent of the country's Carbon Dioxide (CO2) emissions, a significant
         part of global carbon emissions.5 From 2000 to 2020, China's CO2 emissions surged by 227 percent (from 3.35 to
         10.95 billion metric tons) highlighting the critical role of urban development in achieving national and global


1
  World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council, the People’s Republic of China (2022): Four Decades of Poverty Reduction in China Drivers, Insights
for the World, and the Way Ahead.
2 National Bureau of Statistics of China: https://data.stats.gov.cn/english/easyquery.htm?cn=C01
3 World Economic Forum (2022): Seizing Business Opportunities in China’s Transition Towards a Nature-positive Economy. New Nature Economy Report Series.
4 Ibid.
5 Luo, J., Wang, W., Wu, Y., Peng, Y. & L. Zhang (2021): Analysis of an urban development boundary policy in China based on the IAD framework; Auffhammer, M., Sun,

W., Wu, J. & S. Zheng (2016): The Decomposition and Dynamics of Industrial Carbon Dioxide Emissions for 287 Chinese Cities in 1998–2009.


                                                                                                                                                                Page 2
            The World Bank
            Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)


             climate goals.6 With the urban population projected to reach one billion by 2035, cities will play an increasingly
             important role in reducing CO2 emissions. In particular, the way cities are organized and grow –their ‘urban forms’–
             have strong and lasting lock-in effects. Further, transport, building and other municipal services are major
             contributors to energy consumption and emissions. For instance, if unmitigated, transport emissions are expected
             to peak at 150 percent of current levels around 2040.7 The urban water sector also significantly contributes to CO2
             and other greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions due to the degradation of organics in wastewater treatments8 and the
             operation of treatment facilities.9

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

        3. Addressing the two intertwined global challenges of climate and nature crises requires hardwiring low-carbon
           and nature-positive urban development to build livable cities. Low-carbon and nature-positive urban
           development are essential, interconnected strategies. Low-carbon cities focus on planning, implementing,
           monitoring, and accounting for low-carbon investments and climate change mitigation. Nature-positive cities
           enhance resilience and livability by integrating nature and ensuring urban development benefits nature. This dual
           approach creates mutually reinforcing and synergistic benefits for sustainable, livable cities. Urgent action is
           needed to transform China's urban infrastructure towards carbon-neutral, nature-positive outcomes by reducing
           energy consumption in "grey infrastructure" and investing in "blue and green infrastructure." Planning, designing,
           and shaping cities to be carbon-neutral and nature-positive will reduce climate and nature impacts, revitalizing
           and regenerating services and spaces to ensure people can live, work, and thrive in livable cities.

        4. Guiyang, the provincial capital of Guizhou in Southwest China, exemplifies a rapidly urbanizing city undergoing
           economic transformation, but remains heavily indebted. From 2000 to 2022, Guiyang’s population grew by 84.3
           percent from 3,374,500 to 6,220,400,10 and its GDP grew at an annual average rate of 14 percent, 11 consistently
           ranking among the top in China. The city has successfully diversified from traditional industries like aluminum
           production and phosphate mining to the service sector, big data, and technological innovation. Guiyang is crucial
           for Guizhou’s growth and poverty reduction.12 Strategically, Guiyang is vital for the Yangtze River Economic Belt,
           and the new land-sea corridor in western China, highlighting its economic growth potential. However, Guiyang
           faces significant debt and municipal finance challenges.13 To further unlock potential for economic development
           and green job creation, it will be important for Guiyang to transition fully to an economy consistent with net-zero
           carbon emissions and net-positive impacts on nature. A holistic, dual approach is more efficient and cost-effective,
           ensuring continued economic competitiveness and livability.

        5. Aha Lake, a national wetland park located in the core of Guiyang, embodies many of Guiyang’s urbanization
           challenges, including encroachment and nature degradation. The Aha Lake has been designated as a primary
           drinking water source since 1982 but was declassified in 2021 and no longer serves such a purpose. Rapid

6 World Resources Initiative (2023): Climate Watch. Historical GHG Emissions (1990-2020): https://climatewatchdata.org/ghg-emissions
7 World Bank (2022): China. Country Climate and Development Report.
8
    Tong, Y. et al. (2024): Mitigating greenhouse gas emissions from municipal wastewater treatment in China. In: Environmental Science and Ecotechnology, 20.
9 Wang, D. et al. (2022): Greenhouse gas emissions from municipal wastewater treatment facilities in China from 2006 to 2019.
10 Guiyang Statistics Bureau, Guiyang Statistical Yearbook (2023).
11 National Bureau of Statistics of China: https://data.stats.gov.cn/english/index.htm
12 In 2023, Guizhou ranked 22nd out of 31 provinces in Regional GDP, and Guiyang ranked 29th out of 36 major Chinese cities. Urban areas in Guizhou are among the

poorest (10 out of 31) in terms of per capita household consumption. Educational attainment is low, with just over 20 percent of residents educated beyond high school.
13 China Ministry of Finance




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
     The World Bank
     Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)


      urbanization and the completion of the 3-ring and 16-ray road network in 2016 resulted in the lake being situated
      at the center of Guiyang. The dense population and rapid industrial development in the lake basin have led to
      domestic sewage and wastewater discharge into the river system, causing poor water quality and ecological
      degradation. Vegetation cover has declined, biodiversity has decreased, and ecosystem functions are impaired.
      The complex terrain and severe soil erosion result in significant sediment flow into the lake during rains, affecting
      water storage capacity and quality. An inefficient transportation network around Aha Lake, and key urban clusters
      (such as Guanshanhu, and Guian districts) leads to congestion of major roads that connect the city’s northern and
      southern districts, increased GHG emissions, and limits access to Aha Lake and its ecotourism potentials. The
      current lack of Non-Motorized Transport (NMT) paths and the subpar street conditions make it unsafe for
      pedestrians and cyclists discouraging low-carbon transportation options. Aha Lake, Guiyang’s “green lung”, is
      strategically important and suitable as a demonstration site for the low-carbon and nature-positive approach.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
  6. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is: To reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance nature-positive
      urban development in Guiyang.

Key Results
 7. The key results of the project will be measured through two PDO-level indicators, which are aligned with the
     World Bank Group scorecard:

         i.   “Net GHG emissions per year (tons/year)” will measure the project’s contributions to the reduction of
              greenhouse gas emissions (including both emissions reduced and avoided).

        ii.   “Landscapes under enhanced conservation and/or sustainable management (terrestrial and inland water
              areas) (hectare)” will measure the project’s nature positive urban development outcomes.

D. Project Description

  8. The project addresses interconnected development issues by demonstrating how a dual low-carbon and nature-
     positive strategy contributes to GPGs while delivering local benefits in the Aha Lake area. It aims to show an
     integrated approach to achieving dual goals. Focusing on Aha Lake and its surrounding 100 km², the project will
     finance three components:

         i.   Component 1: Low-Carbon Urban Mobility for Enhanced Livability: Improving network efficiency and
              promoting non-motorized and public transport will lower GHG emissions and improve residents' quality
              of life. Transport infrastructure is guided by ecological protection principles to minimize impacts on
              ecosystems and biodiversity.

        ii.   Component 2: Nature-Positive Urban Solutions for Climate Mitigation, Adaptation, and Biodiversity:
              Water quality and flood control activities will reduce pollution, improve water quality, decrease GHG
              emissions, enhance carbon sequestration, and support flood management of Aha Lake and its tributaries.


                                                                                                                      Page 4
      The World Bank
      Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)


                Support for urban ecosystems and biodiversity will improve habitats, enhance species tracking and
                protection, and boost biodiversity, which will strengthen carbon sequestration and resilience against
                climate change.

         iii.   Component 3: City wide institutional strengthening for low carbon and nature positive urban
                development. Technical support, research, capacity building, project management, and knowledge
                dissemination under this component will strengthen city-wide institutionalization of low-carbon and
                nature positive urban development approaches and enable global sharing of lessons learned.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


   9. Environment. The project aims for ecological net gains by reducing GHG emissions and enhancing biodiversity
      conservation around Aha Lake in Guiyang. Municipal-level technical assistance activities will support Guiyang’s
      GHG reduction and biodiversity conservation, and addressing downstream E&S implications. Physical investments,
      including construction and upgrades, will occur in the Aha Lake area (100 km2), with some within the delineated
      ecological redlines (0.33 km2) and the national wetland park (0.2 km2) but without disturbing and negatively
      affecting core reserves. Aha Lake, a reservoir and National Wetland Park, is a Tier 3 natural park in China’s
      protection system and a critical habitat for terrestrial wildlife. It has been an urban park open to the public since
      2013. The project’s activities will not pose additional restrictions to accessing the park. The project will enhance
      the park’s functions including flood control, biodiversity conservation, public education and recreation.

   10. A preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and
       a biodiversity impact management plan, has been prepared per Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)
       requirements. The Feasibility Study Report (FSR) and preliminary EIA confirmed that all project activities are
       planned in compliance with the eco-redline strategy and ecological functions, without disturbing and negatively
       affecting score reserves. Construction nuisance like noise, wastewater, dust, solid waste and soil erosion, and
       pesticide use during reforestation are expected to be temporary, site-specific and manageable with known
       mitigation techniques considering the nature and scale of these activities. During operation, negative impacts
       include domestic wastewater, waste, and occupational health and safety risks from operating wastewater and
       drainage facilities. Mitigation strategies are included in the generic EMP annexed to the preliminary EIA. A dam
       safety assessment confirmed that the dam, rehabilitated in 2023, is well-operated with no safety risks. The small
       section of proposed greenway (cycling and walking path) along the dam will not negatively impact it.




                                                                                                                       Page 5
     The World Bank
      Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)


  11. Guiyang, with previous World Bank experience but new to the Environmental and Social Framework, will build
      capacity through this project. A PMO has been established and fully staffed, with capacity-building activities
      planned in the EIA for the PMO and other stakeholders throughout the project cycle. The environmental risk is
      rated as substantial due to the ecological importance of Aha Lake and the implementation of some activities within
      protected areas (ecological redlines), mitigated by site-specific recommendations from the detailed EIA and
      biodiversity impact assessment.

  12. Social. The project focuses on habitat restoration (river, wetland, and vegetation) and biodiversity monitoring
      within an existing wetland park. It also includes constructing connection roads and greenways around Aha Lake
      to improve access. While habitat restoration will not change forest land use or restrict access, the construction
      will require land acquisition and house demolitions in 11 villages, potentially disrupting residents' lives and
      livelihoods during construction. A Social Impact Assessment (SIA) was conducted based on the FSR design
      identifying social impacts and risks related to land acquisition and housing development on communities and
      ethnic minority groups, the use of temporary construction workers, and disruptions to daily life. The land
      acquisition will affect 1,697 households and 6,387 people, 74 percent of whom are ethnic minorities, mainly Buyi
      and Miao. Despite the significant number of affected individuals, the project's linear nature minimizes the impact
      on each village and household. Most acquired land is forest or unused land not intended for farming, with less
      than 10 percent impact on livelihoods. The land acquisition will not harm the natural resources or environment
      essential for residents’ livelihoods and development. Temporary labor, including migrant and local workers will
      be employed for construction. Potential risks to workers' health and safety may arise from gaps in labor rights
      awareness and deficiencies in managing working conditions. Ethnic minority communities in the project area are
      under urban administration, not attached to ancestral lands, and are multi-ethnic with frequent interactions and
      intermarriage including among Buyi, Miao, Tujia, Yi, Dong, Gelao, Bai, Zhuang etc. They use a common language
      in daily life, and their lifestyles and production methods are largely similar to those of the Han group. The impact
      of land acquisition on the livelihoods of ethnic minorities is also minimal.

  13. To address potential social impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan and an Ethnic Minority Development Plan have
      been prepared to restore livelihoods, mitigate relocation impacts, and ensure ethnic minority participation while
      preserving their culture. Additionally, a Social Management Plan (SMP) and Labor Management Procedures,
      including an Environmental, Health, and Safety plan, have been developed as part of the SIA report to manage
      working conditions and potential health and safety risks during implementation. Overall, although the project
      activities are not expected to cause significant negative social impacts, the social risk is deemed Substantial given
      the complexity of land acquisition, labor management challenges for temporary workers, and the significant
      presence of ethnic minorities in the project area. Per the Environmental and Social Framework requirements, a
      Stakeholder Engagement Plan and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan were developed. A detailed EIA
      and EMP will be developed and shared with the Bank prior to negotiation to provide site-specific
      recommendations on environmental mitigation measures to support project implementation, which is being
      consulted during preparation and will be disclosed per Environmental and Social Framework requirements.

E. Implementation

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements



                                                                                                                      Page 6
     The World Bank
     Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)


  14. Project Steering Committee (PSC): A PSC has been established and is chaired by the Executive Deputy Mayor of
      Guiyang city. The members of the PSC include directors from relevant government agencies, including MDRC,
      Municipal Financial Bureau, Municipal Natural Resources and Planning Bureau, Municipal Water Resource Bureau,
      Municipal Forestry Bureau, Municipal Ecology and Environment Bureau, Municipal Transport Bureau, Municipal
      Housing and Urban-Rural Construction Bureau, and the Aha Lake Wetland Park Management Office, etc. The PSC
      will provide overall policy and strategic guidance to project implementation, monitor progress, and ensure inter-
      agency coordination.

  15. Project Implementing Agency and Project Management Office (PMO): A PMO has been established, which is
      jointly co-chaired by the Guiyang DRC and the Guiyang Infrastructure Construction and Investment Group (GICIG).
      The Guiyang DRC will be overall taking the lead on decision-making, coordinating all relevant municipal
      departments and ensuring effective implementation. GICIG is designated as an implementing agency for this
      project by the Municipal Government. GICIG is an AAA (credit rating) platform company in Guiyang, positioned as
      a "comprehensive operator of urban construction management services". Within the entity, a PMO has been
      established which will be responsible for overseeing project implementation, and daily project management
      including procurement, Financial Management (FM), loan disbursement, Environmental and Social Framework,
      regular reporting, and communication with the World Bank.

  16. Sectoral implementation responsibilities. Line bureaus have assigned technical focal points for the project, and
      will be responsible for planning and quality control during the implementation of sectoral project activities
      including: (i) Municipal Transport Bureau for Component 1 (Low-Carbon Urban Mobility for Enhanced Livability);
      (ii) Forestry Bureau for Subcomponent 2.1 (Improve Water Quality and Flood Control); (iii) Ecology and
      Environment Bureau and Municipal Water Resource Bureau for Subcomponent 2.2 (Conserve and Enhance Urban
      Ecosystems and Biodiversity); and (iv) MDRC and Natural Resources and Planning Bureau, for Subcomponent 3.1
      (Climate Smart and Nature-Positive Urban Spatial Planning).

  17. Aha Lake Management Entity: An Aha Lake Management Entity reporting to the Guiyang Municipality, will be
      established and be responsible to develop and manage the 100 km2 Aha Lake area, ensuring streamlined and area-
      based management, coordinating cross-sectoral and cross-jurisdictional efforts to ensure effective
      implementation and long-term sustainability. The institutional and regulatory nature of the entity will be
      determined in association with Guiyang and Guizhou.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank




                                                                                                                   Page 7
     The World Bank
     Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)


 Chyi-Yun Huang
 Senior Urban Specialist

 Guangming Yan
 Senior Urban Development Specialist

 Linus Benedikt Pott
 Senior Land Administration Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 People’s Republic of China
 Xiang Peng
 Director, International Economic and Financial Cooperation Department, Ministry of Finance
 pengxiang@mof.gov.cn

Implementing Agencies
 Guiyang Municipal Government
 Zhang Neng Zhu
 Secretary
 gyldpmo@163.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Chyi-Yun Huang, Guangming Yan, Linus Benedikt Pott

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Yoonhee Kim                            12-Mar-2025

Country Director:                        Alejandro Alcala Gerez                 30-Apr-2025




                                                                                              Page 8
