Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    The World Bank
                                                                    Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among   Project Information Document (PID)
                                                                    Poor Households(P506027)




Public DisclosurePublic
                  Authorized         Public Disclosure Authorized




                        Disclosure copy
                                                                                    Project Information Document/
                                                                                   Identification/Concept Stage (PID)

                                                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDDC00721




Public Disclosure Authorized
                              The World Bank
                              Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among         Project Information Document (PID)
                              Poor Households(P506027)



                         BASIC INFORMATION

                         A. Basic Project Data


                         Operation Name                                             Operation Short Name
                         Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart
                                                                                    NSCSI4PH
                         Investments among Poor Households
                         Operation ID                                               Financing Instrument
                         P506027                                                    Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                         Beneficiary country/countries                              Region
                         Angola                                                     Angola
                         Environmental and Social Risk Classification




Public Disclosure copy
                         Moderate
                         Date PID Prepared                                          Estimated Date of Approval
                         22-Apr-2024                                                27-Jan-2025
                         Borrower(s)                                                Implementing Agency
                         Ministry of Finance                                        FAS Local Development Institute (FAS-IDL)


                         PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
                         SUMMARY

                           Total Operation Cost                                                                                        2.75

                           Total Financing                                                                                             2.75

                           Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00


                         DETAILS
                          Non-World Bank Group Financing
                            Trust Funds                                                                                                2.75
                               Japan Social Development Fund                                                                           2.75


                         B. Introduction & Context
                         Country Context
                         Despite its relative wealth, Angola experiences persistently high rural and urban poverty, and inequality. Although
                         Angola has a similar GDP per capita to lower-middle income countries (LMICs), its poverty rates and labor market

                                                                                                                                         Page 1
                               The World Bank
                               Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among               Project Information Document (PID)
                               Poor Households(P506027)


                         indicators are closer to low-income countries. Angola’s wealth has minimally benefited its population, with 32.3 percent
                         of the 30.8 million population (around 10 million people) characterized as poor in 2018-19 (World Bank 2020). This is
                         particularly true for rural areas where poverty rates are almost three times higher (54.7 percent) than in urban areas
                         (17.8 percent). The pronounced dichotomy in welfare between rural and urban areas is reflected in Angola’s Gini
                         coefficient of 0.51, one of the highest globally (WDI).
                         Angola’s Human Capital Index (HCI) of 0.36 in 2020 is among the lowest globally, with very high levels of child
                         malnutrition, poor access to schooling, and health services. Chronic malnutrition among children under five years is
                         the fourth highest in Africa, evidenced by a stunting rate of 43.2 percent (WDI). Uptake of positive family practices is
                         another major challenge: Only 25 percent of births are registered, 52 percent of mothers do not initiate breastfeeding
                         early, and only 11 percent of children benefit from early childhood education. In addition, only 58 percent and 52
                         percent of children have access to basic drinking water and basic sanitation, respectively. In this context, the main cause
                         of death in children under five in Angola are diarrheal diseases. Maternal and child mortality rates, at 44 and 68
                         respectively per 1,000 live births, are double the LMICs average. Immunization rates are also alarmingly low: 40 percent
                         of children have never been immunized. In terms of education, one in six school-aged children do not attend school,
                         and only six percent of girls of secondary school age are enrolled in school. Finally, Angola has the second highest fertility
                         rate in the world, with 6.2 children per woman in 2015-16. Angolan teenage girls (15-19 years) give birth at a rate of




Public Disclosure copy
                         162 births per 1,000 girls – the highest globally and above Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) average of 93 per 1,000 girls.
                         High exposure to extreme climate events, which are becoming more persistent and prolonged, poses further risks
                         for the Angolan poor, especially given their dependence on subsistence agriculture. Angola is ranked as the 38th most
                         vulnerable country to climate change, driven in parts by a low readiness to adapt (Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index,
                         2018). Between 2005 and 2017, the country’s economic losses from climate-related disasters amounted to nearly
                         US$1.2 billion. In rural areas, where 85-90 percent of rely on agriculture as their primary source of livelihood, climate
                         shocks constitute a key cause of food insecurity. At least a third of Angolan households are vulnerable to falling into or
                         experiencing worsening poverty if affected by covariate shocks. Data also shows that droughts are becoming more
                         persistent and prolonged in southern pastoralist areas (Cunene and Namibe), maize and beans producing central
                         highlands (Huambo, Huila, and Cuanza Sul), and transitional maize and cassava regions (Benguela and Cuanza Sul).
                         Droughts have become part of the daily life, and it is critical that poor households living in these areas have the
                         opportunity to adapt their livelihoods and increase overall resilience.

                         Sectoral and Institutional Context
                         Angola’s social protection sector is underpinned by several laws, policies, and presidential decrees that have set
                         priorities and funding envelopes since 2004. The Basic Law on Social Protection of 2004 provides the legal and
                         institutional framework for social protection in Angola with three pillars: Basic, Compulsory, and Complementary. While
                         the compulsory and complementary pillars refer to contributory social insurance schemes linked to employment, the
                         basic pillar refers to non-contributory social assistance. Under this pillar, the law identifies highly vulnerable groups to
                         be reached through safety nets, including women, children and adolescents, the elderly, and people with disabilities.
                         The National Policy on Social Action (PNAS) adopted in 2021 further underpins the strategy for investments in SP,
                         particularly providing guidance for large-scale, decentralized delivery. More recently, the Long-Term Strategy (LTS)
                         “Angola 2050”, and the National Development Plan 2023-2027 (NDP) provide a vision for social protection’s
                         contribution to Angola’s development objectives along three pillars—human capital, economic diversification, and
                         opportunities.
                         The establishment of the safety net program Kwenda in 2020 marked a turning point in Angola's social assistance
                         programmatic landscape. Initially designed to be a short-term compensatory mechanism for one million households in
                         response to a planned fuel subsidy reform, Kwenda evolved into a poverty reduction program during the COVID-19


                                                                                                                                                    Page 2
                               The World Bank
                               Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among             Project Information Document (PID)
                               Poor Households(P506027)


                         pandemic. It builds on previous government pilots of social assistance programs for the poor and vulnerable, and World
                         Bank-financed social protection investments. The program is implemented by FAS Local Development Institute (FAS-
                         Instituto de Desenvolvimento Local, FAS-IDL) under the Ministry of Territorial Administration (Ministério da
                         Administração do Território, MAT). At the local level, Kwenda's implementation relies on a network of over 5,000
                         community-based health and sanitation agents (Agentes de Desenvolvimento Comunitário e Sanitário, ADECOS) who
                         assist with family registration and enrollment, grievance redress, provision of services, and follow-up activities. The
                         program is currently financed through a World Bank loan of US$320 million through the Strengthening the National
                         Social Protection System Project (P169779), to which the Government of Angola (GoA) has committed an additional
                         US$100 million to extend the duration of Kwenda and scale up to 1.6 million recipient households.
                         After four years of implementation, Kwenda has established itself as the flagship social safety net program of the
                         GoA, and is now being extended through a new World Bank financed operation. As of October 2024, the program had
                         registered about 1.6 million households in mostly rural areas across 18 provinces, and provided cash transfers to 1.07
                         million households. More than two thirds of recipients are women. The program's targeting mechanism incorporates
                         both geographical targeting, using poverty maps, and household targeting through community validation. Additionally,
                         the program will introduce proxy means testing to prioritize the most vulnerable families at the individual level. Selected
                         households receive unconditional cash transfers of AOA 11,000 per month per family (approximately US$13). Due to




Public Disclosure copy
                         limited financial inclusion in project areas, the majority of payments are made in cash, although there have been
                         noticeable efforts to increase the share of payments made through bank transfers and mobile money. A 2024 evaluation
                         of Kwenda revealed that cash transfers have helped households respond to health, economic and climatic shocks by
                         supporting them to pay for urgent medical expenses, alleviate hunger, and enable debt repayments. The new US$400-
                         million Bank-financed operation Enhancing the Social Protection System for Human Capital and Resilience (P181495),
                         approved in August 2024 and expected to become effective in early 2025, will help expand the scope and duration of
                         Kwenda until 2029, while continuing to strengthen Angola's social protection system.
                         Kwenda cash transfers are complemented by several accompanying measures, whose approach has evolved over
                         time. First, to support human capital accumulation, Kwenda originally focused on the construction and upgrading of
                         Integrated Social Action Centers (Centros de Acҫão Social Integrada, CASIs), meant to provide easier access to social
                         services such as birth registration, social welfare assistance, support for victims of gender-based violence (GBV), and
                         other social protection programs. Under the new operation Enhancing the Social Protection System for Human Capital
                         and Resilience, investments will focus on strengthening supply side linkages with existing health and education facilities,
                         and promoting behavioral change in households through the organization of caretaker groups directly in communities.
                         These activities will focus specifically on pregnant women, lactating mothers, and children under the age of five, in
                         order to address recurrent issues in child malnutrition and early childhood development in project areas. Second, to
                         offer recipient households opportunities to “graduate” out of social assistance, Kwenda has organized productive
                         inclusion activities focused on promoting entrepreneurship and the establishment or expansion of micro-level
                         enterprises. Participants are organized in groups around a share income-generating activity. The package of support
                         has evolved over time and now includes both a light and intensive package combining technical, financial, and business
                         skills training; access to finance; and coaching/mentoring support. Overall, adoption of both of these accompanying
                         activities by Kwenda beneficiaries has been limited, and it has been difficult to draw lessons systematically.
                         The proposed JSDF project will finance the piloting of innovative approaches to completement and strengthen
                         Kwenda's accompanying measures, focusing on incentivizing the adoption of positive nutrition practices and climate-
                         smart income generating activities. As Kwenda embarks on new types of activities with ambitious objectives, there is
                         a need to identify innovative approaches to accelerate take-up and behavior change among participants, as necessary
                         to ensure long-term sustainability and impact of interventions. The proposed grant will address this gap by helping to
                         (i) develop and test a set of innovative accompanying measures for Kwenda cash transfer recipients in the areas of
                         health/nutrition and climate change, and (ii) assess the suitability of these new approaches for integration at scale into


                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
                              The World Bank
                              Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among             Project Information Document (PID)
                              Poor Households(P506027)


                         the broader Kwenda program. The proposed technical design faces moderate risks, particularly in improving access to
                         nutrition services if existing supply is inadequate. To mitigate these, the project will target communities with existing
                         services, define a minimum service package, and provide close implementation support. Institutional risk is also
                         moderate, given FAS-IDL’s legal status and proven capacity to implement World Bank-financed projects.

                         Relationship to CPF
                         The proposed project contributes to the World Bank’s forthcoming Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Angola
                         as well as other corporate and country strategic priorities. In line with the upcoming CPF 2025-2030 (expected for
                         Board approval in May 2025), the project will help boost human capital accumulation among the poor and vulnerable
                         by incentivizing investments in nutrition and health with a focus on early years. The project also supports the fifth
                         pathway of the Angola Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) in “boosting human capital and fostering a
                         culture of climate-preparedness”. Further, it is aligned with Angola’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) and
                         commitments to strengthen domestic resilience to climate change impacts by investing in adaptation strategies, and
                         building resilience at national and community levels. As mentioned, the project will build on the ongoing operation
                         Strengthening the National Social Protection System (P169779) and contribute to strengthening the upcoming




Public Disclosure copy
                         Enhancing the Social Protection System for Human Capital and Resilience (P181495), which support the Kwenda cash
                         transfer program.
                         It is well aligned with the Japan Social Development Fund's (JSDF) objectives and approach of improving the lives of
                         the poorest and most vulnerable through innovative, community-driven development solutions. JSDF financing will
                         offer an ideal “sandbox” environment to pilot strategically important innovations to the Kwenda delivery model. It will
                         allow to test the suitability of new approaches to incentivize investments in nutrition/health and climate resilience
                         among a small set of pilot communities, and support their integration into the broader Kwenda program. It will support
                         FAS-IDL to test and validate new ideas in areas where the institution still has limited experience. Communities will be
                         strongly involved in the implementation of all project components. The project will build on and deepen several
                         community engagement mechanisms already implemented in Kwenda to ensure ownership of the process and results
                         among participants, as a way to promote empowerment. Activities under the proposed grant directly contribute to
                         three of the JSDF round 10 thematic priorities, namely (i) livelihood support through improved entrepreneurial skills
                         and job creation, (ii) improved nutrition and early childhood development, and (iii) environmentally sustainable
                         agriculture and adaptation to climate change.



                         C. Development Objective
                         Development Objective
                         Improve access to nutrition services and climate-smart income generating activities amongst social safety net
                         program beneficiaries, and generate evidence of the suitability of these measures for scale-up.
                         Key Results
                         The pilot activities will directly benefit an estimated 3,000 households through improved access to sustainable income
                         generating activities and nutrition services. The results and lessons learned will contribute to the broader Kwenda
                         program, with potential to reach up to 1.6 million poor and vulnerable households. Additionally, the project will
                         strengthen government capacity to implement an enhanced and more comprehensive set of social safety net activities.
                         Proposed development outcome indicators:
                             • Beneficiaries of social safety net programs (Corporate Scorecard Result Indicator (CSC RI))
                                      o Beneficiaries of cash-based interventions (Number of people, disaggregated by youth and sex)

                                                                                                                                               Page 4
                                 The World Bank
                                 Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among               Project Information Document (PID)
                                 Poor Households(P506027)


                                      o Beneficiaries of productive inclusion programs (Number of people, disaggregated by youth and sex)
                             •     People receiving quality health, nutrition, and population services (CSC RI)
                                      o Number of women and children who have received basic nutrition services (Number of people)
                             •     People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (CSC RI)
                                      o People benefiting from increased resilience of livelihoods, jobs or firms (Number of people)



                         D. Preliminary Description
                         Activities/Components
                         The project will finance the development and piloting of a set of innovative accompanying measures for Kwenda cash
                         transfer recipients in the areas of health/nutrition and climate change. It will explore opportunities to accelerate take-
                         up and behavior change on these topics, and undertake assessments of the suitability of these new measures for
                         integration at scale into the broader Kwenda program. The pilots will focus on two main types of innovative measures
                         and incentive structures:




Public Disclosure copy
                             • Component 1: Financial incentives to boost the adoption of health and nutrition-sensitive practices among
                                 pregnant women, lactating mothers, and children under the age of five (US$1.45M): Participants will be
                                 selected among existing Kwenda beneficiary households and targeted based on information from the social
                                 registry. Selected households will be eligible to receive a cash transfer top-up (i.e., an additional payment on
                                 top of their existing unconditional transfer) if they follow a set of positive child-centered health and nutrition
                                 practices, such as regular health care appointments, vaccination, and dietary diversity. Monitoring of
                                 conditionalities will be conducted by ADECOS and top-ups paid using existing delivery mechanisms. The set of
                                 eligibility conditions to receive the top-up will be confirmed during preparation phase and may be extended to
                                 include other productive human capital investments, such as birth and ID registration, agreed at the community
                                 level. This pilot activity will help to experimentally assess for the first time the potential of financial incentives
                                 to foster behavioral change among social safety net recipients, identify a suitable and scalable top-up model
                                 (that is, how much to provide, how often, based on which criteria, etc.), and contribute to developing new
                                 operational tools and Management Information System (MIS) modules to monitor the adoption of good
                                 practices. Component resources will cover the training, compensation, and travel for ADECOS to monitor and
                                 encourage the adoption of positive health and nutrition practices; the cost of cash transfers and top-ups; the
                                 design of behavioral change communication material; the development of new MIS module(s); as well as
                                 monitoring and learning activities.
                             • Component 2: Testing the viability of climate-friendly income-generating activities (IGAs) (US$975K): This
                                 component will pilot activities to support the development of climate-friendly IGAs that can both generate
                                 revenues for poor households, while reducing community exposure to climate risks. Participants will also be
                                 selected among existing Kwenda cash transfer recipients, focusing on communities particularly affected by
                                 climate change. The package of support will build on the existing Kwenda productive inclusion approach –
                                 through a combination of technical and business skills trainings, small business grants, coaching and mentoring,
                                 and facilitation of savings groups – but be directed exclusively to IGAs that can help communities better adapt
                                 to climate change. This may include businesses or cooperatives centered around installing boreholes and water
                                 tanks, flood drainage infrastructure, distributing fuel efficient cookstoves, etc. Specifically, this pilot activity will
                                 add a screening tool to the community-based productive inclusion process of Kwenda, designed to identify key
                                 climate risks in communities and prioritize interventions that could address them, around which project-
                                 supported IGAs could be built. Component resources will cover the cost of contracting and building the capacity
                                 of local NGOs and community-based organizations to deliver trainings, mentoring, and coaching activities;

                                                                                                                                                       Page 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among          Project Information Document (PID)
                                 Poor Households(P506027)


                                   startup grants for participants organized in groups or cooperatives to launch their new activity; compensation
                                   and travel for ADECOS to coordinate and support all activities locally; and monitoring, learning, and knowledge
                                   disseminations activities. The component will not directly finance infrastructure investments.
                             •     Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge dissemination (US$328K):
                                   This component will cover the cost of consultants for effective project management and monitoring of
                                   activities; contracting of a firm or consultants to conduct rigorous assessments of pilot activities, including
                                   through process evaluations, mixed methods study of program effects, and costing analysis; as well as
                                   knowledge management and dissemination of findings.



                         Environmental and Social Standards Relevance
                         E. Relevant Standards
                         ESS Standards                                                                         Relevance
                         ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and




Public Disclosure copy
                                                                                                               Relevant
                         Impacts
                         ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                             Relevant
                         ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                   Relevant
                         ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                    Relevant
                         ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                    Relevant
                         ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement        Not Currently Relevant
                         ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                                               Not Currently Relevant
                         Resources
                         ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                                               Relevant
                         Traditional Local Communities
                         ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                              Not Currently Relevant
                         ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                       Not Currently Relevant


                         Legal Operational Policies
                         Safeguard Policies                                        Triggered?              Explanation (Optional)

                         Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50               No

                         Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                         No


                         Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                         The project's environmental and social risk is rated as moderate considering (i) the low to moderate E&S risks and
                         impacts potentially generated by the project activities, which can be mitigated with readily available and reliable

                                                                                                                                               Page 6
                                The World Bank
                                Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among             Project Information Document (PID)
                                Poor Households(P506027)


                          measures, (ii) the project will not finance any activities or subprojects located in environmentally sensitive areas, (iii)
                          FAS has prior experience implementing Bank-financed projects under ESF and is committed to reinforcing its E&S team
                          from an early stage of the project to ensure it is implemented in a manner consistent with ESF requirements , (iv) no
                          civil works are expected to be financed by the project, and (v) the existence of some social contextual risks, related to
                          GBV/SEA/SH and the marginalization Indigenous Persons and Ethnolinguistic Minority Communities, that could be
                          exacerbated by the project. The main anticipated environmental risks correspond to occupational health and safety
                          risks associated with the workforce expected for the project, namely, community workers (ADECOS) responsible for
                          rolling out human capital, cash transfer and PI activities under Component 1. Some safety and security risks may also
                          occur for project workers and beneficiaries involved in in-person payments for cash transfers. Minor environmental
                          risks and impacts will be associated with the use of resources and the management of non-hazardous waste resulting
                          from the project activities. The project's social risks may include localized conflicts over the cash transfers and
                          productive inclusion activities (e.g., between eligible and ineligible persons or within households), GBV/SEA/SH risks
                          that could be exacerbated by the project (including intra-household conflict), and risks of exclusion of Indigenous
                          Persons and Ethnolinguistic Minority Communities from the project benefits (these individuals/groups, located in the
                          southern part of Angola, are amongst the most marginalized and vulnerable populations in the country). The project's
                          anticipated E&S risks will be managed through a set of risk proportional measures included in the following E&S




Public Disclosure copy
                          instruments prepared by the Borrower under P181495 project and to be used by this project: (a) an Environmental and
                          Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) setting out the E&S commitments for the project prepared with the Bank support and
                          disclosed by Appraisal, (b) a updated Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and disclosed by Appraisal, (c) a Project's
                          Generic ESMP including, as annexes, LMP and a GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan prepared, consulted and disclosed no later
                          than one (1) month after the Effective Date and (d) an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) prepared (based on the IPP under
                          implementation for Kwenda project), consulted upon, and disclosed once the presence of IP/SSAHUTLCs is confirmed
                          in specific areas of intervention of the project.

                         Contact Point

                         World Bank
                         Emma Mercedes Monsalve Montiel
                         Senior Social Protection Specialist
                         Aylin Isik-Dikmelik
                         Aylin Isik-Dikmelik
                         Federica Ricaldi
                         Federica Ricaldi
                         Borrower/Recipient :

                         Ministry of Finance

                         Patricio Neto

                         Director

                         patricio.neto@minfin.gov.ao




                                                                                                                                                 Page 7
                               The World Bank
                               Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among   Project Information Document (PID)
                               Poor Households(P506027)




                         Implementing Agency :

                         FAS Local Development Institute (FAS-IDL)

                         Belarmino Jelembi

                         Director General

                         belarmino.jelembi@fas.co.ao




Public Disclosure copy
                         For more information, contact:
                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                                                                                    Page 8
