Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI01078

                                                   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                                                                         ON A
                                                                   PROPOSED GRANT
                                              IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 7.4 MILLION (US$10 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
                                                  AND A PROPOSED GRANT IN THE AMOUNT OFUS$5 MILLION
                                    FROM THE COOPERATION IN INTERNATIONAL WATERS IN AFRICA MULTI-DONOR TRUST FUND

                                                                       TO THE
                                     AFRICAN UNION DEVELOPMENT AGENCY – NEW PARTNERSHIP FOR AFRICA’S DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         FOR AN
                                   ACCELERATING ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE IN THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN
                                         AFRICA REGION - PHASE 1 UNDER THE MULTI-PHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH

                                                                       A PROPOSED CREDIT
                                                               IN THE AMOUNT OF US$200 MILLION
                                                     AND A PROPOSED GRANT IN THE AMOUNT OF US$2 MILLION
                                                   FROM THE ENERGY SECTOR MANAGEMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

                                                                                 TO THE
                                                                       UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                             FOR A
                                                    SUSTAINABLE RURAL WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAM
                                              AS PHASE 2 UNDER THE MULTI-PHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH
                                   ACCELERATING ACCESS TO WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE IN THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN
                                                                     AFRICA REGION
                                                WITH AN OVERALL FINANCING ENVELOPE OF US$1,580 MILLION

                                                                              September 9, 2025
                                Water Global Practice
                                Eastern and Southern Africa Region

                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.


                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                        CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                 (Exchange Rate Effective {July 31, 2025})

                             Currency Unit = US$
                                       US$1 = SDR 0.74

                               FISCAL YEAR
                              July 1 - June 30




  Regional Vice President: Ndiame Diop
Regional Practice Director: Anna Wellenstein
        Division Director: Nathan Belete
       Practice Managers: Soma Ghosh Moulik, Francis Ghesquiere
                           Victor Vazquez Alvarez, Susanna Smets, Nishtha Mehta, Ruth
      Task Team Leaders:
                           Kennedy-Walker, Toyoko Kodama, James Origa




                                                                                        Official Use Only
                           ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
             African Investment Program on Water
AIP-Water
AfDB         African Development Bank
AFE          Eastern and Southern Africa
AFE WASH     Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region
AfWASA       African Water and Sanitation Association
AM           Accountability Mechanism
AMCOW        African Ministers' Council on Water
APP          Annual Procurement Plans
AU           African Union
AUC          African Union Commission
AUDA-NEPAD   African Union Development Agency – New Partnership for Africa’s Development
AWPB         Annual Work Plan and Budget
BCC          Behavior Change Communication
BEMIS        Basic Education Management Information System
CBWSOs       Community-Based Water Supply Organizations
CCDR         Country Climate and Development Report
CE           Citizen Engagement
CIWA         Cooperation on International Waters in Africa
CLTS         Community-Led Total Sanitation
CPF          Country Partnership Framework
CWIS         City-Wide Inclusive Sanitation
CWST         Council Water and Sanitation Team
DA           Designated Account
DLI          Disbursement-Linked Indicator
DLR          Disbursement-Linked Result
E&S          Environmental and Social
EIRR         Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESAWAS       Eastern and Southern Africa Water and Sanitation Regulators Association
ESHS         Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety
ESMAP        Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
ESSA         Environmental and Social System Assessment
FCDO         Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
FCV          Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
FM           Financial Management
FSA          Fiduciary Systems Assessment
FSM          Fecal Sludge Management
GBV          Gender-Based Violence
GCP-WSCA     Global Challenge Program on Water Security and Climate Adaptation
GDP          Gross Domestic Product
GePG         Government Electronic Payment Gateway
GHG          Greenhouse Gas
GoT          Government of Tanzania
GRM          Grievance Redress Mechanism
GROW         Global and Regional Opportunities Window
GRS          Grievance Redress Service
GWP-SA       Global Water Partnership – Southern Africa



                                                                                                  Official Use Only
HCFs      Healthcare Facilities
HLO       Higher-Level Outcome
IAG       Internal Auditor General
IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICR       Implementation and Completion Report
IDA       International Development Association
IEG       Independent Evaluation Group
IFC       International Finance Corporation
IFR       Interim Financial Report
IGAD      Intergovernmental Authority on Development
IPF       Investment Project Financing
IVA       Independent Verification Agent
JMP       Joint Monitoring Programme
LGA       Local Government Authority
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MFD       Maximizing Finance for Development
MFD-e     Maximizing Finance for Development–Enabling
MIGA      Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MIS       Management Information System
MoEST     Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
MoH       Ministry of Health
MoW       Ministry of Water
MoWEM     Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals - Zanzibar
MPA       Multiphase Programmatic Approach
NAP       National Adaptation Plans
NBS       National Bureau of Statistics
NDC       Nationally Determined Contributions
NIP       National Investment Plans
NPV       Net Present Value
NRW       Non-Revenue Water
NSMIS     National Sanitation Management Information System
O&M       Operations and Maintenance
OA        Operating Account
OP        Operational Policy
PAD       Program Appraisal Document
PASA      Pan African Sanitation Operators Association
PBA       Performance-Based Allocation
PBC       Performance-Based Conditions
PDO       Project Development Objective
PEIR      Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
PforR     Program-for-Results
PIAP      Performance Improvement Action Plan
PIU       Project Implementation Unit
POM       Program Operational Manual
PO-RALG   President’s Office, Regional Administration and Local Government
PPP       Public-Private Partnership
PrDO      Program Development Objective
REC       Regional Economic Committee



                                                                             Official Use Only
RS         Regional Secretariat
RSDMS      RUWASA Service Delivery Management Information System
RUWASA     Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency
RVP        Regional Vice President
RVR        Results Verification Report
RWSSPS     Rural Water and Sanitation Service Professionalization Strategy
RWST       Regional Water and Sanitation Team
SADC-GMI   Southern African Development Community - Groundwater Management Institute
SDGs       Sustainable Development Goals
SDR        Special Drawing Rights
SEP        Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SMEs       Small and Medium Enterprises
SRWSSP     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program
SSA        Sub-Saharan Africa
TA         Technical Assistance
VGF        Viability Gap Funding
WASH       Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene
WBG        World Bank Group
WRM        Water Resources Management
WSCA       Water Security and Climate Adaptation
WSDP III   Water Sector Development Program Phase III
WSS        Water Supply and Sanitation




                                                                                       Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)




                                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... ii
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 1
      A. Regional Context ............................................................................................................................... 1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 2
      C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................... 4
      D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach................................................................................................ 6
II.   PROGRAM DESCRIPTION .............................................................................................. 16
      A. Program Components .................................................................................................................... 16
      B. Program Beneficiaries ..................................................................................................................... 19
      C. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners .................................................................... 19
      D. Lessons Learned ............................................................................................................................. 19
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 20
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................................................... 20
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ................................................... 20
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .......................................................................................................... 21
      D. Sustainability................................................................................................................................... 21
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 21
      A. Economic Analysis ........................................................................................................................... 21
      B. Corporate Requirements ................................................................................................................ 22
      C. Environmental, Social, and Legal Operational Policies ................................................................... 22
V.    GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 23
VI. KEY RISKS...................................................................................................................... 24
ANNEX 1: Overview of Participating Countries on WASH Systems Change ............................ 26
ANNEX 2: MPA Phase I: Accelerating Access to WASH in the AFE Region .............................. 30
ANNEX 3: MPA Phase II: Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program II ............. 38
ANNEX 3.1. MPA Phase II: Tanzania SRWSSP II -Results Framework ..................................... 54
ANNEX 3.2 MPA Phase II Tanzania SRWSSP-2 Program Action Plan ...................................... 88
ANNEX 3.3. MPA Phase II: Tanzania SRWSSP II Implementation Support Plan....................... 93
ANNEX 3.4 MPA Phase II: Tanzania SRWSSP II Investment Project Financing Component ..... 94

                                                                                                                                                                      Page i


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Angola, Burundi,
Comoros, Congo,
Democratic Republic
of, Ethiopia,
Madagascar, Malawi,
                         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region
Mozambique,
Somalia, Federal
Republic of, South
Sudan, Tanzania,
Zambia
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P506439                                              Moderate
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpaprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[✓] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date                     Expected Program Closing Date
30-Sep-2025                            24-Sep-2029                               13-Sep-2033
Bank/IFC Collaboration                 Joint Level
Yes                                    Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination

                                                                                                                 Page ii


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpa#doctemplate
MPA Program Development Objective
The PrDO for the MPA is to increase access to climate-resilient drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in
participating countries in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region

MPA FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

MPA Program Financing Envelope                                                  2,593.50


Components
 Component Name                                                                                              Cost (US$)
 Strengthening Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH                                                     3,500,000.00
 Advancing Governance, Reforms and Regulation                                                             2,800,000.00
 Improving Service Delivery Performance                                                                   2,400,000.00
 Leveraging Financing for Climate Resilient WASH Infrastructure                                           6,300,000.00


Organizations
Borrower:                        AUDA NEPAD
Implementing Agency:             AUDA-NEPAD


MPA FINANCING DETAILS (US$, Millions)


MPA Program Financing Envelope:                                                 2,593.50

     of which Bank Financing (IBRD):                                            240.00

     of which Bank Financing (IDA):                                             1,340.00

     of which Other Financing sources:                                          1,013.50


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No



                                                                                                                 Page iii


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


SUMMARY

 Total Operation Cost                                                                                           15.00

 Total Financing                                                                                                15.00
               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                10.00

 Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  10.00

        IDA Grant                                                                                               10.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Trust Funds                                                                                                     5.00

        Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                              5.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

Country/Region
                           Regional Institution           Credit     Grant           SML       Guarantee           Total
Window

Eastern and Southern
                                                           0.00       10.00          0.00           0.00           10.00
Africa

Global and Regional
Opportunities              AUDA-NEPAD                      0.00       10.00          0.00           0.00           10.00
Window (GROW)

Total                                                      0.00       10.00          0.00           0.00           10.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal Year               2026                  2027             2028                2029                2030
Annual                        2.00                 5.00             5.00                2.90                0.10
Cumulative                    2.00                 7.00             12.00              14.90               15.00



                                                                                                               Page iv


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Contributing Practice Areas
Infrastructure, PPP's & Guarantees; Urban, Resilience and
Land; Health, Nutrition & Population

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Low
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Low
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Low
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Moderate
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Moderate
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Low
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Moderate
Overall MPA Program Risk                                                    ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No



                                                                                                                 Page v


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                       Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                      Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                             Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                   Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                    Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                    Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement        Not Currently Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                      Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                      Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                              Not Currently Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                       Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
IDA Financing Agreement: Schedule II, Section 1.A.1 (b): The Recipient shall not later than thirty (30) days after the
Effective Date, appoint the project coordinator referred to in Schedule II, Section 1.A.1 (a).
IDA Financing Agreement: Schedule II, Section 1.A.2: The Recipient shall, not later than sixty (60) days after the Effective
Date, establish and thereafter maintain, throughout the period of Project implementation, an Advisory Committee,
responsible for engaging regional entities and representatives of Participating Countries and ensuring coordination and
facilitating agreement on joint activities, with terms of reference and resources satisfactory to the Association, as
further detailed in the Project Operations Manual.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate

                                                                                                                   Page vi


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


 Conditions
 Type                           Citation                      Description                   Financing Source
                                                             The Recipient has adopted
                                                             the Project Operations
 Effectiveness                                               Manual in accordance with
                                Article 5.01                                                IDA; Trust Funds
                                                             the provisions of Section
                                                             B.1 of Schedule 2 of the
                                                             Financing Agreement
Disbursement                   Schedule 2. Section III. B    No withdrawal shall be        IDA
                                                             made for payments made
                                                             prior to the Signature Date
                                                             or under Category (2) until
                                                             and unless the CIWA Grant
                                                             has been fully disbursed




                                                                                                               Page vii


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

 A. Regional Context

1.      A renewed emphasis on investing in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) region’s water, sanitation and
hygiene (WASH) sector is a critical part of restoring long-term growth, enhancing the region’s climate resilience and
developing its human capital. The productivity gains to be captured are huge—it is estimated that the region is losing 5
percent of its annual gross domestic product (GDP), 1 or approximately US$170 billion per year due to poor WASH services.
In a majority of AFE countries, at least 40 percent of students are attending schools without safe water facilities, and more
than 60 percent of students are in schools without proper sanitation facilities. 2 The lack of menstrual-friendly facilities
further depresses female school attendance. While progress to redress the situation remains uneven, a growing number
of countries are beginning to take steps—albeit gradually—in the form of reforms, innovations, and partnerships.
2.      Lack of access to WASH is severely affecting the AFE region’s ability to lift its population out of poverty, spur
economic growth and create jobs. In 2022, there were 277 million people without access to basic water and 458 million
without access to basic sanitation in AFE, 41 and 68 percent respectively, of the region’s total population of the 674 million3
Nine countries are responsible for 80 percent of the gaps.4 These gaps are larger in rural areas, where the largest share of
the region’s poor live, with some countries in the region having basic sanitation access rates as low as 5 percent. Frequent
floods and prolonged droughts further exacerbate the vulnerability of the region’s poor through exposure to
contaminated water sources and lack of water availability, hereby increasing the risk of child stunting.
3.      The region has the highest population and urbanization growth rates globally at 2.7 and 3.5 percent per year
respectively5. The steady progress in poverty reduction in AFE has been significantly disrupted by global shocks such as
food price increases, frequent floods and droughts, and economic vulnerabilities. Recovery from the global pandemic was
disrupted by conflicts, resulting in soaring inflation and food and energy shortages. Countries must develop strategies to
cope with these shocks, ensuring resilience and sustainability. Adaptive measures to stabilize economies and secure
resources are needed. Securing access to water is vital for adaptation, as it supports development and reduces
vulnerability across communities, enabling them to withstand and recover from climate impacts effectively.
4.      Lack of WASH access also has strong gender, equity and health implications for the region. In AFE countries, the
percentage of households where women are responsible for water collection drastically exceeds that of men.6 In some
cases, this percentage is higher than 90 percent, highlighting a deeply rooted inequality in the distribution of WASH-
related domestic labor.7 Poor WASH also leads to increased diarrheal diseases, which is still the leading cause of death in




1Africa's Rising Investment Tide: How to Mobilize US$30 billion annually to Achieve Water Security and Sustainable Sanitation in Africa,

International High-Level Panel on Water Investments for Africa, South Africa, March 2023.
2 Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) 2021
3 JMP 2022
4 Ethiopia, Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Madagascar, Mozambique and Angola.
5 Africa Center for Strategic Studies. “Africa’s Unprecedented Urbanization is Shifting the Security Landscape.” 3 June 2025. Available

at: https://africacenter.org/spotlight/africa-urban-growth-security/ [Accessed 4 September 2025].
The Economist. “Africa’s population will double by 2050.” 25 March 2020. Available at: https://www.economist.com/special-
report/2020/03/26/africas-population-will-double-by-2050 [Accessed 4 September 2025].
6 In the WASH MPA countries on average in 75% of households’ women and girls bear primary responsibility versus only 14 percent men and boys.

The proportion of women and girls bearing this burden has been shown to increase even further during drought, with associated impacts on school
drop-outs and early child marriage.
7 The World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/data/interactive/2024/03/13/gendered-burden-of-water-collection-in-afe-afw-sub-saharan-

africa
                                                                                                                                           Page 1


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


the region, causing more than 8 percent of child deaths.8 Half of global maternal deaths occur in SSA. Nearly 35 percent
of all children are stunted, which is in part attributable to unsafe water, inadequate sanitation, and insufficient hygiene,
thereby affecting the human capital in the region. Simple hygiene interventions, such as handwashing, could drastically
improve health outcomes. Having safe and reliable water and sanitation facilities at home or close to home is especially
beneficial for women and children, who bear the disproportionate burden of off-site water collection.
5.      Water and sanitation access gaps are growing in the AFE region, with significant impacts on the region´s
economy, and are further aggravated by climate change. In 2022, there were an additional 63 million people without
water and 174 million people without sanitation in the region, compared to 2000 (JMP, 2022). If these trends continue,
by 2030, 345 million and 550 million people in the region will be without basic water and sanitation services respectively,
further exposing them to the worsening impacts of climate change—among others, heatwaves, floods, and droughts.
Eastern Africa experienced five consecutive failed rainy seasons between October 2020 and early 2023, resulting in the
worst drought in 40 years. This led to harvest failures, livestock losses, water scarcity, and conflicts, leaving approximately
4.35 million people in need of humanitarian aid.9
6.       In the AFE region, 69 percent of all people without access to water and 71 percent of those without access to
sanitation live in Fragile, Conflict and Violence (FCV) countries. WASH access in FCV countries is affected by lack of
security, as well as institutional weaknesses and capacity constraints typically associated with FCV contexts. In addition,
an increasing number of forcibly displaced persons and their host communities are in urgent need of improved WASH
access to reduce their vulnerabilities
 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

7.        On average, public expenditure on WASH is still low and inefficient in the AFE region, with regressive subsidies,
high donor dependence, and poor sustainability and efficiency of services. In 13 AFE countries analyzed, the average
annual government budget allocated to WASH ranges between 0.1 and 0.8 percent of GDP,10 with a declining trend in half
of them. The region’s estimated investment gap for achieving universal WASH access between 2023 and 2030 is US$150
billion, or 1.4 percent of AFE’s GDP. To reach universal access to WASH, actual investment rates would need to increase 3
times, for urban water, and 14 times, for rural sanitation. The sustainability of WASH investments is a key challenge,
especially as further investment is needed to ensure infrastructure can withstand more frequent and intense climate
shocks. In some AFE countries, up to 40 percent of rural waterpoints fail within two years after construction.11 Average
water losses in urban water utilities stand at 45 percent in the AFE region.12 A significant share of the already low WASH
public expenditure is used to cover operational expenses of utilities, as half of the region’s utilities are not able to cover
their operational costs. This diverts scarce public resources away from investments in expanding access, especially in rural
and low-income peri-urban areas. It is estimated that 56 percent of subsidies go to the wealthiest quintile.13
8.      Despite limited public funding, the expansion of WASH access faces obstacles in mobilizing private capital due
to regulatory and other associated risks. Across Africa, 59 percent of countries are regulating networked water supply

8 Ngabo F, Gatera M, Karema C, Donnen P, Lepage P, Parashar UD, Tate JE, Mwenda JM, Rugambwa C, Binagwaho A. Can routinely collected

national data on childhood morbidity and mortality from diarrhea be used to monitor health impact of rotavirus vaccination in Africa? Examination
of pre-vaccine baseline data from Rwanda. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2014 Jan;33 Suppl 1: S89-93.
9 Joyce Kimutai, Clair Barnes, Mariam Zachariah, Sjoukje Y. Philip, Sarah F. Kew, Izidine Pinto, Piotr Wolski, Gerbrand Koren, Gabriel Vecchi,

Wenchang Yang, Sihan Li, Maja Vahlberg, Roop Singh, Dorothy Heinrich, Julie Arrighi, Carolina Pereira Marghidan, Lisa Thalheimer, Cheikh Kane,
Emmanuel Raju, Friederike E.L. Otto. 2025. “Human-Induced Climate Change Increased 2021–2022 Drought Severity in Horn of Africa.” Weather
and Climate Extremes (47): 1–20 (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212094725000039).
10 United Nations (2022). Strong systems and sound investments: evidence on and key insights into accelerating progress on sanitation, drinking

water and hygiene. UN-Water global analysis and assessment of sanitation and drinking-water (GLAAS) 2022. United Nations, New York.
11 World Bank. 2018. Reaching for the SDGs: The Untapped Potential of Tanzania’s Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector. WASH Poverty

Diagnostic. World Bank, Washington, DC.
12 Average for major water utilities in SSA, IBNET, 2020
13 The World Bank. 2017. “Performance of Water Utilities in Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                                                                                                         Page 2


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


services, but with regulatory authorities often lacking independent mandates and resources to exercise effective service
and tariff regulation. Only 30 percent of AFE countries have autonomously operating regulators. Regulators’ tools for
soliciting consumer feedback and making detailed data on service quality available to consumers are often limited,
undermining accountability to citizens. Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) are often hampered by weak legislative and
regulatory environments, lack of technical expertise and institutional capacity to effectively engage with the private
sector, lack of de-risking instruments and high country and foreign exchange risks. Accessing commercial financing remains
challenging for municipalities and utilities, often due to poor operational efficiency and low investment rates, low
creditworthiness of service providers, poor understanding of the water sector by financial institutions and the mismatch
of financing demand and offers in domestic markets. Such a lack of financing makes it difficult for utilities to make the
necessary investments to improve services and build resilience of their systems and infrastructure.
9.      The WASH sector faces governance challenges such as institutional fragmentation, unpredictable funding, weak
coordination and a lack of incentives for sustainable, customer-focused outcomes. While many AFE countries report the
existence of donor-led coordination arrangements, only nine countries in the region have a functioning national
government-led platform.14 Furthermore, only five AFE countries have systematically funded national WASH investment
programs with implementation adequately monitored, and only two countries are applying or considering result-based
incentives as part of their resource allocation process. Despite these challenges, there are promising initiatives and
opportunities across the region that - if replicated at scale – could address governance constraints, accelerate access to
WASH and ultimately, lead to customer satisfaction and trust.
10.     There is wide consensus in the sector on moving from a business-as-usual approach towards a strategic vision
that uses a systems change approach to accelerate access rates and achieve Sustainable Development Goal 6 (SDG6).
At the WASH Leadership Summit, held in Addis Ababa in November 2023, participating AFE countries endorsed this vision.
They supported the five principles of the systems change approach: (i) establishing government-led planning,
coordinating, and monitoring platforms to support national WASH investment programs; (ii) tackling governance-related
bottlenecks in the sector; (iii) making service delivery more efficient by offering incentives; (iv) boosting investments and
private sector participation (PSP); and (v) embedding resilience to short- and long-term climate change impacts and non-
climate shocks across the entire water service chain, from water resources management (WRM) to last-mile service
delivery, and the closely related sanitation chain, from containment to final disposal or reuse of fecal sludge and
wastewater.
11.      When evaluating the status of systems change in AFE countries, most are currently at a basic level for scaling up
WASH access, though some frontrunners exist. As illustrated in Figure 2, countries are ranked according to their level of
progress in the five principles of systems change outlined in the previous paragraph:15 (i) countries ready to scale up
access, with key elements of the enabling environment in place such as consolidated sector governance, an existing
national investment plan (NIP), well-functioning country platforms and incipient tapping into private capital financing; (ii)
countries with a moderate to aspiring rating, with not all but at least some key elements of the enabling environment in
place; and (iii) countries with a basic rating, with elements in an incipient stage, often FCV countries. Annex 1 presents
details on the status of systems change in the participating countries, along with indicative prioritization of systems change
actions and sub-sectors that different countries may choose to include in their operations, depending on their local
context.
Figure 1. Five Principles of the Systems Change approach            Figure 2. Systems Change Composite Index for 24 AFE Countries




14 Based on surveys across AFE countries in advance of the November 2023 WASH Leadership Summit.
15 Source: Authors’ elaboration. Systems change analysis as part of the AFE WASH Leadership Summit.

                                                                                                                              Page 3


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


12.     The World Bank is engaged in a major scale-up of WASH access effort. The World Bank currently has a WASH
portfolio of US$5.8 billion under implementation, with associated 54 million beneficiaries by 2030. This is being achieved
through a project-by-project approach, helping accelerate access to WASH in several individual countries, but it has not
been sufficient to set the collective momentum for the region to rapidly progress towards universal access. The project-
by-project approach has inherent inefficiencies and leads to fragmentation of efforts, which also makes it more difficult
to mobilize at scale private sector financing or attract co-financing or new sources of funding, such as carbon revenues
and other sources of climate finance.
 C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives

13.     The Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (AFE
WASH) MPA directly supports the mission of the World Bank Group (WBG) to end extreme poverty and boost shared
prosperity on a livable planet and is in line with the WBG Evolution Roadmap discussed by the Board on October 12,
2023 (Report No. 185303). The MPA is a key element of the Global Challenge Program on Water Security and Climate
Adaptation (GCP-WSCA)16 that aims to provide sustainable WASH services to 150 million people and aligns with the WBG
Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience 2021–2025.17 It addresses both climate change vulnerability and
local development challenges by ensuring water security, which is integral to the water-climate-food-energy nexus. The
WSCA sets the following objectives: (i) 250 million people with access to improved water sources; (ii) 150 million people
with access to improved sanitation; (iii) 8.5 million hectares of land with new or improved irrigation services; (iv) 8 million
farmers adopting improved agricultural technology, of which 2 million females; (v) 25 million people with reduced flood
and drought risks; and (vi) 60 river basins with improved water management, considering adaptation to climate impacts
(5 of which are transboundary). The AFE WASH MPA is aligned with the GCP-WSCA’s goals to strengthen water security in
WBG’s client countries through systems change by investing in the scale-up of more sustainable water management and
disaster risk reduction solutions. The AFE WASH MPA is also aligned with the recommendations of the Climate Change
Development Reports (CCDRs) prepared in AFE region, highlighting that WASH is crucial for building climate resilience, as
climate risks like floods and droughts can severely impact water availability, quality, and infrastructure, thereby
exacerbating health and economic burdens. The AFE WASH MPA is also part of the one WBG strategy that includes
government and private sector collaboration for investment and financing.
14.     The AFE WASH MPA underpins human capital formation and employment through various pathways. WASH is
a pre-condition for human capital formation. Childhood stunting, which can be caused by repeated bouts with diarrheal
diseases, is associated with long-term health and economic risks, including reduced educational attainment, lower
earnings, increased morbidity rates, and higher mortality rates.18 Investment in household access to WASH, and access to
WASH in schools, is a prerequisite for enabling human capital formation in the medium- to long-term. Investments in the
WASH sector also result in better public health outcomes, which enhance workforce productivity and reduce absenteeism
due to illness. Where households have access to water beyond the amounts required for basic needs (hygiene, cooking,
and washing) they will use water for productive uses such as kitchen gardening and small livestock production. Irrigation
aside, a reliable water supply is a critical input to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in both rural and urban areas
across diverse sectors such as agri-processing, manufacturing, and services. Across continents including Africa, many
community groups (including women and youth) have also been trained and are gainfully employed in operation and
maintenance (O&M) of WASH schemes.




16 World Bank.2024. Global Challenge Program: Fast-track Water Security and Climate Adaptation - Approach Paper. Washington, D.C.: World Bank

Group.
17 World Bank Group. 2021. World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan 2021–2025; Supporting Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development.

Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
18 World Bank. 2016. “High and Dry: Climate Change, Water, and the Economy.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                                                                                                      Page 4


                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


15.      The AFE WASH MPA is well aligned with the WBG’s three-part approach to private sector development and job
creation.19 First, it supports establishing the WASH infrastructure foundation for jobs, which is required for people and
businesses to thrive. Second, it works with governments to strengthen governance and support business-enabling policies
and a predictable regulatory environment, allowing the private sector to operate and grow. Third, it mobilizes private
capital, as public finance alone cannot deliver the investment necessary to develop the WASH sector and create jobs and
sustained growth. Through collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA), the AFE WASH MPA aims to create a conducive environment for private sector and jobs growth
in the region. WASH projects are significant drivers of temporary and full-time employment through construction works
and induced or multiplier effects in management and services. The employment multiplier effects for WASH projects
surpass those of sectors such as roads, energy, health, and education. These projects are labor-intensive, generating direct
employment during construction, maintenance, and management, as well as indirect jobs across supply chains. For every
US$1 million invested, an average of 30 full-time equivalent jobs is created, compared to 25 in the energy sector and 16
in roads. 20 Investments also support livelihoods by providing water as an input for production in homesteads, SMEs, and
industries. Access to WASH enhances workforce productivity and earnings by improving health and cognitive outcomes.
Recent studies estimate the job creation potential of the AFE WASH MPA, with Moszoro (2024) projecting between 38,839
and 130,686 jobs in low-income countries, and up to 429,000 jobs based on data from India's Swachh Bharat mission. 21 22
Egypt's analysis suggests up to 498,638 total jobs, reflecting sector-specific employment coefficients and adjusted
multipliers. 23
16.       The AFE WASH MPA is aligned with the Mobilizing Finance for Development (MFD) principles, working in
tandem with IFC and MIGA to mobilize private capital. It supports the Scaling Up Water Finance24 initiative through
various means, including establishing national WASH access and financing platforms, promoting PPPs, and supporting
innovative financing solutions. The MPA aims to enhance the attractiveness of the WASH sector to private investors and
operators (including small and medium entrepreneurs) by creating enabling conditions through strengthening the legal
and regulatory frameworks, improving water sector efficiency and financial sustainability over time, building capacity, and
facilitating PSP schemes backed by suitable risk mitigation instruments from the WBG including guarantees and, where
needed, investments grants as viability gap funding (VGF) to improve affordability of services, thereby mobilizing private
capital for viable investment projects. The private capital mobilization (PCM) expected to be generated under the
individual participating countries’ operations is estimated at US$240 million. To this end, joint World Bank/IFC/MIGA
teams are collaborating at the country level to identify and operationalize PCM aspects of the project (for example, hybrid
financing for PPPs for bulk water treatment in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)). At the regional level, the AFE
WASH MPA will also include a joint task force from IFC, MIGA, and the World Bank to support PCM.
17.     The AFE WASH MPA aligns with the WBG 2020 FCV Strategy25 and the WBG’s Gender Strategy 2024-30.26 It
addresses inequalities, one of the underlying causes of fragility, aiding the transition out of fragility. The proposed MPA
will contribute to human development by improving health and education outcomes, especially for girls, through better
WASH facilities at home, in schools, and in health centers. It will narrow gender gaps by empowering women and girls,

19 Development Committee (2025). Jobs: The Path to Prosperity
20 Moszoro, Marian W. 2024. The direct employment impact of public investment, International Journal of Management and Economics. 60(1): 59–

74
21 Naik, Gopal, Abinash Singh, Jas Abhilasha. 2023. Assessment of employment generation potentials of Jal Jeevan Mission, Centre for Public Policy

Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
22 UNICEF. 2020. National Economic Impact Evaluation of the Swachh Bharat Mission Final Report, New Delhi, India
23 The World Bank. (2013). Infrastructure and employment creation in the Middle East and North Africa. The World Bank.
24 https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-

reports/documentdetail/099081523115515232/p1801320fb80dc0690b8f50f470c7aa8bc1
25 World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020–2025. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
26World Bank Group Gender Strategy 2024—200: Accelerate Gender Equality to End Poverty on a Livable Planet Washington, DC: World Bank

Group
                                                                                                                                           Page 5


                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


reducing their physical and time burden of collecting water through improved access to WASH, and creating economic
opportunities. All country phases of the MPA will be fully aligned with their respective Country Partnership Frameworks
(CPFs).
18.      The AFE WASH MPA will contribute to the Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan (2023-2027), which
identifies increasing water security as one of the top priorities of the region. It is also aligned with the World Bank’s Green,
Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach, which pursues poverty eradication and shared prosperity with a
sustainability lens, principles that the AFE WASH MPA follows. Expanding access to WASH aligns with IDA21 goals to
improve lives by focusing on sustainable development, including water security, to ensure a livable planet for all.
19.     The AFE WASH MPA will coordinate and collaborate with other regional MPA programs in the AFE region
seeking to address global and regional public goods and improve the region’s resilience. WASH access will complement
these programs to deliver results. For example, the AFE WASH MPA will support delivery of last-mile water for rural
beneficiaries, often farmers, who can also use water to support livelihoods (livestock, small-scale irrigation, and food
security) complementing the Food Systems Resilience Program for Eastern and Southern Africa, the Middle East and North
Africa (P178566), or programs contributing to increased resilience of water resources such as the Regional Climate
Resilience Program for Eastern and Southern Africa (P180171) Series of Projects (SoP), and the Horn of Africa Groundwater
for Resilience Program (P174867) or programs contributing to increased access to WASH in schools such as Advancing
Innovative Methods to Promote Learning (AIM4Learning) in Eastern and Southern Africa MPA Program (P507220), and
programs promoting vocational education and training and job creation such as the East Africa Skills for Transformation
and Regional Integration Project (EASTRIP; P163399), and the Skills for Economic Transformation and Jobs Program
(SETforJobs; P510027) to strengthen this engagement. The AFE WASH MPA will also scale up existing national operations
across the region (for example, rural water Program for Results (PforRs) in Tanzania and Ethiopia) by bringing more
systematic approaches and addressing pending bottlenecks that still impede moving at scale, benefitting from a
comprehensive regional collaboration platform that this Program is promoting.
20.       The program aligns closely with Agenda 2063 and key initiatives promoted by the African Union (AU) and the
African Ministers' Council on Water (AMCOW). The MPA supports the Second Ten-Year Implementation Plan (2024-2033)
of Agenda 2063 (The Africa We Want in 2063) in accelerating infrastructure development, institutional reforms, financing,
skilling and generating employment, and promoting resilience. The Continental Africa Investment Program for Water (AIP-
Water) seeks to mobilize substantial investments—targeting US$30 billion annually by 2030—to enhance water security
and sustainable sanitation across the continent. The AFE WASH MPA complements this by addressing governance
bottlenecks, promoting efficiency, and creating a conducive environment for investment and learning. AMCOW's
commitment to advancing resilient WASH services emphasizes the need for robust institutional frameworks and financing
strategies, which aligns with the AFE WASH MPA’s approach of leveraging financial resources to overcome existing
challenges. By integrating efforts with these continental strategies and working with partners implementing these key
regional initiatives, the AFE WASH MPA is well poised to foster collaborations that enhance the effectiveness of WASH
interventions and ensure sustainable outcomes across the region.
 D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach

 (i) Rationale for Using MPA

21.     For reversing the slide in WASH access in the region and rapidly scale up access, the AFE WASH MPA requires a
region-wide mandate and scope, agility to respond to diverse needs, the ability to quickly adapt to the changing
circumstances, and participating countries to learn quickly from collective experiences. The MPA affords a cohesive and
well-coordinated approach while being flexible to accommodate specific country contexts. The AFE WASH MPA comprises
an engagement at regional level, delivered through three regional phases and twelve individual country phases. The
compelling rationale for the MPA being the best suited approach includes:

                                                                                                                        Page 6


                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


•   Achieving the SDG (6.1 and 6.2) targets of universal water and sanitation access in the AFE region demands a long-
    term, regionally coordinated vision for sector transformation. The challenges faced by countries in this region—
    such as water scarcity, rapid urbanization, and climate vulnerability—are often transboundary and interconnected,
    making a regional operational approach not only strategic but indispensable. By fostering a regional collaborative
    platform, countries can share knowledge, learn lessons and adopt best-fit practices tailored to the unique contexts
    of AFE. Regional mechanisms can incentivize countries to participate in regional-level capacity building, share
    expertise, and build a momentum for policy, institutional and regulatory development, while integrated management
    of transboundary water resources can ensure that upstream and downstream countries benefit equitably. This
    regional coordination strengthens collective capacity to address WASH challenges, leading to improved health
    outcomes, economic growth, and resilience across borders, rather than individual countries starting anew on sector
    development and achieving isolated national gains.
•   The regional character of the AFE WASH MPA will help catalyze a shift from a project-by-project approach to a
    programmatic systems change approach, promoting implementation flexibility, streamlined processes, and
    phased implementation. As opposed to country-by-country investments, a regional approach using the MPA
    instrument will allow for agile implementation and reduce transaction costs in both design and implementation of
    WASH interventions in participating countries. Through collaboration and cross-country learning, the MPA will
    achieve significant economies of scale and support regional integration objectives. These will bring participating
    countries together to tackle the common systemic challenges associated with the WASH crisis. For example, the AFE
    WASH MPA will facilitate the development of a set of options for improved service delivery, customer orientation
    and engagement, support private sector engagement, and explore effective procurement and construction
    approaches to develop quality and climate-resilient WASH infrastructure. Thus, the regional phases incentivize
    participating countries through on-demand technical assistance, while informing country-level implementation
    strategies through knowledge exchange and good practice in other MPA participating countries. The design of all
    phases of the proposed MPA will be aligned to ensure quick effectiveness and implementation.
•   The regional phases of the proposed AFE WASH MPA are designed to facilitate sustained, multi-country
    engagement, supporting countries before, during, and after their individual country phases. This regional
    framework ensures continuity and coherence in systems change, allowing for the development and scaling of reforms
    that are informed by regional experiences and adapted to local contexts. By anchoring reforms within a regional
    structure, countries can benefit from peer-to-peer learning, and coordinated investments, which are critical for the
    sustainability and impact of WASH sector reforms across the region.
•   Through its individual country phases, the proposed AFE WASH MPA will leverage a close engagement with other
    sectors embedded within the respective CPFs. Key areas for cross-country collaboration include rural and urban
    development (sanitation, drainage, and circular water management), environment, health, education, renewable
    energy, and governance reforms. Regional institutions and networks play a pivotal role in facilitating dialogue and
    joint action on issues such as state-owned enterprise reform, public investment management, and decentralization,
    all of which have direct implications for WASH outcomes. The MPA’s design enables countries to work in tandem
    with regional development policy financing and operations, ensuring that interventions are not siloed but instead
    benefit from strong regional synergies and shared solutions to complex, intersectoral challenges. This approach
    maximizes the impact of WASH investments and reforms, driving progress toward universal access across AFE as a
    collective regional achievement.
•   The AFE WASH MPA aims to deliver solutions and impact at scale. The MPA will directly deliver results at scale for
    30 million people across the region, and its design incorporates the flexibility required to adapt and respond rapidly
    to the changing circumstances of many of the poorest and most fragile countries in the world. It will help build robust
    foundation of the WASH sectors in the participating countries so that they can continue building on their momentum
    to sustainably scale-up access to WASH services. Its regional knowledge platform will ensure that countries can learn

                                                                                                                    Page 7


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


      from one another and work more effectively to collaboratively address WASH challenges. Embedding learning
      throughout the program will improve the agility of projects to adjust, and course correct during implementation.
 (ii) Program Results Chain

22.     The Program’s Theory of Change is illustrated in Figure 3. All participating countries will follow the same causal
chain but will select activities and results indicators relevant to their contexts, thus providing maximum flexibility.




                                                                                                                   Page 8


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                                                                     Figure 3: AFE WASH Program Theory of Change




Note: NIP = national investment plan/program; DP = Development Partner; PIAP = performance improvement action plan; PEIR= Public Expenditure and Institutional Review; PSP = private sector
participation; WASH = water, sanitation and hygiene; WRM = water resources management; WSS = water supply and sanitation



                                                                                                                                                                                      Page 9


                                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


Underlying assumptions: (i) WASH sector continues being a priority in MPA participating countries; (ii) the macro -fiscal
situation in MPA participating countries is acceptable allowing WASH programs to be funded; (iii) countries show high
levels of engagement at the regional level and through regional project activities.

 (iii) Program Development Objectives

          (i) PrDO Statement
 23.     The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to increase access to climate resilient drinking water supply,
 sanitation and hygiene services in participating countries in Eastern and Southern Africa. The MPA aims to significantly
 increase access to WASH at the household level, in schools, and in health facilities, following a common intervention
 framework across participating countries. This approach enhances community climate resilience by ensuring secure
 and sustainable water and sanitation access amid increasing variability in water supply.
          (ii) PrDO Level Indicators
24.       The proposed PrDO indicators are:
      •   PrDO Indicator 1: Number of people with access to water supply services. Disaggregated by gender, youth, sub
          sector (rural-urban), and level of service (percentage safely managed)
              o Target 1 by 9/2033: 17 million people with access to at least basic water supply services, of which 50
                   percent access to safely managed services, and at least 40 percent in rural areas27
      •   PrDO Indicator 2: Number of people with access to sanitation services. Disaggregated by gender, youth, and sub
          sector (rural-urban), and level of service (percentage safely managed)
              o Target 2 by 9/2033: 13 million people with access to at least basic sanitation services, of which 10
                   percent access to safely managed services, at least 80 percent in rural areas28
      •   PrDO Indicator 3: Number of schools and health care facilities with WASH facilities, disaggregated by schools and
          health care facilities.
              o Target 3 by 9/2033: 7,500 schools or healthcare facilities with new WASH facilities
      •   PrDO Indicator 4: Number of beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks, disaggregated by gender,
          youth, of which people benefiting from climate-resilient infrastructure.
              o Target 4: by 9/2033: 17 million (same as PrDO1)
      •   PrDO Indicator 529: Number of transboundary aquifer management plans for climate-resilient water supply
          development completed and adopted30
              o Target 5: by 9/2033: 6
25.      The PrDO indicators are aligned with the Corporate Scorecard: The indicator ‘people with access to water supply,
sanitation, and hygiene services’ will be used across all country phases. In addition, the AFE WASH MPA includes a menu
of indicators from which participating countries would select relevant indicators depending on country specific design and
needs.
26.    The PrDO level indicators will apply to all country-level operations to allow aggregation at the MPA level.
Country operations will develop their project Results Framework, using indicators of choice from a menu of indicators



27 Basic access refers to access to an improved water source that is within 30 minutes return trip; safely managed access means that water is

accessible on premises, available when needed, and free of contamination. (JMP)
28 Basic access refers to access to an improved sanitation facility (that is, one that hygienically separates human excreta from human contact);

safely managed is a higher level of service that requires safe collection and off-site treatment and disposal/re-use.
29 This indicator would be measured in the countries that benefit from IDA21’s GROW window.
30 Approved by transboundary basin/groundwater committees and/or other relevant national or regional authorities

                                                                                                                                            Page 10


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


corresponding to the activities under each pillar of the program. The country operations will thus include indicators that
can be aggregated at the program level, pertaining to results indicators mapped to each of the four pillars of the program.
27.     For participating countries, results monitoring will be carried out by the country phase task teams and relevant
implementing agencies. At the regional level, the implementing agency, African Union Development Agency - New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (AUDA-NEPAD) and the program task team will be responsible for monitoring and
reporting. The participating countries will select targets and indicators tailored to their specific needs and design of the
operation. The menu of indicators includes the following:
    - Government-led National WASH Platforms functional
    - Number of National Investment Programs for WASH approved
    - Policies new or updated for climate-resilient urban and rural water and sanitation
    - Regulatory framework developed / implemented (water/sanitation/urban/rural or a combination)
    - Water / sanitation regulator set up and operational
    - Percentage increase in operational cost recovery ratio for urban utilities
    - Number of urban utilities that reach creditworthiness
    - Number of water schemes / sanitation solutions that are fully functional in rural areas
    - M&E systems (sector wide / urban / rural / water / sanitation) fully operational
    - Number of operators (urban/rural) that have developed and implemented climate adaptation plans
    - Citizen engagement mechanisms implemented for improving water and sanitation service delivery
    - Number of PPPs in operation/amount of private and innovative finances deployed
    - Amount (U$) leveraged in private capital mobilization for water / sanitation infrastructure
    - Integrated Water Resources Management plans prepared and under implementation
    - Increase in the number of women who are able to access water from an improved source within 30 minutes or
        less (mandatory for all country-phases)31

 (iv) Program Framework

28.    At the WASH Leadership Summit in Addis Ababa in 2023, all participating country delegations comprising finance
and water ministers expressed their commitment to the climate-resilient WASH acceleration agenda. Twelve countries
have subsequently expressed their intent to join the MPA, as indicated in Table 1.
29.     Principles of country engagement. Most countries in AFE require significant investment to achieve universal
access to WASH services. However, financial resources are limited, and several governments face fiscal constraints.
Therefore, countries’ demand to join the MPA as well as the following principles have guided the program framework.
Participating countries have either already established or indicated their intention to develop government-led WASH
programs (national or sub-national) that set realistic, time-bound targets for access and identify credible financial
resources. Where needed, the MPA will support the development of these national WASH programs, including a set of
medium-term reforms, with the aim of addressing governance bottlenecks and unlocking private financing.
30.    The AFE WASH MPA is planned to be implemented over eight years. All countries interested in the programs are
expected to join the program within the first three years after approval of the MPA to ensure that all countries achieve



31 This indicator will be calculated by multiplying the proportion of households where women bear the primary burden for water collection by the

number of households upgraded to at least basic water and then multiplied by the average number of women/girls per household to arrive at the
estimated number of women benefitting from the reduced time burden. The regional WASH MPA will provide guidance on methods for measuring
the increase in the number of women shifting from over 30 minutes to 30 minutes or less for water collection from an improved source. This
should as much as possible be based on actual outcomes/attestation-based surveys or the equivalent representative data. The country-level MPA
M&E plans will monitor these aspects and include the specific methodology to be used.
                                                                                                                                        Page 11


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


their targets within the eight years of implementation. Adjustments to the program may be made depending on
implementation experience, country demand, and findings from the program's learning agenda.
31.     Table 1 presents the AFE WASH MPA’s Program Framework. The framework is developed based on the countries'
readiness to join the program and their implementation capacity. The program description section describes program-
level components (or pillars) and areas of investment (menu of activities).




                                                                                                              Page 12


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


  Table 1. Proposed MPA Framework
     • PrDO: To increase access to climate resilient water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in participating countries in Eastern and Southern Africa
     • PDO-phase 1 (Regional): To improve governance and build institutional capacities for climate-resilient water supply and sanitation service delivery in
          participating countries in the Eastern and Southern Africa region
     • PDO phase 2 (Tanzania): To increase and sustain access to at least basic water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in all rural districts.
     • All phases are simultaneous
                                                                                               Estimated    Estimated   Estimated
                                                                                               IBRD         IDA         Other       Estimated   Estimated
Phase                            Sequential or                                        IPF or
         Operation ID                            Phase’s Proposed DO*                          Amount       Amount      Amount*     Approval    Environmental &
#                                Simultaneous                                         PforR
                                                                                               (US$         (US$        (US$        Date        Social Risk Rating
                                                                                               million)     million)    million)
                                                 To improve governance and build
         Regional WASH-                          institutional capacities for
         Tanzania, Burundi,                      climate-resilient water supply
  1      South Sudan,            Simultaneous    and sanitation service delivery in   IPF            0.00       10.00        5.00     Sept-25       Moderate
         Democratic Republic                     participating countries in the
         of Congo; P506439                       Eastern and Southern Africa
                                                 region.
                                                 To increase and sustain access to
                                                 at least basic water supply,
  2      Tanzania; P508698       Simultaneous    sanitation and hygiene services      P4R            0.00      200.00      122.00     Sept-25       Moderate
                                                 in all rural districts.


                                                 To increase access to climate
                                                 resilient water supply and
  3      Burundi; P507207        Simultaneous    sanitation services and to           IPF            0.00       80.00       15.00     Dec-25       Substantial
                                                 strengthen the capacity of water
                                                 operators
         South Sudan;
  4                              Simultaneous                                         IPF            0.00       85.00        0.00     Mar-26          High
         P512161



                        Official Use Only                                                                                                                    Page 13
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


           Democratic Republic
    5                                Simultaneous                                             IPF                 0.00        200.00         300.00    Jul-26       High
           of Congo; P513301
           Regional WASH -
           Ethiopia, Somalia,
    6                               Simultaneous                                              IPF                 0.00          10.00           0.00   Jul-26    Moderate
           Madagascar, and
           Comoros, Malawi

    7      Ethiopia; P508078         Simultaneous                                             P4R                 0.00        200.00         185.00    Sep-26    Substantial

    8      Somalia                   Simultaneous                                             IPF                 0.00          50.00           5.00   Sep-26       High

    9      Madagascar                Simultaneous                                             IPF                 0.00        100.00          30.00    Sept-26      High

   10      Comoros                   Simultaneous                                             IPF                 0.00          20.00         10.00    Dec-26    Substantial

   11      Malawi                    Simultaneous                                             IPF                 0.00        100.00          25.00    Jan-27    Substantial

   12      Angola                    Simultaneous                                             IPF               240.00           0.00        210.00    Mar-27    Substantial

   13      Zambia                    Simultaneous                                             P4R                 0.00        200.00          50.00    May-27    Substantial

   14      Mozambique                Simultaneous                                             PforR               0.00          75.00         56.50    Jul-27    Substantial

           Regional WASH -
   15      Angola, Zambia and        Simultaneous                                             IPF                 0.00          10.00           0.00   Jul-27    Moderate
           Mozambique

 Total                                                                                                         240.00       1,340.00       1,013.50

                                                                             Total Program Envelope                                     US$2,593.50

                                                               Board Approved Financing Envelope                                        US$1,580.00
*Note: Other sources of funding include contributions from development partners, government allocations, and investments from the private sector.


                           Official Use Only                                                                                                                               Page 14
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


 (v) Learning Agenda

32.      The MPA will draw on lessons learned from past operations and proposed activities will inform future
engagement to support a longer-term systems change agenda. The regional phases are expected to foster collaboration
through a regional knowledge platform and the integration of knowledge and learning activities covering four pillars of
the MPA. The knowledge derived from this platform will be leveraged to support the preparation and implementation of
subsequent phases. By generating and sharing region-wide knowledge and implementation support, the platform will help
ensure that future projects incorporate the best-fit practices. This will be accomplished by providing access to advanced
global knowledge, implementing a flexible approach to knowledge application, and fostering peer-to-peer learning among
participating countries. Based on the MPA learning agenda below, the regional phases will develop and implement a
specific knowledge, monitoring, and learning plan and update this throughout implementation.
33.     Analytical work will be conducted to guide future actions in thematic areas aligned with the four pillars of the
MPA: (i) enhancing sector governance through evidence-based learning; (ii) improving sector planning through
comprehensive basin/aquifer level assessments; (iii) utilizing benchmarking and enhanced data to facilitate decision-
making; and (iv) increasing financing to boost overall sector performance. Many of these elements have been incorporated
in the knowledge and learning activities of the first regional phase.
                                                   MPA LEARNING AGENDA
 Research Questions                Indicative Methodology                                   How the Activity will Support the PrDO

 How can sector governance         Development of assessment methodology on                 This initiative will help identify policies
 bottlenecks be addressed          linkages between governance improvements and             and reforms that strengthen governance
 better through evidence-based     systems change and service delivery.                     and improve WASH outcomes for
 learning?                                                                                  women, marginalized communities, and
                                                                                            remote communities by reducing access
                                                                                            barriers.
 How can better basin-/aquifer-    Evaluation of approaches for conducting water            Explore how water resources
 level assessments improve         resource assessments at the sub-basin or aquifer         assessments can improve basin-level
 sector planning?                  scale that are applicable across various countries and   planning and decision making, and
                                   how these can be used for improved decision making       integrate hydro, ecological, and socio-
                                   in different countries.                                  economic data.

 Can benchmarking and              Open-access dashboards and real-time monitoring          Assess how digital interfaces enhance
 improved data utilization lead    systems to track service delivery and investment         transparency, benchmark progress in
 to greater accountability?        flows                                                    implementing universal access
                                                                                            roadmaps, aid decision-making for sector
                                                                                            reforms, and mobilize financial
                                                                                            resources.
 How can different sources of      Assess strategies to enhance access to innovative        Explore ways to mobilize climate finance
 finance, including private        financing mechanisms—including climate finance,          in the WASH sector and ways to increase
 finance, be mobilized to          micro-finance, and private capital—by identifying        blended finance models, guarantees to
 improve systems change            existing barriers, analyzing enabling environments,      de-risk private investments and micro-
 impact?                           and evaluating the effectiveness of various              credit for sanitation.
                                   approaches across different contexts.
 How can water and sanitation                                                               The activity will enhance knowledge on
                                   Develop a methodology to mainstream climate risk/
 systems be optimized to enable                                                             optimizing WASH systems for efficient
                                   energy efficiency assessments in WASH projects
 efficient use of energy sources                                                            energy use, including solar pumping, and
 with lower emissions?                                                                      aiding climate change adaptation.

                                                                                                                             Page 15
                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
              The World Bank
              Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)



 II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

       A. Program Components

34.      The AFE WASH MPA structure consists of four pillars or Program Components encompassing the overall scope of
the Program and covering urban and rural, water and sanitation sub-sectors. The four pillars contain a comprehensive
menu of activities tailored to the needs of participating countries to achieve the Program’s development objectives. The
activities will be tailored to a specific context to effectively advance the reform agenda and achieve the greatest possible
impact. The choice of financing instruments will depend on the country’s context.
Pillar 1/Program Component 1: WASH Acceleration Platforms.
35.      This pillar will support the development of (i) a Regional Platform for knowledge and benchmarking and (ii)
national WASH platforms and corresponding preparation of national or subnational WASH investment plans. National
WASH Acceleration Platforms will consolidate government-led efforts to coordinate sector stakeholders around National
WASH Investment Plans on financing and reforms, as well as on policy and technical guidance with an emphasis on climate
resilience, inclusivity, and gender equality. The pillar will promote budget allocations and preparation of multi-year
national or subnational investment plans for WASH in both rural and urban areas that will provide the main framework
for expanding timely access to WASH for all. Government-led national WASH platforms will coordinate the efforts of key
sector stakeholders, including the Ministry of Finance; Ministries of Water and Sanitation; Ministries of Education and
Health; other relevant ministries/agencies; donor partners; and civil society organizations. These platforms will manage
links with policies and plans for WRM, floods, and disasters, ensuring that the investments proposed are coherent and
climate resilient. Countries may adapt from successful examples in the region such as the One WASH platform’ in Ethiopia,
which coordinates policy, financing and technical inputs through coordinated planning, financing and implementation of
WASH investments. This pillar will also support comprehensive sectoral M&E systems to track progress. This pillar will
include improving the data and feedback systems that accurately track the time that women spend collecting water (in
the context of access to ‘basic’ and ‘safely managed’ water) to inform decisions or incentives for achieving at least basic
access for women.
36.       The regional phases will support countries in setting up the national platforms and preparing NIP by promoting
cross-learning and best practices. Through high-level engagements, the regional phases shall advocate for countries
prioritizing WASH in policies and in national budgetary allocations. They will be aligned with ongoing regional efforts on
mobilizing finance for WASH (under Program for Infrastructure Development in Africa), the water investment monitoring
scorecard, and other efforts for promoting capacity building and resilience. The AUDA-NEPAD, the implementing agency
for the regional phases, will provide support to capacity building, the systems change dashboard, and partnerships with
civil society and other non-state stakeholders for Pillar 1 activities.
Pillar 2/Program Component 2: Sector Governance Reforms
37.      This pillar will focus on strategic governance and supporting institutional reforms and enhancing regulatory
oversight. It will offer incentives and technical assistance to initiate essential governance and institutional reforms. These
will include strengthening policies and institutional capacities and improving accountability and transparency within the
sector. Sector reforms and their implementation will be informed by analytics and the deployment of tools such as PEIRs,
Water Sector Assessment Programs and enterprise bottleneck and employment multiplier studies. The pillar will also cover
flood and drought management strategies and use the EPIC 32 Response Framework for identifying bottlenecks and
developing roadmaps for improving climate resilience.



32 EPIC = Enable, Plan, Invest, Control


                                                                                                                      Page 16
                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


38.       Depending on the country context, Pillar 2 supports reforms by designing incentives for updating national water
policies, enacting modern water laws, clarifying institutional mandates, supporting decentralized service delivery,
promoting efficient fiscal transfers, building organizational and personnel capacities in decentralized levels and in national
agencies, and skilling community groups to be employed in O&M activities. The vital role of non-sector actors will be
recognized and bottlenecks in the operations for example. of small and medium-local entrepreneurs will be addressed by
policy measures to integrate them formally, also easing their access to financing. The pillar will also support improving
citizen engagement and accountability33 by taking stock of existing regulators in terms of capacity to engage consumers,
capture and aggregate consumer feedback and improve transparency on service provision including to underserved
populations. Regulators will receive technical assistance to expand their capacities, autonomy and mandates. The regional
phases will support participating countries in revising policies, strengthening institutions and regulatory frameworks,
facilitating regulatory twinning arrangements, developing standard regulatory tools/instruments and helping countries
adopt these to their contexts, and building capacity and promoting regional knowledge exchanges.
Pillar 3/Program Component 3: Improving Service Provision Performance
39.      This pillar focuses on enhancing WASH service delivery models by improving the sustainability and climate
resilience of operations and service provision in both urban and rural areas. This pillar aims at improving the
creditworthiness and climate resilience of urban utilities as well as the implementation of sustainable, resilient and low-
carbon O&M models in rural areas. This pillar will support the development and implementation of PIAPs and Rural Water
and Sanitation Service Professionalization Strategies (RWSSPS) to improve operational and financial sustainability of
operators. The implementation of these plans and strategies will aim to reduce water losses (thus increasing available
water supply and contributing to adaptation) and energy consumption (thus reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions).
Other activities will help improve the operating ratio of utilities and efficiency of rural service providers. Support will also
be provided to strengthen institutions with dedicated mandates, budget and personnel for scaling up sanitation, especially
in rural areas. Particular attention shall be given to skilling and capacity building of community groups including women
and youth groups, for them to be employed in construction, O&M, and repairs of water schemes, household and public
toilets.
40.       The pillar will also support developing information management systems, monitoring tools necessary to generate
reliable data and evidence, and systems of customer engagement and systematic feedback to guide the PIAPs. Climate
resilience will be mainstreamed throughout the plans and strategies by promoting flood and drought disaster risk
management, and use of renewable or low-carbon energy sources. This pillar will emphasize the importance of market-
based strategies for service expansion backed by innovative financial support, particularly in sanitation for both rural and
urban contexts. For urban sanitation, this may involve City-Wide Inclusive Sanitation (CWIS) Plans and their
implementation where relevant. For rural areas, this may include strategies for sustaining behavior change and developing
market-based sanitation services and innovative models for delivering smart subsidies that crowd-in demand and promote
local private sector development and jobs. Under this pillar, private sector and community capacity and innovation will
need to be leveraged. The pillar will also promote affordability and inclusion for low-income and vulnerable populations
to gain access and improve service delivery through mechanisms like utility scorecards, benchmarking of service providers’
systems for customer and civic engagement and closing customer feedback loops. These activities will contribute to more
informed policy discussions and operational strategies for water investments. This will also help harness the potential of
water investments in leveraging employment. The regional phases will support regional capacity building initiatives for
utilities, informal rural and urban service providers, city administrations, rural WASH agencies, and skilling community
groups.




33 For example, through use of diagnostics to assess service providers’ systems for engaging consumers, citizens and civil society and for leveraging

consumer feedback for improved responsiveness and service delivery.
                                                                                                                                            Page 17
                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


Pillar 4/Program Component 4: Financing Climate-Resilient WSS Infrastructure and Promoting Private Sector
Participation
41.       This pillar entails financing all WASH infrastructure to expand access. The pillar will have a strong focus to
leveraging private sector expertise and capital to expand resilient water and sanitation infrastructure, including WASH
facilities in schools and health centers, and rural sanitation programs, as well as the long-term sustainability of the built
infrastructure through adequate operation and maintenance (O&M). This pillar will support countries in strategically
incorporating WASH into their budgets and mobilize private and innovative financing for the sector. By working with IFC
and MIGA, this pillar will finance WASH infrastructure designed to both withstand climatic shocks and improve
beneficiaries’ drought and flood resilience34 while aiming to enable and mobilize private capital and expertise, for example
through hybrid finance structures, PPP transactions and risk mitigation instruments to mobilize commercial financing and
equity and attract competent management. The pillar will promote the use of financing innovations including micro-
finance, climate finance, etc. for scaling up access to water and sanitation. Support will be provided to address supply-side
bottlenecks including utilities’ access to commercial/blended finance, SME access to innovative finance, and measures to
increase the flow of financing for each of the sub-sectors, for example, for CWIS in urban sanitation, etc. The program will
also identify opportunities for peer-to-peer learning among participating countries. The AFE WASH MPA will develop tools
to assess the skills gaps for participating countries to help design country-specific projects that consider capacity
strengthening and skilling programs that benefit local communities.
42.      The pillar includes a range of resilience-building activities, including improving WRM to more efficiently allocate
water resources during times of scarcity and provide flood protection; promoting basin-level strategies that integrate
flood and drought preparedness and response; supporting investments in water storage, aquifer recharge and
development, and water reuse for drought resilience; and ensuring new and rehabilitated infrastructure is climate-
resilient.35 At the regional level (phase I) expertise will be mobilized to support countries with state-of-the art advisory
services and technical support for transboundary aquifer assessments and climate-resilient groundwater management
plans to inform NIPs.
MPA Regional Phases
43.    The regional phases will provide both collective and tailored support to country operations throughout the
preparation, implementation, and post-closing stages. Its overarching goal is to foster an enabling environment for
reforms and catalyze increased investments, assisting countries in selecting relevant elements from the four pillars of the
MPA to drive systems changes that are most applicable to their specific contexts. Implementation of country phases will
generate insights into appropriate systems’ change elements for different contexts, supporting iterative implementation
and encouraging peer-to-peer learning in support of the MPA learning agenda.
44.     The regional engagement, implemented by AUDA-NEPAD, will support overall program progress. During the first
regional phase and its subsequent two phases AUDA-NEPAD will extend targeted support to countries as they join the
program, facilitating their integration and ongoing progress. Each phase will place a stronger focus on promoting PSP and
investment in WASH initiatives. In the first regional phase targeted support will be provided to Tanzania, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan. In the second regional phase, targeted interventions will be introduced
to deepen support for countries joining the program, including Ethiopia, Somalia, Madagascar, Comoros and Malawi. In
the third regional phase targeted support will be provided to Angola, Zambia and Mozambique as they join the program.



34 Improving sanitation contributes to adaptation by reducing the volume of untreated wastewater discharged into the environment (thereby

increasing the volume of available water and improving water quality). The improved water quality will in turn lower the incidence of waterborne
diseases and reduce the potential impact of floods, as flood waters will become less contaminated (thus raising communities' resilience to floods).
In addition, climate-proofing WSS infrastructure will lead to fewer service disruptions."
35 The World Bank’s Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief, published in 2017, focuses on the three natural hazards most likely to affect water

and sanitation infrastructure—droughts, floods, and high winds. It provides hard and soft recommendations for the climate-proofing of WSS
infrastructure.
                                                                                                                                           Page 18
                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


Throughout all three phases, the regional engagement will prioritize scaling up proven approaches and strengthening PSP,
ensuring sustained impact and momentum as the AFE WASH MPA progresses.
 B. Program Beneficiaries

45.     The main beneficiaries of the MPA will be people to have new access to WASH services (either basic or safely
managed) and those who will move from basic to safely managed level. The MPA aims to reach at least 30 million
beneficiaries, 17 million with at least basic access to water and 13 million people with at least basic access to sanitation.
46.     This would also benefit at least 7.4 million women and girls with reduced time burden to collect water and 6.5
million women and girls with improved access to basic sanitation. 36 The MPA targets marginalized and vulnerable
populations and focuses on improving WASH access in healthcare facilities and schools (7,500 facilities). The program is
therefore expected to bring significant positive public health human capital impacts by reducing the incidence of
waterborne diseases, lowering healthcare costs, and increasing productivity. By reducing the time women and children
spend collecting water, the program will enable them to engage in more productive activities. Increasing sanitation access
will reduce the risks for gender-based violence (GBV) for women and girls during open defecation. The program will also
benefit institutions that are responsible for delivering or regulating WASH services, focusing on improving capacity and
learning opportunities.
 C. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners

47.     The MPA and its country-level phases are supported by multiple regional and international partners. The MPA
aligns with the strategic objectives of the main DPs supporting access to WASH. The MPA supports the Second Ten-Year
Implementation Plan (2024-2033) of Africa’s Agenda 2063. In 2026, the AU will focus on "Assuring Sustainable Water
Availability and Safe Sanitation Systems to Achieve the Goals of Agenda 2063".The International High-Level Panel on
Water, which aims to ensure the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all, emphasizes the
importance of valuing and financing water effectively to address global water challenges, including water scarcity,
pollution, and the need for increased investment in water infrastructure. Similar support from DPs is anticipated for many
countries in later phases. Each country operation will be complementary and will leverage to the extent possible, other
partners’ parallel and/or co-financing, adding to a total estimate of US$554.5 million.
48.     In addition, the knowledge platform under the regional phase of the MPA will engage global and regional partners
to combine global knowledge and implementation experience with peer-to-peer learning in support of an evolving and
context-specific learning agenda. The AFE WASH MPA complements regional initiatives such as the Africa Urban Sanitation
Investment Initiative (AUSII) and the African Water Facility that supports project preparation, leveraging significant
investments. Under the regional phases, regional knowledge partners will be engaged for specific services given their
unique competencies and experiences (see Annex 2).
 D. Lessons Learned

49.     The AFE WASH MPA draws on lessons learned from past operations and builds insights from the Independent
Evaluation Group (IEG) evaluations of the region’s WASH sector. It incorporates lessons from recently closed WASH
projects, as documented in their Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICRs), and other regional MPAs such
as the Horn of Africa Groundwater for Resilience Program. Key insights have emerged from efforts to attract private capital
to the water sector, and the experience of mobilizing SMEs in the water sector, especially through work with the IFC and
MIGA. These partnerships underscore the importance of establishing a conducive enabling environment, which includes
robust policy frameworks, strong governance structures, and capable service providers. The Accelerating Sustainable and

36 This number is based on the 17 million beneficiaries of which 50.3 percent are women/girls (based on population weighted demographic data

from WASH MPA countries), or 8.55 million women/girls. As in 87 percent of households in these countries’ women/girls hold primary
responsibility for water collection, an estimated 7.4 million women/girls will benefit from the reduced time burden.
                                                                                                                                      Page 19
                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


Clean Energy Access Transformation (ASCENT) program also services as a pertinent example of the significance of
improving the enabling environment to attract private investment, enhance the creditworthiness of utilities, reduce their
reliance on public subsidies, and position them to secure private sector financing. Building on the progress made under
the WBG’s existing WASH portfolio, the AFE WASH MPA is informed by lessons from IEG evaluations. The MPA responds
to IEG’s recommendations by working closely with client governments to reform the water and sanitation sector, improve
the financial viability of service providers, and enable greater access to commercial finance. It also promotes collaboration
across sectors to address issues such as climate resilience, municipal pollution, and groundwater overuse through lending,
technical assistance, and knowledge sharing. 37
50.      Other operational lessons learned include the need for a long-term strategic vision, complementing infrastructure
needs with sustainable institutions for service delivery. There is a need to minimize stop-and-go cycles, which are
inefficient in addressing structural governance issues. Transitioning to more results-based instruments proves to be more
effective in addressing core sustainability and efficiency issues. Infrastructure-focused solutions are usually not
transformative enough, and need to incorporate broader systemic changes, including governance reforms and community
engagement, to ensure long-term sustainability and impact in WASH initiatives. Lastly, there are some key takeaways from
the PCM agenda. Long-term partnerships with utilities such as Uganda's National Water and Sewerage Corporation have
shown that consistent engagement can significantly boost performance and help utilities achieve creditworthiness.

 III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

51.      The AFE WASH MPA’s institutional and implementation arrangements will focus on improved coordination and
governance in the WASH sector. At the country level, the platforms will be implemented by relevant agencies, including
ministries of water, ministries responsible for sanitation, water and sanitation agencies, utilities, regulatory agencies, and
respective decentralized levels of government, as per each country’s water sector institutional setting. While each country
under the Program will differ, implementing arrangements will include (i) a clear governance structure to oversee strategic
direction, ensure sector alignment and coordination, and approve workplan and budgets; (ii) the establishment of a
Project Management Unit to manage day-to-day coordination, implementation, environmental and social and fiduciary
roles, and tracking of project-specific indicators; (iii) development and regularly update of a strong M&E framework; and
(v) targeted capacity-building activities to improve project implementation and improve knowledge sharing. AUDA-
NEPAD) is the implementing agency of the MPA’s regional phases and will help participating countries prepare for and
implement relevant reforms.
 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements

52.     Implementation progress and results will be monitored throughout the duration of the Program using the PrDO
indicators and Results Framework. The MPA provides several results indicators that participating countries will include at
the country operational level to ensure consolidation of results. These indicators will be monitored at both the regional
level and by country-level implementing agencies, with progress reported semi-annually. Results from individual projects
will be aggregated to assess overall progress. Country-phases will have context-specific results framework, following
guidance provided at the regional level to ensure that corporate mandate indicators are maintained and facilitate
aggregate reporting.
53.      During implementation, progress on the learning agenda will be evaluated as well as the validity of the AFE WASH
MPA’s framework and recommendations to strengthen the Program’s ability to meet its PrDO. At the country and regional
level, a mid-term review will be carried out to assess the need for any adjustments or course corrections. This review will

37 IEG, 2017. A Thirst for Change: An IEG Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support for Water Supply and Sanitation, with Focus on the Poor,

FY2007–16. World Bank Group, Washington DC, 2017
                                                                                                                                        Page 20
                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


offer an overview of the implementation process, compare expected outcomes with actual progress, identify recurring
challenges and lessons learned, and recommend changes to achieve the PDO.
C. Disbursement Arrangements

54.      At the country level, the MPA will utilize both IPF and PforR financing instruments, or a combination of the two.
For projects with a PforR component, disbursements will occur only after independent verification of results. In contrast,
for IPF components, disbursements will be made based on an approved Annual Workplan and Budget, using the project’s
Designated Account(s) (DAs). Specific disbursement procedures will be outlined in the operation manuals for each country-
level project.
D. Sustainability

55.      The proposed interventions aim to create a lasting impact by enhancing the climate resilience of infrastructure
and communities, ensuring sustainability across technical, economic, financial, operational, and environmental
dimensions. At the technical level, the AFE WASH MPA investments will adhere to rigorous standards to ensure durability
of service conditions for the program beneficiaries. Economically and financially, the interventions will follow least-cost
plans to promote efficient resource allocation and ensure viability, supporting only sustainable business models with
demonstrated budgetary and technical capacity for adequate O&M. Operationally, infrastructure investments will be
complemented by utility strengthening and aligned interventions to ensure cost recovery leading to operational and
financial sustainability. This will be supported with technical assistance available through the regional phases to enable
government agencies, utilities, and service providers to access top-tier knowledge and expertise, integrating best practices
into their operations. Environmentally, the AFE WASH MPA is expected to deliver positive externalities by supporting
access to WASH services, leading to reductions in GHG emissions and local environmental benefits while strengthening
institutional capacities and promoting efficient service delivery mechanisms to enhance resilience to climate change.

 IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY

 A. Economic Analysis

56.      An economic analysis has been carried out for the twelve country phases under the AFE WASH MPA, aiming to
reach 17 million people with access to water and 13 million with access to sanitation services, and WASH access in 7,500
schools and health facilities. The MPA addresses service gaps with a strong focus on reducing the time women and children
spend collecting water and accessing sanitation, thereby enabling greater participation in education and economic
activities. The economic analysis estimates costs and benefits over a 20-year horizon, including a five-year implementation
period. Costs are broken down into capital investments, design and supervision, operation & maintenance (O&M)
differentiated by sub-sector, and rehabilitation, with annual inflation adjustments. The discount rate is calculated using
the Ramsey formula, tailored to each country’s historical GDP per capita growth. Quantified benefits include substantial
time savings—estimated at 30–40 minutes per day for water collection and 20–25 minutes for sanitation access. Time
savings account for over 70 percent of water service benefits and more than 60 percent for sanitation. Health
improvements are projected to reduce mortality costs by 30 percent in urban areas and 25 percent in rural areas for water,
and by 60 percent and 40 percent for sanitation. Out-of-pocket health expenditures are expected to fall by 40 percent in
urban and 20 percent in rural areas. Non-quantified benefits include reduced spending on bottled water, improved
environmental quality, and better school attendance for girls.
57.     Overall, the MPA is projected to deliver robust economic returns with an economic internal rate of return (EIRR)
of 22 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$246 million for water supply, and an EIRR of 17 percent and NPV of
US$58 million for sanitation, with rural areas generally showing higher returns due to greater time and health benefits.
The economic analysis is available in the project file including country-by-country and sub-sector estimates. A sensitivity
analysis was conducted to evaluate the impact of changes in expected costs and benefits on the NPV and EIRR of the MPA.

                                                                                                                    Page 21
                                                                                                                Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


Three scenarios were considered to test the robustness of the results, namely (i) a first scenario with a reduction in all
benefits of 20 percent; (ii) second scenario with a 20 percent increase in rehabilitation costs and O&M costs and increased
inflation; and (iii) a third scenario that combines the former two, representing the most conservative scenario. The results
indicate that the program continues to yield substantial economic benefits even under significant reductions in expected
benefits or increases in expected costs.
B. Corporate Requirements

58.      Paris Alignment. The MPA aligns with AFE countries’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and climate
strategies, supporting adaptation goals through improved water access. Each country phase will ensure consistency with
national climate plans, while the regional phase advances Paris Agreement objectives in mitigation and adaptation by
promoting low-carbon, climate-resilient water sector development. Knowledge sharing will focus on climate vulnerability,
renewable energy use, and monitoring data for better planning. Country phases will assess Paris Alignment using IPF
methodologies for adaptation and mitigation and contribute to mitigation by reducing water losses, increasing energy
efficiency, and integrating renewable energy, while avoiding fossil-fuel dependent infrastructure. Efforts to climate-proof
water and sanitation services will strengthen adaptation, and water sources will be monitored for sustainability. Country-
specific risks will be addressed at the appropriate stage.
59.      Gender: The program will address gender disparities in WASH by reducing the time women and girls spend
collecting water—currently 87 percent of WASH MPA households rely on them, with some spending up to five hours daily.
Improved access can cut this to 30 minutes, boosting education and productivity. Actions include expanding water
services, strengthening providers, consulting women on design, and monitoring service quality. It will also narrow the
gender gap in water sector leadership and staffing, where women make up only 19 percent of managers and 21 percent
of employees. The regional program will expand diagnostics and peer learning, with country-specific actions and targets.
Finally, the program will accelerate WASH in schools and promote menstrual-friendly facilities, increasing female
attendance and sharing best practices regionally.
60.      Civic and Citizen Engagement and Social Inclusion. The program will strengthen sector-wide systems of citizen
engagement in several ways. It will leverage increasing engagement with citizens in legal and policy reform (Pillar 1)
through regional and national forums with civil society organizations, use benchmarking (consumer orientation index) of
the strength of service providers’ systems to engage citizens and partner with civil society, and incorporating these into
key performance indicators (KPIs) and PIAPs (Pillar 3). Through Pillar 1, it will also enhance country capacity in participatory
methodologies for rural community engagement in water and sanitation and also provide technical support for systems
to better capture, analyze and track stakeholder feedback on an ongoing basis (for example, capacity building on public
citizen/consumer portals that generate data for decision-making for agencies or service providers). Country-level social
assessment will be conducted to address the specific needs of vulnerable groups. The program will also prioritize
improving national standards for inclusive sanitation and public sanitation facilities. At the regional level, the
benchmarking process in terms of country-progress will track specific indicators on gender and social inclusion. This is in
addition to a phase-specific Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
 C. Environmental, Social, and Legal Operational Policies

61.     The environmental and social risk associated with the program activities is rated as Substantial. However,
Environmental and social risk ratings will be based on individual country operations. The Program activities outlined under
the four pillars could lead to a range of environmental and social impacts, particularly in the construction, operation, and
maintenance phases of water and sanitation (WASH) infrastructure. While the risks are largely manageable, they must be
properly addressed to ensure sustainability and climate resilience.
62.     Pillars 1 and 3 of the MPA will mostly finance technical assistance activities. Although the AFE WASH MPA will
bring positive socio-economic benefits, technical assistance activities at the regional level and in participating countries
may result in downstream negative impacts. For example, various feasibility studies may lead to the preparation of
                                                                                                                       Page 22
                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


subsequent investments that attract a higher risk rating, such as resettlement, impacts on Indigenous Peoples/Sub-
Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities (IP/SSAHUTLC), and cumulative effects on
livelihoods. Environmental aspects, such as resource and water consumption, waste generation, pollution, land use
changes, and impacts on biodiversity, must be carefully managed during these activities. Furthermore, climate resilience
should be embedded in all aspects of technical assistance planning. All technical assistance activities must be undertaken
in line with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) requirements to mitigate potential environmental and social
risks and impacts and be in compliance with the World Bank’s Advisory Note on Technical Assistance.
63.     In Pillar 2 (Sector Governance Reforms), efforts to improve regulatory frameworks, strengthen institutional
capacities, and promote efficient service delivery mechanisms will be environmentally beneficial by promoting resilience
to climate change. However, the institutional reforms may indirectly influence the environmental performance of water
and sanitation services, particularly in flood and drought management. Risk mitigation strategies will be necessary to
prevent any unintended environmental consequences, such as over-extraction of water resources, inefficient land-use
planning, or inadequate environmental oversight in service delivery.
64.     Pillars 3 and 4 will finance activities such as network rehabilitation and extension, new water intakes and
reservoirs, pumps, and water and wastewater treatment facilities. Such activities will involve potentially significant civil
works and cause risks related to land acquisition, labor influx, sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH),
and challenges in carrying out robust stakeholder engagement activities. Environmental aspects such as soil erosion, water
pollution from runoff, waste generation, air pollution, noise and vibration, resource consumption, occupational and
community health and safety and potential impacts on ecosystems and biodiversity must be carefully managed during
construction. These risks will be fully described in the individual country-level environmental and social assessments,
depending on the instrument of downstream financing, IPF or PforR. For IPF operations, the implementing ministries will
be responsible for preparing necessary ESF instruments, whereas PforR operations will require preparation of
Environmental and Social Systems Assessments (ESSA) to assess the country’s environmental and social system. The ESSAs
assess country systems both as written and practiced; review environmental and social compliance monitoring, reporting,
and feedback mechanisms; and examine the existence and effectiveness of the GRM. These assessments ensure the
effective management of the program's environmental and social risks, with adequate compliance and GRMs in place. The
country phases under the AFE WASH MPA will include Projects on International Waterways, thus triggering OP 7.50.
Project activities under Phase I also trigger OP7.50. An exception to the notification requirement was approved by the
Regional Vice President on August 11, 2025 (see Annex 2).
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES


 65.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
 supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
 Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
 project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
 independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
 occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute

                                                                                                                    Page 23
                                                                                                                Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


 Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through
 dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to
 the attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information
 on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
 information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
 https://accountability.worldbank.org.


 VI. KEY RISKS

66.      The overall risk of the MPA program is rated as Substantial. This assessment draws on the risk profiles of
comparable IPF and PforR operations within the sector and is informed by the anticipated risk levels of each country phase.
Comprehensive Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tools (SORTs) have been developed for Phases I and II and are included
in the respective annexes. For subsequent country phases, tailored risk mitigation strategies will be prepared to address
phase-specific risks. In addition, support from the regional phase will be provided to further mitigate risks. For the overall
program, the following substantial risks and corresponding mitigation strategies have been identified.
67.     Political and Governance Risks are rated as Substantial. Weak institutional capacity, poor appetite for policy
reform implementation and regulatory gaps can arise because of fractured governance at the national and local levels,
and inertia to change. Further, political volatility can derail ongoing reforms in some countries. To mitigate these risks,
appropriate measures will be implemented, including high-level engagements with the leadership of participating
countries and regional entities. The regional level systems change dashboard data and governance improvement technical
assistance will be used to further mitigate some of these risks.
68.     Macroeconomic Risks are rated as Substantial. Across most participating countries, low levels of public
investment and poor cost recovery across public services can combine with currency fluctuations and inflation shocks
causing a vicious cycle of high WSS project costs and poor sustainability of services but there are variations across the
category of countries as shown by the systems change analysis. The program will support countries in these different
categories with appropriate mitigation measures, thereby partially addressing the overall risk. The regional phase will
include support for governance and efficiency enhancements, contributing to improving macroeconomic indicators.
69.     Sector Strategy and Policy Risks are rated as Substantial: Across most participating countries, there are
inadequate policies, planning and design standards for resilience; poor institutional capacity, sustainability of operations,
financial risks from inadequate tariff setting, government ownership and commitment risks, and poor regulations. The
program design adopts a sector-wide systems change approach, incorporating structural and process-based measures to
mitigate these risks. The regional phases provide targeted support to participating countries to address these gaps,
monitor progress, raise awareness, and strengthen collective capacity to manage these risks.
70.      Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability Risks are rated as Substantial. Participating
countries are at different stages in their institutional and implementation capacity. To address these risks, the regional
phases will incentivize countries to engage in regional activities that strengthen the skills and capacities of sector
personnel. The program will also promote peer-to-peer learning and knowledge exchange among capacity-building
institutions in participating countries, as well as with regional entities such as the Eastern and Southern Africa Water and
Sanitation Regulators Association (ESAWAS), African Water and Sanitation Association (AfWASA), and Pan African
Sanitation Operators Association (PASA). Emphasis will also be on skilling local communities to enhance their engagement
in the water sector. The regional phases will also support comprehensive capacity-building initiatives and introduce
methodologies and tools—such as digitalization—to rapidly improve implementation and monitoring capacities.
71.     Environmental and Social Risks are rated as Substantial. The project activities outlined under the four pillars
could lead to a range of environmental and social impacts, particularly in the construction, operation, and maintenance
phases of WASH infrastructure. While the risks are largely manageable, they must be properly addressed to ensure
                                                                                                                      Page 24
                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


sustainability and climate resilience. These risks will be fully described in the individual country-level environmental and
social assessments, depending on the instrument of downstream financing, IPF or PforR. For IPF operations, the
implementing ministries will be responsible for preparing the necessary ESF instruments, whereas PforR operations will
require preparation of ESSAs to assess the country’s environmental and social system. These assessments ensure effective
management of the program's environmental and social risks, with adequate compliance and GRMs in place.




                                                                                                                    Page 25
                                                                                                                Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)



           ANNEX 1: Overview of Participating Countries on WASH Systems Change

1.      At the WASH Leadership Summit on Achieving Universal Access to WASH in AFE, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in
November 2023, the participating countries endorsed 38 the following WASH sector systems-change principles to be
operationalized in the respective country contexts:
         i. Create /strengthen a government-led country-level national platform for WASH
         ii. Address sector-level governance (policies, regulation) bottlenecks
         iii. Re-align sector-wide service provider incentives
         iv. Mobilize more funding from the private sector, climate and innovative finance
         v. Design WASH systems that are climate- and disaster-resilient
2.      An analysis39 of the current WASH sector status in the 24 AFE countries with respect to the five system-change
principles showed that countries could be classified in three groups:
   a) Basic: About 40 percent of the countries have only basic features in their WASH Sector (often FCV countries) that
      will need to do foundational preparatory work in the sector.
   b) Aspiring: About 33 percent of the countries have at least some key elements of the enabling environment in place
      but will need to develop their policies, institutions, and regulations to graduate to the next level.
   c) Moderate: One quarter of the countries’ WASH sectors have key elements in place that is, an established
      governance structure, functioning service providers, country platforms and NIPs, incipient conditions for attracting
      private finance, and the capacity to accelerate reforms and scale up access.

3.      The 12 AFE WASH MPA participating countries have differences on where they stand across the five system-
change pillars and their urban/ rural water and sanitation sub-sectors, but they may identify specific reform and sub-
sector priorities suitable for their context from this list and add their own. Table 1.1 indicates the water and sanitation
access gaps, and Table 1.2 indicates sub-sector and reform actions that will be adapted by participating countries.

                                      Table 1.1: Water and Sanitation Access Gaps (in millions)

                                                             JMP 2022 GAP IN WATER AND SANITATION
                  country/regional
                     operation
                                         Gap Total      Gap Rural      Gap Urban      Gap Total       Gap Rural      Gap Urban
                                          Water          Water           Water        Sanitation      Sanitation     Sanitation
                 Tanzania                   25.7           21.1            4.5            45.4           32.7            12.8
                 Burundi                     6.4            5.7            0.7            9.2             7.8             1.3
                 South Sudan                 4.8            4.7            0.2            7.0             5.9             1.1
                 The Democratic
                 Republic of
                 Congo                      64.2           45.4           18.9            83.0           46.7            36.3
                 Ethiopia                   59.8           55.1            4.7           111.9           90.1            21.7


38 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/statement/2023/11/17/wash-leadership-summit-afe-1123-mobilizing-finance-and-promo-ng-systems-

change
39 The analysis is based on provisional data from secondary reviews and rapid surveys, and will be validated during the Regional Phase 1 data

collection on systems-change Dashboard indicators
                                                                                                                                          Page 26
                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)



                                                          JMP 2022 GAP IN WATER AND SANITATION
                 country/regional
                    operation
                                       Gap Total     Gap Rural       Gap Urban     Gap Total      Gap Rural     Gap Urban
                                        Water         Water            Water       Sanitation     Sanitation    Sanitation
                 Somalia                   7.3           5.7             1.7          10.5           6.9            3.6
                 Madagascar                6.4           5.3             1.0          12.8           7.4            5.3
                 Comoros                  13.8          11.4             2.4          25.2           16.0           9.3
                 Malawi                    0.8           0.6             0.2            0.8          0.6            0.2
                 Angola                    5.7           5.2             0.5          10.4           8.5            1.9
                 Zambia                   15.0           8.2             6.8          17.0           8.6            8.4
                 Mozambique               12.1          10.5             1.6          20.6           15.8           4.9
                 TOTAL                    222.2         179.0           43.3          353.8         247.0          106.8


                     Table 1.2: Sub-Sector and Reform Actions to Be Adapted by Participating Countries

 Country          AFE MPA            Government led             Policy and Regulatory      Sector-wide Incentive        Mobilize Private,
 Category         Country            National WASH              Frameworks                 Framework                    Climate/
                                     Platform                                                                           Innovative
                                                                                                                        Finances

 "Basic"          Burundi* 40 ,      Foundation  work           Develop         policies   Build capacity of service    Work on enabling
                  Comoros*,          and creation of            defining key functions     providers (including non-    environment. Pre-
                  Madagascar,        platform                   and          regulatory    state) to provide services   feasibility     of
                  Somalia*,                                     framework, covering        in all regions               opportunities, and
                  South Sudan*                                  all sub-sectors, and                                    micro-finance
                                                                links to other sectors

 Priorities in    Urban Water: Adaptive programming for service provision; partnership with non-state providers for service
 Sub-sectors      expansion; technical solutions using renewables to provide quality water; and protection of sources and storage
                  investments for resilience.
                  Rural Water: Extending urban services in proximal areas; special approaches for services in remote areas including
                  additional funding; local community capacity building; and appropriate technology solutions with renewables,
                  source protection, and storage solutions.
                  Urban Sanitation: Financing support for basic solutions in the sanitation chain with gradual upgrades (for example,
                  community to individual toilets); strengthening of urban bodies/utilities; partnership with private operators for
                  service expansion; and behavior change communications and local capacity building.
                  Rural Sanitation: Time-bound plans, technical options, and financial support for promoting graduated sanitation
                  (community, household and institution level facilities); strengthening national/local organizations and private
                  sector (building material suppliers, masons, etc.); targeted behaviour change communications and local capacity
                  building for adopting and sustaining practices.



40 World Bank, 2026, Ethiopia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Mozambique, South Sudan, and Somalia are FCV affected countries; and Burundi and

Comoros are affected by institutional and social fragility. https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/5c7e4e268baaafa6ef38d924be9279be-
0090082025/original/FCSListFY26.pdf
                                                                                                                                     Page 27
                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)



Country         AFE MPA           Government led          Policy and Regulatory     Sector-wide Incentive        Mobilize Private,
Category        Country           National WASH           Frameworks                Framework                    Climate/
                                  Platform                                                                       Innovative
                                                                                                                 Finances

"Aspiring"      Democratic        Creation/               Update policies and       Incentivize        service   Test PPP models in
                Republic   of     Strengthening           strengthen                providers to provide         infrastructure
                Congo,                                    implementation,           sustainable                  provision      and
                Malawi, and                               regulation preparatory    infrastructure        and    service delivery,
                Zambia                                    work for urban WSS        efficient        services,   test and scale up
                                                                                    promote                      climate/micro-
                                                                                    commercialization       of   finance
                                                                                    selected utilities, work
                                                                                    with private operators

Priorities in   Urban Water: Strengthening policy and budgets for consolidating current infrastructure and services and extending
Sub-sectors     to new areas; adopting adaptive tariffs and service levels; recognizing / incorporating private and non-formal
                services providers in sector; testing creation of local utilities/ national utilities with local units; strengthening
                customer forums and protecting sources and storage investments for resilience.
                Rural Water: Extending of urban services in proximal areas; special approaches for services in remote areas
                including appropriate technology and funding; private and local community capacity building; and appropriate
                technology solutions with renewables, source protection and storage solutions.
                Urban Sanitation: Policy development and financing support for basic solutions in the sanitation chain with gradual
                upgrades (for example community to individual toilets); strengthening of urban bodies/utilities; partnerships with
                private operators/non-state providers for service expansion.
                Rural Sanitation: Policy/plan development for phased scale-up; time-bound plans, government-led marketing
                and/or community-based approaches backed by government funding support; strengthening national/local
                organizations and private sector (building material suppliers, masons, etc.); and targeted behavior change
                communications and local capacity building for adoption and sustaining practices.

"Moderate"      Angola,           Creation/               Strengthen                Strengthen operational       Test introduction
                Ethiopia*,        strengthening           Implementation            and financial autonomy       of private capital in
                Mozambique,                               compliance, Policies      of service providers,        selected utilities;
                and Tanzania                              updated to cover all      aspiring at O&M cost         introduce
                                                          rural and urban WASH,     recovery rations of >        innovative
                                                          Implement/strengthen      100%                         financing
                                                          Regulation                                             mechanisms

Priorities in   Urban Water: Promotion of PPPs; strengthening of utility creditworthiness (non-revenue water, tariffs, financial
Sub-sectors     sustainability, and operational efficiency); piloting of private investments, for example, water/wastewater
                treatment; regulator to be functional; and integrated WRM and resilience measures.
                Rural Water: Rural water national/sub-national entities strengthening (professionalization of operators and
                community managed systems); functioning M&E systems, emphasis on scaling up sustainable service delivery with
                customer focus; integrated WRM and resilience measures.
                Urban Sanitation: Policy creation/revision to cover full sanitation value-chain; strengthening of urban
                bodies/utilities for infrastructure provision and service delivery; regulatory framework for customer services, price
                and environmental regulations; and engagement with private operators.




                                                                                                                              Page 28
                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)



 Country         AFE MPA         Government led        Policy and Regulatory   Sector-wide Incentive     Mobilize Private,
 Category        Country         National WASH         Frameworks              Framework                 Climate/
                                 Platform                                                                Innovative
                                                                                                         Finances
                 Rural Sanitation: Re-assessment of policies/plans; strengthening of national/local organizations; consumer
                 research and communication for sustainable behavior change, and government-led marketing and community-
                 based approaches backed by government funding support.

4.      Promoting and mainstreaming climate resilience across the sector will need to be adopted by all the three
categories of the participating countries, as most suffer severe impacts from climate change-related events. In the
sanitation subsector, especially in rural areas, while some countries had made good progress, there have been slippages,
and most countries are lagging behind in achieving SDG6. All the three country categories will need to balance their
investments across the water and sanitation sub-sectors. The choice of the exact reform action and sub-sector priority for
each country will be dependent on the local context and political economy considerations. The MPA, through its regional
phases, will encourage the design of country phases by taking cognizance of the above findings, supporting countries in
addressing the key binding constraints identified.




                                                                                                                    Page 29
                                                                                                                Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


 ANNEX 2: MPA Phase I: Accelerating Access to WASH in the AFE Region (US$15 Million Total, of which US$10 Million
 IDA and US$5 Million CIWA)

Task Team Leaders: Victor Vazquez, Susanna Smets, Nishtha Mehta
Core Team: Tesfaye Ayele, Tandile Msiwa, Min-Ji Sohn, Aimonchok Tashieva, and Jay Pascual
     A. Context
1.      The Accelerating Access to Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Regional Project will serve as a
catalyst for the MPA participating countries to embrace more systematic approaches in scaling up access to WASH. The
Project will closely align its activities and support the AUDA-NEPAD in this endeavor. It will facilitate, enhance, and support
the MPA participating countries' progress in accelerating sustainable access to WASH through knowledge sharing, capacity
building, benchmarking and monitoring, and on-demand technical assistance to advance reforms, policies, governance
and regulatory improvements.
2.       AUDA-NEPAD is the development agency of the African Union Commission (AUC) and the implementing body
of Agenda 2063, the continent's strategic framework for socio-economic transformation. In 2001, NEPAD was initially
established as a program to accelerate Africa's development and integration into the global economy. This was followed
by the creation of the NEPAD Planning and Coordination Agency in 2010 integrating NEPAD into AU structures and
processes. In 2018, the NEPAD Agency was transformed into the AUDA-NEPAD, the first technical entity of the AU with its
own legal identity and defined by its own statute. AUDA-NEPAD's main functions include coordinating and executing
priority regional and continental projects, strengthening the capacity of African Union (AU) member states, and mobilizing
resources.
3.      AUDA-NEPAD plays a crucial role in WASH initiatives across Africa, focusing on sustainable financing solutions
and infrastructure development. Their work includes strengthening regional and national WASH systems, promoting PSP,
enhancing service delivery, and ensuring climate-resilient investments. They collaborate with continental, regional and
national organizations at policy advocacy, and executive and technical levels. The main partnerships in the water sector
are with the AUC41, the AIP-Water, AMCOW, ESAWAS42 and Regional Economic Communities (RECs) to advance universal
access to WASH. As part of the flagship AIP-Water, AUDA-NEPAD has a longstanding partnership with the AIP-Water
Secretariat, which is hosted at the Global Water Partnership Southern Africa (GWP-SA). AUDA-NEPAD operates as
implementing agency for various multilateral and bilateral DPs. In 2026, the AU will focus on "Assuring Sustainable Water
Availability and Safe Sanitation Systems to Achieve the Goals of Agenda 2063". This theme will drive efforts to improve
water management and sanitation across the continent. The AU is also developing a comprehensive African Water Policy
to guide this initiative.
     B. Relevance to Higher-Level Objectives
4.      The project aligns with the regional MPA’s objectives to promote the AFE WASH acceleration agenda through a
systems change approach and enhance the attractiveness of the WASH sector for private finance by strengthening the
legal and regulatory frameworks and enabling PCM for viable investment projects. The project also supports the Scaling
Up Finance for Water43 initiative through various means, including establishing national WASH access platforms, providing
technical support for upstream project development and the enabling environment, promoting PPP, and supporting
innovative financing facilities.




41 Specifically, the Agriculture, Rural Development, Blue Economy and Sustainable Environment department.
42 Whose mandate and membership base now covers not only East and South Africa but the entire African Continent
43 https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water/publication/scaling-up-finance-for-water-a-world-bank-strategic-framework-and-roadmap-for-

action
                                                                                                                                 Page 30
                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


     C. Project Description
5.       The PDO for the Accelerating Access to WASH in the AFE Region Project is to improve governance and build
institutional capacities for climate-resilient water supply and sanitation service delivery in participating countries in the
Eastern and Southern Africa region. The Project will support the regional dashboard for sector transformation (that is,
Systems Change) , governance reforms, institutional capacities and regulations and service delivery improvements.
Capacity building will also be provided for PCM. Support will be provided using multiple approaches including policy and
analytical advisory, knowledge sharing, capacity building, skill building and training and on-demand technical assistance
to the participating MPA countries.
6.      The Results Framework is presented in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2.
                                    Table 2.1: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcome (P506439)
 PDO: to improve governance and build institutional capacities for climate-resilient water supply and sanitation service delivery in
 participating countries in the Eastern and Southern Africa region.
 Outcome 1: Improve governance for water supply and sanitation service delivery
 Number of countries that have prepared new/revised policies for water supply and sanitation for adoption by national
 governments (with sub-indicators for water supply and sanitation))
                         September 2025                                                     September 2029
                                 0                                                                 8
 Number of countries that have prepared new/revised regulatory frameworks for water supply and sanitation for adoption by
 national governments (with sub-indicators for water and sanitation)
                         September 2025                                                     September 2029
                                 0                                                                 8
 Outcome 2: Build institutional capacity for climate-resilient water supply and sanitation service delivery
 Number of transboundary aquifer management plans for climate resilient water supply development completed and submitted
 for adoption by transboundary basin/groundwater committees
                         September 2025                                                     September 2029
                                 0                                                                 6
 Number of countries where urban service providers have developed and adopted performance improvement action plans (sub-
 indicators for water and sanitation)
                         September 2025                                                     September 2029
                                 0                                                                 8
 Number of countries that have developed and adopted a professionalized water service delivery model for rural areas
                         September 2025                                                     September 2029
                                 0                                                                 4

                                Table 2.2: Intermediate Indicators by Components (P506439)
 Component 1: Strengthening Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH
 Number of countries participating in annual water scorecard benchmarking exercise, including WASH systems change indicators
                        September 2025                                                    September 2029
                                0                                                                10
 Number of civil society organizations participating in capacity development programs to engage in national WASH dialogue
                        September 2025                                                    September 2029
                                0                                                                 8
 Component 2: Advancing Reforms, Governance and Regulation
 Number of public expenditure and institutional reviews conducted to inform WASH country programming
                        September 2025                                                    September 2029
                                0                                                                 6
 Number of people that benefited from capacity development and knowledge events to develop and/or strengthen regulatory
 instruments and tools.
                        September 2025                                                    September 2029
                                                                                                                              Page 31
                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


                                0                                                                  200
 Component 3: Improving Service Delivery performance
 Number of countries where at least one service provider has adopted new management practices to improve gender equality in
 the workplace
                        September 2025                                                      September 2029
                                0                                                                   8
 Number of countries that have adopted new models for sanitation service provision
                        September 2025                                                      September 2029
                                0                                                                   8
 Component 4: Levering financing for climate resilient WASH Infrastructure
 Number of transboundary aquifer assessment completed to inform climate-resilient aquifer management plans
                        September 2025                                                      September 2029
                                0                                                                   6
 Number of diagnostics/analytics that have informed private capital mobilization initiatives in the water and sanitation sector (with
 sub-indicators for water and sanitation)
                        September 2025                                                      September 2029
                                0                                                                   6
 Number of people that benefited from training and/or skill development on private capital mobilization and innovative finance
                        September 2025                                                      September 2029
                                0                                                                  150


7.       The Accelerating Access to WASH in the AFE Region Project will focus its activities on all countries participating
in the AFE WASH MPA. Certain capacity building activities of a regional nature may also benefit non-participating MPA
countries in the AFE region44. Implemented and managed by AUDA-NEPAD, the project will contribute to implementation,
knowledge sharing and monitoring of the overall program. The project is financed through IDA allocation under the IDA
GROW, given the global public good nature of increasing access to WASH, as well as the importance of the WASH access
agenda in AFE, as a regional priority for development. Specific activities in support of transboundary WRM are financed
through the trust funds from the Cooperation on International Waters Africa (CIWA) program. The duration of the project
is four years.
8.      The regional engagement will support overall program progress. During the first regional phase and its
subsequent two phases AUDA-NEPAD will extend targeted support to countries as they join the program, facilitating their
integration and ongoing progress. Each phase will place a stronger focus on promoting private sector participation and
investment in WASH initiatives. In the first regional phase, targeted support will be provided to Tanzania, Burundi,
Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan. In the second regional phase, targeted interventions will be introduced
to deepen support for countries joining the program, including Ethiopia, Somalia, Madagascar, Comoros and Malawi. In
the third regional phase targeted support will be provided to Angola, Zambia and Mozambique as they join the program.
Throughout all three phases, the regional engagement led by AUDA-NEPAD will prioritize scaling up proven approaches
and strengthening private sector participation, ensuring sustained impact and momentum as the AFE WASH MPA
progresses.
9.     The project will sustain momentum in elevating the profile of WASH in the region and will use regional
benchmarking and high-level engagements to demonstrate and encourage results on the WASH Systems Change
agenda. Building on the WASH Leadership Summit organized in Addis Ababa in November 202345, the Project will engage
heads of state, finance ministers, and sector ministers through a series of dedicated events, and by leveraging the AU


44 These countries may potentially join the MPA at a later stage, as they are currently not in the MPA framework; alternatively, these countries may

develop WASH / water security operations financed by IDA/IBRD outside of the WASH MPA framework.
45 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/statement/2023/11/17/wash-leadership-summit-afe-1123-mobilizing-finance-and-promo-ng-systems-

change
                                                                                                                                          Page 32
                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


summits and events, such as those on water, infrastructure and private sector development. The envisaged components
and subcomponents are detailed in the following paragraphs (including a 5 percent contingency).
10.     Component 1: Strengthening Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH (US$3.4 million IDA) is aligned with pillar
1 of the MPA and finances technical assistance, workshops, training, (non)-consulting services, goods and operational
costs to strengthen regional benchmarking platforms and high-level engagement on WASH, implement the program’s
knowledge and learning platform and support project management costs. It includes the following two subcomponents.
11.      Subcomponent 1.1: Regional Benchmarking on Systems Change and Knowledge Platform for WASH (US$1.5
million).This subcomponent will finance activities to carry out regional benchmarking, complementing the AIP-Water
Scorecard46 to monitor performance of countries in AFE region on implementing the systems change approach for WASH
through a series of KPIs47 and to engage high-level decision makers at regional level to pursue the WASH systems change
and acceleration agenda. It also finances the activities to develop and implement a knowledge and learning platform on
WASH targeted at the MPA participating countries. This will include, among others, i) the development of a regional
benchmarking dashboard with KPIs for WASH systems change monitoring, ii) support for capacity building and annual data
collection and analysis of KPIs, iii) support to organize high-level events and engagement activities to review progress on
the WASH acceleration agenda, including ministerial WASH summits and head of states engagement activities during AU
summits, iv) support for regional civil society forums and capacity building of civil society organizations to strengthen
effective dialogue on WASH at national level, and iv) technical assistance, workshops and training to develop an on-line
knowledge platform, hosted by the AIP-Water Secretariat, v) the implementation of peer-learning activities for countries
in the AFE region, including, South-South knowledge exchanges and multi-country learning events These knowledge
exchanges will showcase best practices in areas such as PPPs utility transformation, rural water sustainability, a and urban
sanitation governance. The regional benchmarking activities and the digital knowledge platform will be implemented by
AUDA-NEPAD through contracting the GWP-SA48 as Secretariat for AIP-Water.
12.      Subcomponent 1.2: Project Management (US$1.9 million). This subcomponent finances project management
and coordination costs by AUDA-NEPAD: i) incremental operational costs, including incremental staffing costs of the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within AUDA-NEPAD ii) consultant services to strengthen the technical capacity of the
PIU for the effective project implementation and communication, iii) costs for stakeholder consultations, coordination,
supervision, M&E; and iv) preparation costs for the next phase of the regional project. In parallel, AUDA-NEPAD is financing
a share of project management costs, specifically dedicated staff functions within the PIU, valued at US$ 2million.
13.     Component 2: Advancing Reforms, Governance and Regulation (US$3 million IDA) is fully aligned with pillar 2 of
the MPA and finances on-demand analytical and advisory activities to inform and improve policies, governance and
regulation in the WASH sector and build capacities for the MPA-participating countries. Activities related regulatory
governance will be implemented through the PIU contracting the ESAWAS49 ). For policy-related activities, the existing
partnership between AUDA-NEPAD and the AMCOW will be leveraged. The Component finances workshops, training, and
(non)-consulting services for the MPA participating countries to: i) conduct PEIRs to identify and address institutional and
financing bottlenecks, ii) support the establishment of new regulatory entities and build capacity of regulators, iii) establish
partnerships between mature and nascent regulators focusing on domains such as tariff setting, creditworthiness
assessment, and performance benchmarking, iv) develop standard regulatory tools at the regional level and support their
adaptation at national level, v) enable dialogues between service providers and regulators, vi) operationalize the African



46 https://aipwater.org/implementation/aip-water-investment-scorecard/
47 Examples of KPIs include the existence of national investment programs for WASH and their level of implementation, functioning national

platforms on WASH, establishment of functioning regulators, existence of key policies with well-defined institutional roles and responsibilities,
performance of utilities, inclusion of climate resilience aspects in policies, guidelines and plans, as well as citizen engagement and gender inclusive
policies, WASH access levels and mobilization of private sector capital, among others.
48 As outlined in the Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD)
49 As outlined in the PPSD

                                                                                                                                              Page 33
                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


Sanitation Policy Guidelines and develop and/or revise national sanitation policies, and vii) implement the forthcoming
Continental Water Policy Framework (anticipated to be adopted by the AUC in January 2026).
14.      Component 3: Improving Service Delivery Performance (US$2.3 million IDA) is fully aligned with pillar 3 of the
MPA and finances activities to support service delivery performance improvement for urban and rural service providers,
including through building data, knowledge, skills and partnerships at the regional level. Activities under this component
will be implemented through AUDA-NEPAD contracting ESAWAS50 in association with the AfWASA and PASA to respond
to country demand to advance nascent (or often nonexistent) regulatory practices, especially on sanitation. It consists of
two subcomponents.
15.       Subcomponent 3.1 Performance Improvements for Water Service Delivery (US$1.5 million). This subcomponent
finances: i) technical assistance to enhance the participation of utilities/service providers in countries in the AFE region in
a digital benchmarking platform (NewIBNET 51 ) to improve data-driven decision making, share best practices and
performance metrics, improving data integrity and reliability, and enhance skills in data management and analytics, ii)
capacity development for utilities in the Eastern and Southern region through regional training programs, with a focus
among others on utility turnaround, leadership development, customer and community engagement, digitalization,
regulation and climate resilient service delivery, iii) technical assistance and training for the development of PIAPs for
utilities in the MPA participating countries, including adequate citizen feedback mechanisms, iv) technical assistance for
utilities to carry out gender equality diagnostics52 and adopt management practices to improve gender equality, and v)
technical assistance for the MPA participating countries to develop strategic plans and actionable roadmaps to enhance
professional management and sustainability of rural water operators, including through private sector engagement. PIAPs
aim to improve the utilities performance and resilience, implementable in the timeline of the program with effective
mechanisms for M&E53. As part of PIAP preparation, utilities will be supported to institutionalize effective two-way citizen
feedback loops. These strategies aim to improve utility performance and service delivery across participating countries,
leveraging shared resources and expertise for sustainable impacts.
16.     Subcomponent 3.2 Performance Improvements for Sanitation Service Delivery (US$0.8 million). This
subcomponent finances technical assistance and capacity development activities for MPA participating countries,
including among others: i) conducting diagnostics and the developing of strategies for market-based sanitation and
hygiene service delivery with a focus on the application of circular economy principles to ensure environmental outcomes
and economic value, ii) supporting to regional training programs for the professionalization of sanitation and hygiene
service providers in both urban and rural contexts to promote sustainable and profitable sanitation and hygiene
businesses, and iii) conducting rapid CWIS assessments to inform urban sanitation investments strategies.
17.     Component 4: Levering financing for climate resilient WASH Infrastructure (US$6.3 million) aligns with pillar 4
of the MPA and finances technical assistance in support to mobilize private capital, as well as studies to inform the resilient
development of transboundary groundwater resources. The component consists of two subcomponents.

18.      Subcomponent 4.1 Mobilizing Private Capital for WASH (US$ 1.3 million). This subcomponent finances activities
targeting MPA participating countries including: i) on-demand upstream diagnostics or analytical studies that may enable
downstream PCM, ii) training for sector professionals on PPPs54 and innovative financing mechanisms and iii) organization
of private sector and/or investor marketplace events to encourage private investment in the WASH sector.

19.   Subcomponent 4.2 Transboundary Groundwater for Resilient WASH (US$5 million CIWA Trust Fund). This
subcomponent finances assessments that inform the sustainable exploitation and improved management on

50 As outlined in the PPSD
51 https://newibnet.org/
52 Using Equal Aqua toolkit; https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water/brief/inclusive-water-institutions-platform
53 The country operations will finance the preparation of the full-scale PIAPs, and the implementation of the measures identified in the PIAPs.
54 Proposed is the to APMG's PPP Certification Programme https://ppp-certification.com/

                                                                                                                                           Page 34
                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


transboundary aquifers, supporting the MPA participating countries to enhance their water resource diversification
strategies as part of national WASH investment plans, including: i) consulting services to conduct geohydrological
assessments, feasibility studies and the preparation of management plans of selected transboundary aquifers in the Africa
South and East region, ii) training, capacity building and workshops to consult and validate the studies and management
plans for selected transboundary aquifers, and iii) consulting services for the technical management and supervision of
the aquifer assessments provided by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in Eastern Africa and the
Southern Africa Development Community – Groundwater Management Institute (SADC-GMI). Approximately 64 percent
of Africa’s landmass falls within transboundary international river basins, meaning a significant portion of water resources
in East and Southern Africa are shared among multiple countries. Groundwater is a synonym for resilience as it helps
utilities diversify their sources and due to the high dependence of rural populations on groundwater resources; however,
it remains under studied and underdeveloped.

D. Project Beneficiaries
20.      The Project’s direct beneficiaries are various government entities (ministries, agencies, public utilities, etc.),
private companies, and civil society organizations operating in the WASH space in the MPA participating countries. These
institutional beneficiaries, including their staff, female and male, will benefit from technical assistance services, knowledge
and learning, capacity building, skill building and training, and targeted technical assistance grants. Moreover, the Project
will finance several regional capacity building activities that will benefit sector agencies of all AFE countries, including
those that are not currently participating in the MPA, such as activities related to the regional dashboard on WASH systems
change and regional analytical and advocacy initiatives. The ultimate beneficiaries will be the people of the AFE region
who will have access to WASH through the MPA intervention.

E. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
21.      AUDA-NEPAD will serve as the sole implementing agency responsible for the Project (phase I of the MPA).
AUDA-NEPAD will be responsible for overall coordination of the Project through the establishment of a PIU. The PIU will
comprise of AUDA-NEPAD salaried staff, both existing and to be recruited staff following the agency’s human resources
policies. For specific tasks, the PIU is supported by competitively recruited consultants. The PIU was established on July
22, 2025, assigning existing staff for key roles. Within 30 days after effectiveness. AUDA-NEPAD will competitively select
a project coordinator, who will be supported by a team of experts, including a water and sanitation specialist, fiduciary
specialists (procurement and financial management), an environmental and social specialist, and a monitoring, evaluation
and knowledge management specialist. An Advisory Committee for the Project will be established to engage other regional
entities, including AMCOW, AUC55, RECs and representatives of the MPA participating countries to ensure coordination
and facilitate agreement on joint activities. Country Coordination Teams will be set up at the level of the twelve
participating MPA countries, which will consist of key stakeholders in the WASH sector, to ensure well-coordinated and
demand-driven implementation of the project’s activities. The Project Operations Manual (POM) will include the roles
and responsibilities of the PIU within AUDA-NEPAD, the Project Advisory Committee, and the Country Coordination teams
within the MPA participating countries and is a condition for project effectiveness. The PPSD outlines and justifies single-
source engagements with entities such as ESAWAS (in association with AfWASA and PASA), GWP-SA, IGAD and SADC-GMI
for specific services where they bring unique value and competencies.

F. Appraisal Summary
22.     Paris Alignment. The project is fully aligned with the objectives of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
addressing both adaptation and mitigation priorities. By supporting 12 country-level WASH operations across AFE, the
regional project is expected to significantly strengthen climate resilience through national planning in urban and rural
contexts. The project will enhance adaptive capacity by building capacities of agencies and service providers to deliver

55 Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, Blue Economy and Sustainable Environment

                                                                                                                      Page 35
                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


climate resilient water and sanitation services to vulnerable communities, while also contributing to mitigation by
promoting state-of-the art knowledge on low-emission, resource-efficient technologies and service models.
23.      Financial Management. The overall residual risk of financial management (FM) has been assessed as Moderate,
based on the experience of health and agriculture sector projects implemented by AUDA-NEPAD. The existing FM
arrangements are adequate; the entity is familiar with the World Bank disbursements and Financial Management
guidelines. AUDA-NEPAD will open a DA denominated in US dollars and an Operational Account denominated in South
African rand (ZAR) at a commercial bank acceptable to the World Bank to pay for project expenditures. The project will
use the IFRs to disburse and report on the use of funds. An open ceiling for disbursements is proposed for withdrawals
based on projected expenditures. The project has a single disbursement category to finance all technical assistance
activities, covering consulting services, non-consulting services, workshops and training, goods, and operational costs. The
project will rely on the entity’s audited financial statements as prepared by the AU Board of External Auditors. The audit
report will be submitted with the management letter to the World Bank six months after the end of the financial year.
24.      Procurement. The World Bank carried out a review of AUDA-NEPAD’s procurement capacity, whose risk is rated
as Moderate. Procurement under the project will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement
Regulations for IPF Borrowers (Borrowers Regulations), dated February 2025. The project implements the Guidelines on
Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in projects financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, revised
July 1, 2016. The Project also applies beneficial disclosure requirements and other requirements as to be provided and
stipulated in the Financing Agreement for the Project. The Procurement Plan, as agreed between the AUDA-NEPAD and
World Bank, specifies procurement methods and their applicable thresholds, and activities subject to the World Bank Prior
Review. Procurement planning, execution and contract management processes will be tracked through the Systematic
Tracking of Exchange in Procurement (STEP) tool and will be publicly disclosed. AUDA-NEPAD’s procurement system
assessments confirm the availability of robust, transparent, and effective management of the project, including the
prevalence of credible procurement processes. The system assessment has also identified some risks that will be mitigated
by the implementation of recommended action plans. The risks include: (i) gaps or delays in timely identification and
consolidation of procurement packages for timely procurement planning and implementation, (ii) gaps in the use of the
World Bank’s STEP in real-time to monitor credibility of awardees and decision making; and (iii) gaps in management and
monitoring of implementation of contracts consistent with contractual terms and conditions. Strengthening staff
performance monitoring by management and training staff on the proper use of the World Bank’s Standard Procurement
documents and orientation on effective use of the STEP platform may mitigate the risks identified.
25.     ESF. The Environmental and Social Risk Classification is rated as Moderate; the project will not finance any civil
works that may have direct adverse environmental and social impacts but will finance technical assistance studies in areas
including water usage that may have potential downstream environmental and social risks. Potential downstream
environmental and social risks and impacts are associated with environmental pollution, hydrological ecosystem services,
occupational and community health and safety, and potential impact to water balance. The Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan (ESCP) has been prepared and approved by the World Bank. The ESCP was disclosed on the World
Bank’s website on August 12, 2025 and in-country on September 8, 2025. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has
been prepared and was disclosed in-country on July 23, 2025 and on the World Bank external website on August 15, 2025.
Two rounds of consultation were carried out by NEPAD on July 14 and July 17, 2025, involving a wide range of stakeholders.
26.     The World Bank Policy on Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50) applies to this Project as its activities
include the potential use of seven transboundary aquifers56. The Project will finance the preparation of transboundary
aquifer assessments and related groundwater management plans. The terms of reference for these studies will require



56 The Sand and Gravel Aquifer (Malawi and Zambia), the Coastal Sedimentary Basin III Aquifer (Mozambique and Tanzania), the Coango Aquifer

(Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Angola), the Tanganyika Aquifer (Burundi, DRC and Tanzania), the Jubba Aquifer (Ethiopia and Somalia),
the Sudd Basin Aquifer (Ethiopia, Kenya and South Sudan), and the Rift Aquifer (Kenya and Tanzania).
                                                                                                                                      Page 36
                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region(P506439)


the assessment of any riparian issues. The exception to the notification requirement according to paragraph 7 (b) was
approved by the Regional Vice President on August 11, 2025.
27.      Gender: The project will help countries take stock of the current data sources for calculating the gendered time
burden of water collection (a key component of ‘basic’ water access), support the development of robust methodologies
for tracking changes in the time burden and integrate these findings in policy dialogue. The regional benchmarking
indicators explicitly track gender-disaggregated data and the presence of gender-inclusive WASH policies, while technical
assistance can support countries in embedding gender equity in national platforms and monitoring systems. Component
2 will promote gender-sensitive governance by incorporating gender analysis in sector diagnostics, supporting regulatory
frameworks that mandate inclusive service delivery, and ensuring women’s participation in policy dialogues. Component
3 will enhance utility performance by supporting gender-balanced staffing, leadership, and customer feedback systems,
and by tailoring PIAPs to address gender-specific service gaps.
28.     Climate Change and Co-Benefit Assessment: The regional benchmarking dashboard (under Component 1) will
include climate-related indicators and ensure that national WASH platforms and programs incorporate climate risk
assessments and adaptation planning. The project will support the development of regulatory frameworks that mandate
climate-resilient infrastructure and services, while also embedding climate considerations into sector diagnostics and
policy reforms. It will also enhance utility resilience by promoting energy-efficient technologies, climate risk-informed
PIAPs, and data systems that monitor climate impacts on service delivery. It can also support circular economy pilots that
reduce emissions and resource use. Component 4 supports groundwater assessments to strengthen source diversification
and drought resilience in the MPA participating countries. The project is fully compliant with climate and disaster risk
screening and includes a climate indicator as required.
29.      Private Capital Mobilization: The project is tagged as maximizing finance for development (MFD), given the focus
on high-level engagement to advocate for reforms and resource mobilization for WASH under Component 1 and the
upstream support for analytics and advisory services to remove bottlenecks to increase financing of the sector through
tariffs and PCM initiatives (Component 2, 3 and 4).
G. Key Risks
30.     The overall risk for the Accelerating Access to WASH Regional Project is considered Moderate. The project will solely
finance technical assistance. Furthermore, it will be executed by an experienced implementing agency with a proven track
record in handling World Bank projects.




                                                                                                                  Page 37
                                                                                                              Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


 ANNEX 3: MPA Phase II: Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program II (US$322 million total, of which
 US$200 million IDA, US$2 million ESMAP Grant, US$100 million Government of Tanzania, and US$20 million
 Commercial Financing)

Task team leaders: Toyoko Kodama, Ruth Kennedy-Walker, and James Origa Otieno
Core team: Mohammad Kandeel; Emil Mathew Karuranga; Paul Welton; Priscilla Simbisayi Zengeni; Aquiline Peter Safari;
Vida Ndilanha Nkya; Benjamin Ndazi Mtesigwa; Habab Taifour; Aileen Castro; Dawit Tadesse; Faith-Lucy Matumbo;
James Edward Ramsay; Josephine Kokuhabukilwa Njunwas; Josephine Aron Zimba; Restituta Paul Mapinduzi; Alexander
V. Danilenko; Victor Kongo

A.       Context

1.       The Water Sector Development Program (WSDP) in Tanzania has progressively achieved substantial progress in
expanding access to rural WASH services and strengthening service delivery systems. The Government of Tanzania (GoT),
in collaboration with DPs, has been implementing the multi-year WSDP from 2006 to 2025 as its flagship sector-wide
approach to planning. The program aims to enhance water supply, sanitation, and WRM nationwide57. Phase I (2007–
2014) focused on foundational investments, including the construction of over 32,000 rural water points, which provided
access to improved water services for more than 8 million people. It also strengthened Basin Water Boards to support
integrated WRM and launched the National Sanitation Campaign58. Phase II (2014–2021) built upon these achievements,
increasing rural water supply coverage to 72.3 percent and urban coverage to 86 percent. Sewerage access in regional
centers rose to 13 percent during this phase59. Phase III (2022–2025) continues this trajectory, having reached 80 percent
of its water access targets and achieved 85 percent of the performance benchmarks for water distribution systems to
date.

2.      A key institutional milestone under the WSDP has been the establishment of the Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation Agency (RUWASA) in 2019. By consolidating responsibility for rural water service delivery under a dedicated
national institution with a decentralized service delivery structure at regional and district levels, RUWASA has significantly
improved coordination, resource allocation, and technical oversight. This reform has led to a marked increase in the
functionality of rural water points from 259,730 (2020) to 395,984 (Aug. 2025), thereby enabling sustainable access to
improved water services from 17,586,081 (2020) to 31,203,058 (2025) rural residents. Targeted institutional strengthening
and technical support initiatives led by RUWASA have enhanced the capacity of Community-Based Water Supply
Organizations (CBWSOs) to operate as professional service providers. Through the adoption of a multi-village scheme
model, the number of CBWSOs has been rationalized from over 2,000 to 979 60 . Additionally, dedicated social and
behavioral change communication campaigns, led by the Ministry of Health, have contributed to increased access to
improved sanitation and hygiene among rural households.

3.       Despite these efforts of the GoT universal access to WASH services in Tanzania is yet to be achieved in Tanzania.
Data from the UNICEF/World Health Organization (WHO) JMP indicates that access to basic drinking water has increased
steadily from 40 percent in 2000 to 77 percent in 202261, while according to the most recent government report, national


57 Ministry of Water (2004) Water Sector Development Programme 2006 – 2025 https://www.taees.org/wp-

content/uploads/2021/09/WSDP_Main_Document__2006_-_2025__Nov_2006.pdf
58 https://www.maji.go.tz/uploads/publications/en1568472384-wsdp-phase-i-evaluation-final-report.pdf; USAID (2020) Tanzania Water Sector

Assessment for Strategy Development
59 USAID (2022) Final evaluation report: Government of Tanzania water sector development program phase 2 final evaluation
60 RUWASA Service Delivery and Monitoring System
61 Joint Monitoring Program. 2022. https://washdata.org/data/

                                                                                                                                   Page 38
                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


access to basic drinking water reached 83 percent as of December 2024, up from 79.6 percent in December 2023 62—
below national targets of 85 percent63. WASH deficits are especially acute in rural schools and health centers with 34
percent of rural schools lacking any drinking water, 60 percent lacking basic sanitation, and 83 percent lacking hygiene
facilities. These conditions contribute to an estimated 33 million lost school days annually to WASH-related illnesses, with
girls particularly affected by inadequate access to WASH for menstrual hygiene64. In rural health facilities, 26 percent
lacked water, 52 percent were without any sanitation services, and only 32 percent had basic waste services65.

4.      The economic cost of inadequate WASH is estimated at US$2.4 billion annually (3.2 percent of GDP66). While
GDP is projected to grow by 6 percent by 2025, poverty reduction is hindered by rapid population growth. Tanzania’s
population of 61.7 million is expected to double by 2044, with 65 percent living in rural areas. Poor WASH contributes to
high child mortality, undernutrition, and disease outbreaks such as cholera. Gender disparities persist women and girls
bear the burden of water collection, limiting their education and economic participation. While women hold 28–29
percent of leadership roles in RUWASA and CBWSOs, their representation in Basin Water Boards remains low.

5.      Tanzania’s population is increasingly exposed to water stress, a trend driven by population growth, growing
climate variability, and weak resource management. Per capita renewable water resources have plummeted from 10,265
m³ per year in 1967 to 2,105 m³ in 2022 and are projected to fall to 1,415 m³ by 203567. This decline threatens both water
quantity and quality. Weak monitoring and limited coordination between WRM and service delivery — especially in rural
areas — underscore the need for integrated, sustainable approaches across technical, institutional, and resource
dimensions. Tanzania ranks 150th out of 191 countries in climate change readiness, leaving its economy highly exposed to
prolonged droughts, severe storms, floods, and rising temperatures. Without decisive action, climate change could reduce
real GDP by up to 4 percent by 2050. Addressing these risks requires stronger institutions to plan and implement resilience
measures, alongside investment in sustainable resource management and climate-resilient infrastructure68.
6.      Zanzibar’s water sector is undergoing a pivotal transition, marked by a strong government commitment to
reform and improve service delivery. While mainland Tanzania has made significant progress in advancing the WASH
agenda through a multi-year, sector-wide approach to planning under the WSDP, the sustainable development of the
water sector in Zanzibar has lagged. The sector continues to face several challenges, including limited institutional
capacity, fragmented governance, and underdeveloped infrastructure and service delivery systems for both WRM and
WASH services. Further constraints include over-reliance on vulnerable groundwater sources, low sanitation coverage,
and operational inefficiencies in water utility service delivery. However, recent developments, most notably the launch of
the 2025 Water and Sanitation Policy, demonstrate a clear intent to address these constraints and set the sector on a
transformative path. Supporting the Government of Zanzibar in fully implementing this reform agenda presents a timely
opportunity to strengthen regulatory frameworks, build technical capacity, and enhance the financial sustainability of
service delivery.
7.      The World Bank supported the Tanzania Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program (SRWSSP)
Phase 1, together with interventions from other DPs, has complemented government efforts to expand access to WASH
services. While the sustainability and functionality of rural water services in Tanzania remain ongoing challenges, notable
progress has been achieved through the SRWSSP (P163732), which closed in July 2025. The Program, in coordination with



62 Ministry of Water, January 2025 - Preliminary status of water service availability in Tanzania.
63 Joint Monitoring Programme. 2022. https://washdata.org/data/
64 Belete, N. 2023. “The Urgency of Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene in 5 key numbers.” World Bank blogs. Feb. 23.
65 Joint Monitoring Program. 2022. https://washdata.org/data/
66 World Bank. 2024. Country Partnership Framework FY25 – 28

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099061724153527007/pdf/BOSIB193d9b4f005a1a0c01407ba1414034.pdf
67 Tanzania 2022 Population and Housing Census
68 World Bank Group. 2024. Tanzania Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series.

                                                                                                                             Page 39
                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


other DPs through the Donor Partners Group 69 , financed the strengthening of institutional capacity and improved
infrastructure planning and delivery across mainland Tanzania, excluding Zanzibar. Through the SRWSSP, 10.7 million
people gained access to improved water supply and 12.3 million to basic sanitation, representing 121 percent and 137
percent of the original program targets, respectively. In addition, the program supported the organizational set-up and
operationalization of the new RUWASA, strengthened the capacity of CBWSOs, and invested in improved WASH services
for 1,830 public primary schools and 2,593 health care facilities. Collectively, these efforts have laid a strong foundation
for addressing systemic weaknesses and enhancing the sustainability of rural WASH services in Tanzania70.

8.      To accelerate progress towards universal WASH access in rural areas of mainland Tanzania, the proposed
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (SRWSSP II) will adopt a comprehensive systems
approach. The SRWSSP II will build on the achievements of Phase 1 with a focus on strengthening governance, institutional
capacity, and service delivery performance, alongside infrastructure improvements. The program will adopt a hybrid
financing structure, combining PforR with an IPF component. This approach will expand access to climate-resilient WASH
services, support sustainable WRM, and promote PSP and financial sustainability in the sector. The operation will also
provide targeted technical assistance to the Government of Zanzibar through the IPF component. This support will focus
on strengthening sector governance, advancing institutional reforms, and enhancing service delivery capacity within the
Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals (MoWEM). The IPF will finance a strategic package of activities that will serve as
a preparatory platform for a future standalone investment operation aimed at scaling up WASH access in Zanzibar.

B.        Relevance to Higher-Level Objectives

9.       The Tanzania program strongly aligns with the strategic objectives of the regional MPA of improving governance
and institutional capacities for climate-resilient and financially sustainable inclusive WASH services delivery. The
program’s integrated approach—linking service expansion, institutional strengthening, regulatory reforms, PCM and
climate resilience—mirrors the MPA’s vision of systems transformation grounded on government-led planning and
coordination; addressing systemic governance bottlenecks; incentivizing efficient water utility services; mobilizing diverse
financing sources including private capital; and embedding resilience in infrastructure development throughout the water
and sanitation service chain. The operation is also aligned with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
Tanzania FY25-29 (Report Number: CPF0000021), and it supports meeting the CPF’s goal “to help Tanzania achieve more
inclusive, private sector-led, and resilient growth during FY25–29 and beyond.” Specifically, the Program will support the
achievement of Higher-Level Outcome (HLO) 1 - “Enhanced human capital to boost labor productivity”. This will be
achieved by increasing access to safe and clean WASH facilities in schools to improve attendance (Objective 1), enhancing
access to WASH facilities in healthcare facilities (Objective 2) and expanding access to safely managed WASH services for
households, which are critical for a healthy and dignified life (Objective 3); HL02 – “Catalyzing Private-Sector-Led Growth”
through supporting water sector regulatory and institutional reforms and improving access to and mobilizing private
finance for WASH services (Objective 5); and HL03 – “Enhanced Resilience to Shocks and Climate Impacts” through
financing climate-resilient and low-carbon WASH infrastructure and systems (Objective 9).

C.        Program Description

10.    SRWSSP II will support the third phase of Tanzania’s Water Sector Development Program (WSDP III) and the
GoT’s successor program in 137 rural Local Government Authorities (LGAs) in 25 regions over a 5-year period. It will

69 https://tzdpg.or.tz/clusters/water-sanitation-and-hygiene ; Other initiatives include DFID (now FCDO) Payment by Results (PbR) programme in

Tanzania which played a catalytic role in shifting the focus from infrastructure delivery to service sustainability. It introduced performance-based
financing, strengthened institutional accountability.
70 Final Assessment Report (2025) for Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Phase I

                                                                                                                                             Page 40
                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
             The World Bank
             Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


support all five components of WSDP III through three areas focusing on: (i) increased access and sustainability of at least
basic WASH services; (ii) policy, institutions and regulation for strengthened service delivery; and (iii) Maximizing Finance
for Development (MFD), including the leverage of private investment. The program will also provide technical assistance
to the Government of Zanzibar in laying the foundations for accelerated implementation of institutional reforms critical
for sustainable and inclusive water and sanitation service delivery. Its estimated number of beneficiaries is 3 million people
for water supply and 4.5 million people for sanitation and hygiene services. Table 3.1 provides a summary of WSDP III and
the slice of WSDP III to be supported by SRWSSP II. The government program will also include the successor program to
the current WSDP III.
                                     Table 3.1. Summary of PforR Program Boundaries
                                 Government Program                           PforR Program                 Alignment, Exclusions notes
                         Strengthening sector institutions for   The program development objective is
                         integrated water resources              to increase and sustain access to at
 Objective                                                                                                  Aligned
                         management and improved access to       least basic water supply, sanitation and
                         water supply and sanitation services    hygiene services in all rural districts.
 Duration                             2022-2026                                 2025-2030                   Aligned
                          Nationwide (26 regions including 184              25 regions including            Excluding urban areas and
 Geographic coverage
                                         LGAs)                             137 District Councils            Zanzibar
 Components                                                                 Results Areas (RAs)
 Component 1 - Water Resources Management and                                                               Aligned with specific activities,
 Development                                                                                                excluding (i) urban water supply
 Component 2-Water Quality Management                            RA 1: Increased access and                 investments, (ii) those related to
 Sub-Component 3.1: Rural Water Supply                           sustainability of at least basic WASH      inter and intra-basin water
 Sub-Component 3.2: Urban Water Supply                           services                                   transfer infrastructures, and (iii)
                                                                                                            construction of large water
 Component 4 - Sanitation and Hygiene
                                                                                                            storage infrastructures
 Component 5- Program Coordination and Delivery Support
                                                                 RA 2 - Policy, Institutions and
 Sub-Component 5.1: Policy, Planning and Fiduciary
                                                                 Regulation for strengthened service        Aligned
 Management
                                                                 delivery
 Sub-Component 5.2: Institutional Capacity Building
 Sub-Component 5.3: Crosscutting Issues (private sector          RA 3: Maximizing Finance for
                                                                                                            Aligned
 engagement)                                                     Development (MFD)

11.      The GoT has initiated the development of a new five-year sector-wide plan, Water Sector Development Program
covering 2026–2030. This plan will build on the current program and incorporate lessons learned from previous phases.
It is expected to be formally launched in early 2026. SRWSSP II will support this process through technical assistance
activities financed under the IPF component. These activities will contribute to the design and operational readiness of
the New Program, ensuring alignment with national priorities and sector reform objectives.

12.      SRWSSP II will adopt an integrated sector approach that aligns incentives across community, district, regional,
and national levels. It will prioritize both high-quality infrastructure development and sustainable service delivery. The
program will expand access to sanitation and hygiene through Private Sector Engagement, behavior change
communication, and sanitation marketing to eliminate open defecation and improve household sanitation. It will also
incentivize districts to improve WASH access in primary schools and healthcare facilities, and at the national level
strengthen the sector’s governance and financing and enhance climate-resilient WRM. Activities under the IPF component
will complement the PforR by providing technical assistance and preparatory inputs essential for achieving program
results.

13.     The Total PforR Program financing over 2025–2030 is expected to be US$307 million with an IPF component of
US$15 million. Of the PforR Program, an expected US$100 million will be funded by the Government, US$185 million will
be financed through IDA, US$2 million through a grant from Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP),
                                                                                                                                        Page 41
                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


and US$20 million expected to be leveraged from commercial financing through Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs). The
IPF component consists of US$15 million of IDA credit to provide TA, capacity development, and program delivery support
to key implementing agencies. Priority activities include: Strengthening of the Water Department through procurement
of working tools and software’s for the 2 newly established Divisions (Water Resource Management and Water Supply
and Sanitation Management divisions) under MoWEM; Procurement of Groundwater investigation and monitoring
equipment; Technical assistance for Developing Faecal Sludge and wastewater management strategy, detailed designs,
and tender documents for priority sanitation investments; Detailed design and tender documents for water schemes
development in Pemba; Drafting the National Water and sanitation Act of 2006 and its Regulations; and Rehabilitation
works for Zanzibar Water Institute. Table 2 below provides the financing breakdown.

                                                   Table 3.2. Proposed Program Financing
 Source                                                                                                           Amount (US$, million)
 Total PforR Program Financing                                                                                            307
     Counterpart Funding                                                                                                  100
     Commercial financing leveraged                                                                                        20
     IDA Credit                                                                                                           185
     ESMAP Grant                                                                                                            2
 IPF Component                                                                                                             15
     IDA credit                                                                                                            15
 Grand Total                                                                                                              322


14.     The Program will support results across three RAs. The following paragraphs provide a summary of each RA, its
key activities, and how it is aligned with the pillars of the Regional WASH MPA.71
     •    RA 1: Increased access and sustainability of at least basic WASH services (US$141.56 million IDA, US$84.37
          million Counterpart Funding). Activities financed under this RA align with Pillar 4, expanding access to basic
          climate-resilient WASH infrastructures for rural households, schools, and healthcare facilities through functional
          waterpoints and latrines.72 Specific activities include design and construction, extension and or rehabilitation of
          rural water points, household latrines, and gender-sensitive WASH facilities in schools and healthcare facilities. It
          includes sanitation behavior change campaign and hygiene promotion. These efforts will particularly benefit
          women and girls by reducing the time spent collecting water, improving safety and dignity, and supporting
          menstrual health and hygiene. To enhance climate resilience, the program will support integrated planning,
          construction, maintenance, and monitoring of water resources use and conservation. This includes integrating
          climate resilient infrastructure design of WSS investments. It will also support, through the IPF, sustainable water
          resource protection and management to ensure long-term availability and manage the risks of overexploitation.
          Improved WASH services will enhance climate resilience by ensuring reliable access to safe water, reducing
          disease risks during floods and droughts, and protecting communities through resilient infrastructure and
          resource-efficient systems (seen at the DLI level).
     •    RA 2: Policy, Institutions and regulation for strengthened service delivery (US$33.44 million IDA, US$15.63
          million Counterpart Funding). Activities financed under this RA align with Pillars 2 and 3, strengthening policies,
          institutions, and regulatory frameworks for sustainable and climate resilient service delivery. The specific activities


71  High-risk investments with significant adverse impacts on the environment or people, for example, large dams or resettlements affecting over
200 people, are not financed under the Program.
72 Access to basic water service means drinking water from an improved source, such as a protected well, borehole or piped supply, that is at most

within a 30-minute round trip for collection, including queuing while basic sanitation refers to the use of improved sanitation facilities that are not
shared with other households. Functional water points and household latrines tend to be highly exposed to droughts, floods, storms, and rising
temperatures. Therefore, climate-proofing these facilities is essential to safeguard public health, protect natural resources, and ensure
uninterrupted services in the wake of extreme weather events.
                                                                                                                                              Page 42
                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


        include capacity building for CBWSOs, establishment of RUWASA O&M support centers, development of district
        WASH master plans, regulatory improvement plans for rural water services, and investments in data systems and
        financial sustainability reforms. Sector reforms and investment activities will also be designed to ensure targeted
        incentives in the disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) to enhance women’s voices are integrated in the planning,
        design, and siting of water infrastructure to improve safety, accessibility, and responsiveness.
    •   RA 3: Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) (US$10 million IDA, US$2 million ESMAP TF, and US$20
        million private capital). Activities under this RA aligns with Pillar 4 focused on catalyzing private financing for
        WASH, including menstrual health and hygiene (MHH). Specific activities include mobilizing private capital/non-
        public finance through implementation of the government-led pre-feasibility study for a PPP in rural water supply
        services completed under phase I and exploring other blended finance mechanisms to scale eligible WASH
        investments across the country.

15.      The program will strategically support the GoT’s ambition to accelerate the transition to low-carbon, climate-
resilient rural water services. The ESMAP grant of US$2 million under RA3 provides critical catalytic funding to advance
the implementation of PPP for rural water supply schemes, with a particular focus on the deployment of solar PV water
pumping systems in off-grid rural areas. This targeted support enables the Program to scale innovative renewable energy
solutions, reduce operational costs, enhance climate resilience, and expand sustainable access to water for underserved
communities. The ESMAP grant not only leverages private capital and technical expertise but also strengthens the enabling
environment for blended finance.

16.     The IPF component will provide targeted technical assistance and capacity-building support to implementing
agencies, with a focus on institutional strengthening, enhancing sector coordination, monitoring, and reporting. On the
mainland, the IPF component will support government initiatives on integrated WRM including conducting aquifer
mapping, development of groundwater data systems, integrated water resources planning and allocation, maintaining a
dam inventory and strengthening of the Basin Water Boards. In Zanzibar, the IPF will provide targeted TA to the Water
Development of the MoWEM towards strengthening sector governance, institutional restructuring, service delivery, and
capacity building.

17.      Prioritization and alignment with the four pillars of the Regional WASH MPA and participation in regional
activities. The operation is fully aligned with the four pillars of the AFE WASH MPA, ensuring strategic prioritization and
sequencing of activities to address national priorities. Under Pillar 1, the program will support the development of district-
wide subnational WASH investment plans as the platform and guiding framework for WASH services delivery. At the
national-level, the program will support sector-wide policy and investments coordination through the development of the
flagship long-term sector-wide sector development program. Pillar 2 is addressed through RA 2 and the IPF component,
which provide incentives and technical assistance for governance and institutional reforms. Pillar 3 alignment is reflected
in specific DLIs aimed at enhancing the capacity of CBWSOs as rural water utilities and supporting the development of
WASH information management systems and monitoring frameworks. DLIs 1–4 focusing on expanding WASH access
through climate-resilient infrastructure and DLI 8 focused mobilizing private capital for infrastructure are aligned to Pillar
4. Part of the IPF will provide technical assistance focused on improving the WRM framework towards more sustainable
allocation and monitoring of scarce water resources and promoting basin-level strategies.

18.     To further strengthen alignment with the regional MPA, Tanzania will, in line with national priorities, utilize project
resources to participate in regional data collection, analytical work, and assessments under the regional project. This
engagement will facilitate access to technical assistance, regional knowledge, peer learning, and benchmarking to inform
national policies, while also enabling Tanzania to contribute to and benefit from regional cooperation, ensuring mutual
value and respect for national ownership.



                                                                                                                      Page 43
                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


19.      The PDO is to increase and sustain access73 to at least basic water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in all
rural districts.

20.       The PDO indicators are:
             a. People provided with at least basic water (Number of people, disaggregated by gender, youth)
             b. People provided with at least basic sanitation (Number of people, disaggregated by gender, youth)
             c. People provided with basic hygiene (Number of people, disaggregated by gender, youth)
             d. Proportion of sustainably functioning rural water points (Percentage)
             e. USD (million dollars) of non-public financing mobilized to provide WASH services in rural areas (Amount)

21.       The program DLIs and the financing allocation are presented in Table 3.4.

                                                            Table 3.4: Summary of DLIs
 RA    DLI       Description                    DLR and End Target                                         Unit Cost (US$)                Allocation
 1     DLI 1     Number      of    people       1-1: 1,500,000 people have (re)gained access to basic      1-1: US$7 per person for       US$28,500,000
                 (re)gaining access to at       water supply services in Rural Districts above the         districts   above    the
                 least basic water supply       National Access Target considering only the areas          national target
                 services                       within RUWASA jurisdiction                                 1-2: US$12 per person for
                                                1-2: 1,500,000 people have (re)gained access to basic      districts   below    the
                                                water supply services in Rural Districts below the         national target
                                                National Access Target as of the date of the Financing
                                                Agreement, considering only the areas within
                                                RUWASA jurisdiction.
       DLI 2     Number of people with          2-1: 1,500,000 people have gained access to basic          2-1: US$2 per person for       US$18,500,000
                 access to at least basic       sanitation services in Rural Districts with sanitation     districts   above    the
                 sanitation and hygiene         coverage above the National Sanitation Coverage            national target
                 services                       Average considering only the areas within RUWASA           2-2: US$3 per person for
                                                jurisdiction,                                              districts   below    the
                                                2-2: 3,000,000 people have gained access to basic          national target
                                                sanitation services in Rural Districts with sanitation     2-3: US$2 per person
                                                coverage below the National Sanitation Coverage
                                                Average
                                                2-3: 3,250,000 people have gained access to basic
                                                hygiene services in Rural Districts considering only the
                                                areas within RUWASA jurisdiction
       DLI 3     Number of public primary       1,300 public primary schools in Rural Districts have       US$20,000 per school           US$26,000,000
                 schools with access to at      gained access to basic WASH services
                 least      basic     water,
                 sanitation and hygiene
                 (“WASH”) services
       DLI 4     Number of government-          1,000 government-run public health care facilities in      US$29,000 per HCF              US$29,000,000
                 run public health care         Rural Districts have gained access to basic WASH
                 facilities with access to at   services
                 least basic WASH services
 2     DLI 5     Number of community-           5-1: 980 CBWSOs have improved their O&M                    5-1: US$8,000 per CBWSO        US$39,560,000
                 based water supply             capabilities for professional water supply service         meeting basic category
                 organizations                  delivery, attaining a level 4 (basic category)             (Level 4).
                 (“CBWSOs”) with                certification                                              5-2:    US$15,000    per
                 improved operation and                                                                    CBWSO meeting Level 3
                 maintenance (“O&M”)


73 Sustaining WASH access refers to ensuring communities have continuous and reliable access to at least basic water supply, sanitation, and

hygiene services. This involves not only the initial provision of these services but also their technical, financial and institutional aspects of providing
maintenance, improvement, and adaptation to changing conditions over time.
                                                                                                                                                 Page 44
                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


        capacity for professional   5-2: 980 CBWSOs have further improved their O&M            5-3: US$22,000      per
        water supply service        capabilities for professional water supply service         CBWSO meeting Level 2
        delivery                    delivery, attaining a level 3 certification                5-4:  US$32,000     for
                                    5-3: 490 CBWSOs have further improved their O&M            CBWSO meeting Level 1
                                    capabilities for professional water supply service
                                    delivery, attaining a level 2 certification
                                    5-4: 195 CBWSOs have further improved their O&M
                                    capabilities for professional water supply service
                                    delivery, attaining a level 1 certification
DLI 6   Number of District          6-1: 137 District Councils have submitted to RUWASA        6-1: US$8,000 per year for   US$16,440,000
        Councils submitting         timely, accurate and complete water sector data,           water data
        sector monitoring and       covering four (4) consecutive calendar quarters of         6-2: US$8,000 per year for
        evaluation (“M&E”) data     Program implementation.                                    sanitation data
        that are timely, accurate   6-2: 137 District Councils have submitted to MoH           6-3: US$8,000 per year for
        and complete sector.        timely, accurate and complete sanitation sector data,      schools WASH data
                                    covering four (4) consecutive calendar quarters of
                                    Program implementation.
                                    6-3: 137 District Councils have submitted to MoEST
                                    timely, accurate and complete WASH data pertaining
                                    to all publicly own primary schools, covering an entire
                                    academic year
DLI 7   WASH sector planning,       7-1: Improved WASH Sector coordination and                                              US$17,000,000
        sustainability and          district-wide planning: At least 50% of Rural Districts    7-1: US$4,360,000
        regulation strengthened     (i.e., no less than 69 Rural Districts) have adopted and
                                    commenced implementation of their respective               7-2: US$5,000,000
                                    climate informed District WASH Master Plans.
                                    7-2: Strengthened Technical Backstopping                   7-3: US$2,000,000
                                    mechanisms for O&M services: RUWASA has fully
                                    established 25 operational CBWSOs support centers,
                                    one per Region.                                            7-4: US$1,500,000
                                    7-3: Enhanced rural water services Regulation:
                                    RUWASA: (a) has adopted a Rural Water Services             7-5: US$1,000,000
                                    Regulatory Improvement Plan; and (b) has fully
                                    implemented the short- and medium-term action              7-6: US$2,450,000
                                    items thereof.
                                    7-4: Strengthened enabling environment for sector          7-7: US$690,000
                                    financial Sustainability and performance-based
                                    financing: The recipient has:
                                    (a) amended the National Water Fund Regulations to
                                    enable the provision of loans to CBWSOs; and
                                    (b) developed and adopted a performance-based
                                    criteria for resource allocation for urban and rural
                                    water services.
                                    7-5: Strengthened enabling environment for Private
                                    Capital Mobilization: MoW has approved/adopted
                                    relevant policy documents providing for fiscal
                                    incentives to promote private sector investment into
                                    water services through public-private partnerships.
                                    7-6: Strengthened the Sanitation function within
                                    RUWASA: RUWASA has (a) formally adopted a Fecal
                                    Sludge Management Strategy and piloted its
                                    implementation in at least one [Rural] District per
                                    Region; and
                                    (b) undertaken an internal re-organization
                                    establishing a sanitation unit led by Head of Unit
                                    reporting directly to RUWASA’s Director General and
                                    staffed with sufficient staff.
                                    7-7: Enhanced Water Services Delivery Data
                                    Management and Reporting: RUWASA has published
                                                                                                                                  Page 45
                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                                            on annual reports, for at least 4 years of the Program,
                                            the performance and financial data collected monthly
                                            from CBWSOs through the data monitoring and
                                            visualization platform under the RUWASA Service
                                            Delivery and Management System.

 3     DLI 8    Non-public financing        8-1: RUWASA has executed public-private partnership       8-1: US$2,000,000           US$12,000,000
                leveraged for the water     (“PPP”) contract(s) for the development and/or
                supply and sanitation       operation and maintenance of 206 water schemes.74         8-2: US$10,000,000
                sector                      8-2: The Recipient has mobilized US$20,000,000 in
                                            private capital for eligible investments in the WASH
                                            sector pursuant to the Program’s Private Sector
                                            Participation Guidelines.


D.       Project Beneficiaries

22.     Direct beneficiaries include approximately 3 million people gaining access to basic water supply and 4.5 million
people gaining access to basic sanitation and hygiene services across rural areas of Tanzania. Institutional and capacity-
building beneficiaries include a wide range of organizations, and stakeholders supported through the IPF-funded technical
assistance component including ministries, national and subnational government agencies (e.g., PORALG, MoW, MoWEM,
MoH, MoEST, RUWASA), CBWSOs, and regulatory bodies in both mainland Tanzania and in Zanzibar.

E.       Implementation Arrangements

23.      The implementation of SRWSSP II will build on the institutional framework established under the first phase,
leveraging existing systems and capacities developed through WSDP III. The primary implementing entities will include
LGAs and RUWASA district offices, which will be responsible for the execution of program activities at the local level in the
mainland. These entities will operate within the decentralized framework of the GoT, ensuring continuity and alignment
with national sector strategies. At the national level, the MoW will serve as the overall program coordinator and ‘program
owner’. Implementation will be guided by a joint National Steering Committee comprising Permanent or Principal
Secretaries from MoW, Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MoEST), President’s
Office – Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG), Ministry of Finance (MoF), President’s Office – Finance
and Planning (PoFP), Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals (MoWEM) and RUWASA. At the national level, fully
empowered teams will be established nationally to monitor and support implementation. WASH Coordination Team will
be established at the regional and district levels, directed by National Coordination Strategy. In Zanzibar, the Water
Development Department of the Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals (MoWEM) will lead implementation of IPF
supported technical assistance activities.

24.     Each implementing agency has a specific role. RUWASA will oversee rural WSS investments and sustainability,
while the MoH will lead sanitation and hygiene promotion, including WASH activities in healthcare facilities, working with
PO-RALG, Regional Secretariats (RSs) and district authorities. Districts, supported by RSs will handle procurement and
construction of health care facilities, primary schools, as well as household sanitation. MoEST will oversee implementation
related to WASH in schools, whereas PO-RALG will supervise and coordinate implementation of rural sanitation services
through its 25 RSs, which are responsible for monitoring, and providing technical backstopping and capacity building to
137 district councils that implement WASH activities at the local level.


74
  DLR 8.1 is financed 100% by a $2 million ESMAP grant. The expected end date for the achievement of DLR 8.1 is June 30th, 2027, to align with the
wider ESMAP grant end date. This has been captured in the negotiated ESMAP Grant Agreement with the recipient.
                                                                                                                                         Page 46
                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


25.     To ensure accountability and independent results verification, an Independent Verification Agent (IVA) will be
engaged to validate program outcomes reported by districts through the MoW. The Internal Auditor General has been
designated as the IVA, based on its institutional independence and mandate to conduct district-level audits. The Internal
Auditor General brings experience from SRWSSP phase 1 and may sub-contract specialized verification tasks where
additional technical expertise is required.

F.      Appraisal Summary

Technical Assessments
26.      The Technical Assessment confirmed the clear strategic relevance of addressing water and sanitation in
Tanzania. WSDP III has a strong justification in terms of health and economic benefits. However, as the lessons from their
first and second phases clearly show, there are several critical aspects that need strengthening.

27.       Several service and sustainability constraints affect the sector. Water supply investments mainly support capital
investment in new water supply schemes. Insufficient priority is given to sustaining existing schemes that become non-
functional due to poor management and O&M stemming from low capacity and inadequate local government funding and
tariffs. Rural water supply often fails to meet national water quality standards due to inadequate water monitoring and
treatment. On sanitation, poor designs and construction quality affect the effectiveness of sanitation facilities.
Specifications and enforcement of building standards are often lacking, and designs are not climate resilient. Safely
managed sanitation is hampered by a lack of fecal sludge management (FSM) facilities in rural areas. Improving sector
performance is further constrained by the failure to submit timely and accurate M&E data.

28.      Current sector financing is insufficient to meet the needs. Private sector financing has potential, but there is a
lack of appropriate innovative financing instruments and limited sector capacity to identify, prepare, design, construct and
manage specific PPP projects.

29.      WRM in rural Tanzania faces numerous challenges. Traditional water sources are drying and yields from
groundwater sources are reducing due to prolonged droughts and other climate change impacts, affected by seasonal
variability. Overextraction of groundwater and deforestation further exacerbate these issues. Declining water resource
quality is a significant problem, due to the contamination of limited supplies. These challenges collectively impact
agriculture, health, and livelihoods. There is a need to strengthen sustainable management, community awareness, and
investment in climate-resilient infrastructure to ensure equitable access and sustainability.

30.     The sector faces significant governance challenges and there is a need to maintain and accelerate the progress
on sector reforms previously initiated by GoT. The capacities of LGAs and RUWASA have persistently been ranked as an
overarching challenge. There is also a lack of integrated planning amongst the implementing agencies for project
implementation and reporting in the sector. The PforR incentives and the IPF technical assistance component are expected
to address these issues.

31.      Program Expenditure Framework. The program is financially sustainable with projected government allocations
and a detailed expenditure framework confirming sufficient resources to fully implement each DLI. The total PforR
Program financing envelope of US$307 million comprises contributions from the GoT (US$100 million), IDA (US$185
million), ESMAP grant (US$2 million), and expected private sector capital from PPPs (US$20 million). The Government has
provided a comprehensive expenditure breakdown by implementing agency and expenditure category - fully mapped to
the national budget classification system as detailed in the Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA). Budget lines are
delineated to enable effective fund tracking across ministries, LGAs, and service delivery points. Institutional arrangements
and fund flow mechanisms ensure that resources reach appropriate implementation levels. No High-Value Contracts are

                                                                                                                     Page 47
                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


anticipated, and procurement will remain within national thresholds, supporting transparency, accountability, and
alignment with the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).

32.     The Zanzibar water sector faces critical challenges across WRM, sanitation, utility governance, and institutional
capacity. The islands rely entirely on a fragile karst aquifer system, threatened by over-abstraction, saltwater intrusion,
and widespread unregulated boreholes due to improper monitoring system. Sanitation infrastructure is severely
underdeveloped, with only 13 percent of Stone Town sewered and underperformed wastewater treatment facilities,
contributing to recurring waterborne diseases. The defunct water sector utility suffered from poor service delivery, low
metering, and high non-revenue water, while regulatory oversight remains weak. MoWEM has limited technical and
planning capacity.

33.     Despite these challenges, the newly adopted 2025 Water and Sanitation Policy offers a transformative
opportunity. It redefines institutional roles, mandates the creation of WRM and WSS divisions, and supports legal and
regulatory reforms. The transition to RAND Water Zanzibar as the new utility 75 , coupled with plans to establish the
Zanzibar Water Institute, provides a platform for institutional realignment and capacity building. Priority interventions
necessary to put the sector on a transformative path include completion of the sector re-organization, tariff reforms,
aquifer mapping and protection of recharge areas, development of WRM and WASH (wastewater) information systems,
rural water supply expansion in Pemba, investments in sanitation infrastructure, and sanitation behavior change
campaigns. The sector also aims to mobilize private capital through bankable proposals and strengthen donor
coordination under the World Bank leadership.

34.      Program Economic and Financial Analysis. The SRWSSP II project delivers significant economic benefits by
improving access to safe water and sanitation, which is expected to reduce diarrhea incidence among children under five
by 8 percent annually, based on an Economic Analysis where the baseline prevalence is 13 percent. The World Health
Organization (WHO) further estimates a 5 percent annual reduction in diarrhea cases due to better water and sanitation.
In addition, improved water management should decrease malaria and chikungunya morbidity by 5 percent by limiting
mosquito breeding grounds. Economic productivity will rise as illness-related absenteeism is reduced, with each episode
of illness currently resulting in two lost days on average. The project also aims for a 15 percent cut in non-revenue water
(NRW), lowering operational costs and conserving resources, while shifting from diesel to solar pumping is projected to
boost energy security and significantly reduce expenses. Financial sustainability will be strengthened by achieving a 97
percent payment collection rate and cutting account receivables by 85 percent by 2030, ensuring reliable funding for
ongoing services and improvements. Based on the above, the overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for the
Program, over a 30-year period with a 6 percent discount rate, is calculated at 13 percent. The Net Present Value (NPV) is
estimated at around US$1.67 billion. By providing direct access to clean water, the Program aims to reduce the need for
charcoal to boil water and make it potable, thereby contributing to both improved public health and environmental
sustainability by reducing charcoal consumption and associated carbon emissions and thereby contributing to climate
mitigation. The analysis shows that the estimated total net carbon reduction of 523,641 tCO2e/year as mitigated emissions
for years 2025-2055 on average. The results show an EIRR 15 to 17 percent and NPV between US$2,174 and US$2,684
million, depending on the Shadow Price of Carbon adopted.




75 RAND Water Zanzibar has been formally engaged as the new water utility for Zanzibar through a competitive selection process and is expected to

lead the transformation of utility services, including the development of a utility turnaround plan.
                                                                                                                                       Page 48
                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                                         Table 3.5: Summary of Economic Analysis
                                                               Results 1 (Water)      Results 2 (Sanitation) Total project
       No GHG accounted
       NPV, 6%, US$ million                                                  US$759                   US$911        US$1,670
       IRR                                                                      18%                      11%            13%
       With GHG accounted
       SPC High
       NPV, 6%, US$ million                                              US$1,764                     US$921        US$2,684
       IRR                                                                     36%                       11%             17%
       SPC Low

       NPV, 6%, US$ million                                              US$1,259                     US$916        US$2,174
       IRR                                                                   26%                         11%            15%

                                            Table 3.6: GHG Reduction Summary

                      GHG accounting          Water                  Wastewater             Total
                                              tCO2e                  tCO2e                  tCO2e
                      Baseline                         52,161,600              3,791,502             55,953,103
                      With Project                     36,624,102              3,619,783             40,243,885
                      Net reduction                   (15,537,499)             (171,719)            (15,709,218)
                      Annual reduction                  (517,917)                 (5,724)             (523,641)
                      %                                      30%                      5%                    28%

35.      Paris Alignment. The Program is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation.
It directly supports Tanzania’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) by prioritizing climate-resilient WSS
infrastructure and services, promoting low-carbon development pathways.

36.      Assessment and Reduction of Adaptation Risks. The main climate and disaster risks affecting the project areas
are droughts, floods, and increasingly variable rainfall. Adaptation-related activities will raise the rural areas’ resilience to
these risks and include enhancing the resilience of water resources and sanitation systems to climate change-exacerbated
droughts and floods, improving integrated WRM, and expanding access to safe water and sanitation for vulnerable rural
communities. The implementation of SRWSSP II incorporates climate risk screening and adaptation measures throughout
design and construction of various WASH infrastructures and promotes the use of renewable energy in line with the NDCs’
mitigation objectives. To ensure the rehabilitated and new infrastructure itself will also be resilient to droughts and floods,
the task team will consider the pertinent recommendations given in the Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief, so
that service disruptions due to infrastructure damaged by climate-related shocks will be less likely to happen.

37.      Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. This program does not pose a material risk of negatively affecting
the country’s low-GHG emissions development pathways, as it will neither result in carbon lock-in nor create transition
risks. GHG emission reductions will be achieved mainly by (a) reducing energy consumption through higher energy
efficiency and the use of solar pumps, (b) reduction in NRW, and (c) reduced use of charcoal to boil water. In addition,
improving the operational and creditworthiness of WSS service providers will allow them to continue investing in energy
efficiency enhancements, thereby further reducing GHG emissions.




                                                                                                                             Page 49
                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Private Capital Facilitation, Gender, and Citizen Engagement.

38.      The program is aligned with the World Bank’s MDF strategy as it embedded private capital mobilization (PCM)
and private capital enablement (PCE) into its core structure. The IPF component is verified MFD-e as it involves TA and
capacity building activities that support upstream reforms to strengthen sector policies, regulatory frameworks, and
planning systems—laying the groundwork for sustainable private sector participation in rural water supply and
sanitation through PPPs. Also, under the IPF component, PCE activities will be carried out through the TA to identify and
advance commercially viable opportunities, leveraging the ongoing development of the Comprehensive Water Sector
Private Sector Engagement Strategy in collaboration with UNICEF and GoT. SRWSSP II also promotes innovative service
delivery models, including performance-based contracts between CBWSOs and professional private operators. The PCE
activities are expected to close about 206 water scheme PPPs. A total of US$20 million PCM is expected to be leveraged
under RA3 out of the PPP on rural water supply, which will comprise 30 percent in equity and 70 percent in debt (see DLI
8 for more details).

39.      Gender equality. In Tanzania, 40 percent of households are located more than 30 minutes from drinking water
sources, with women and girls taking responsibility for collecting water in 85 to 94 percent of these households.76 Women
also have primary responsibility for fetching water in 94. percent of rural households lacking on-site access, spending an
average 36-40 minutes per trip fetching water, for a weekly burden exceeding four hours77. This disproportionate time
commitment restricts women’s and girls’ educational (missed school days) and economic opportunities, limits their
participation in community decision-making, and exposes them to increased risks of injury and gender-based violence and
sexual harassment78. To address these constraints, the program will construct 12,000 water points in 137 underserved
rural districts, reduced time-burden on women of water collection to within 30 minutes, including waiting time, for
1,541,454 women in Tanzania79. To ensure that women’s preferences and concerns directly inform decisions about the
location and design of water points, the project will support RUWASA to develop protocols and standard operating
procedures that guide: (i) structured and documented consultations with women and girls to inform the siting and design
of all water points; and (ii) incorporation of design futures that enhances women’s safety (e.g proximity to
homes/schools/markets), accessibility (e.g., ramps, appropriate tap numbers and heights), and privacy (e.g., gender-
segregated facilities where necessary/relevant). Besides, women presence in decision-making roles for water resource
management has increased, but this progress has been uneven across the different institutions. Over the 2020-24 period,
women accounted for an average of 35 percent of Ministry of Water leadership, and 37 percent of National Water Fund
(NFW), compared to 22 percent of BWB directors, and 6 percent of water utilities leadership. In RUWASA, women make
up 28 percent of managers and directors, and 14 percent of regional managers, while in CBWSOs, female staff make up
29.2 percent. RUWASA is committed to further promote quotas for women’s representation in CBWSOs as well as targeted
capacity building to support women leaders on these bodies. One of the criteria for level 4 CBWSOs under DLI 5 is to have



76 The World Bank. 2022. Tanzania Gender Assessment. Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.

https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/33775734
77 The World Bank. 2022. Tanzania Gender Assessment. Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.

https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/33775734
78 World Bank.2024. Tanzania Economic Update - Overcoming Demographic Challenges while Embracing Opportunities. Washington, D.C. : World

Bank Group. https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/34278365; Castañeda Camey, I., Sabater, L., Owren, C. and Boyer, A.E. (2020).
Gender-based violence and environment linkages: The violence of inequality. Wen, J. (ed.). Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. 272pp
79 This indicator will be calculated by multiplying the proportion of households where women bear the primary burden for water collection by the

number of households upgraded to at least basic water (per JMP definitions) and then multiplied by the average number of women/girls per
household to arrive at the estimated number of women benefitting from the reduced time burden. During the results verification process, a verifier
will assess by asking women and girls on their perceptions on time saving by having a functioning water point near their houses.
                                                                                                                                        Page 50
                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


at least one of CBWSO’s governance board positions must be held by a woman, that means either a chairperson, vice
chairperson or an accountant.

40.      Citizen engagement. The SEP provides a coherent guiding framework for implementing agencies on how to ensure
effective citizen engagement during program implementation. The SEP mandates early and continuous consultations with
a wide range of stakeholders—including rural communities, women, people with disabilities, LGAs, and civil society—using
tailored approaches such as public meetings, focus groups, and targeted outreach to vulnerable groups. The DLIs explicitly
incentivizes participatory processes: for example, DLIs 1 and 2 require that communities are consulted in the sitting and
design of water points and sanitation facilities, with evidence of community input and satisfaction forming part of the
verification protocol. The IPF component will fund capacity building for local institutions and community-based
organizations to strengthen their ability to facilitate inclusive engagement, monitor service delivery, and manage feedback
mechanisms. Throughout construction and implementation, the program requires contractors and implementing agencies
to disclose information, collect feedback, and document stakeholder concerns, with regular reporting back to
communities on how their input has shaped project decisions. The program incentivizes capacity building of the citizen
facing- CBWSOs as the primary agents for the management of water services facilities to ensure sustained participation
and ownership. A multi-tiered GRM, accessible at the village, ward, district, and regional levels, enables all stakeholders
— including anonymous complainants—to raise concerns and receive timely, transparent responses, with grievance data
systematically tracked and reported as a core part of the program design. The results verification protocol includes citizen
engagement indicators, such as beneficiary satisfaction rates, ensuring that citizen engagement is a measurable and
integral part of program success.

Fiduciary Systems Assessments

41.     The FSA has found Tanzania’s procurement and FM frameworks to be adequate, but assigned a Substantial risk
rating due to four weaknesses: (i) multilayer D-Fund approval processes that slow disbursements; (ii) misalignment
between Program activities and the national budget calendar impedes timely endorsement and integration of program
budgets; (iii) complex coordination across multiple institutions and varying financial capabilities that results in delays and
communication breakdowns, and impacts the timeliness of funds flow and financial reporting; and (iv) weak internal audit
function that reduces timeliness and quality of financial oversight. To address these gaps, the Program Action Plan (PAP)
will require: (i) alignment of DLI verification and Program planning with budget milestones; (ii) introduction of
standardized planning, budgeting and reporting tools; (iii) expansion of internal-audit coverage and support to include the
SRWSSP II; and (iv) a requirement for the Controller and Auditor General (CAG) of Tanzania to conduct audit of Program
financial statements in line with International Standards. Program financial statements will be submitted to the World
Bank within six months of the fiscal year end.

42.      Procurement also requires further attention. Procurement will follow the Public Procurement Act, Cap. 410 (R.E.
2023) and Public Procurement Regulations 2024, and the World Bank Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and
Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing (revised in 2015). Procurement under the Program will mainly include various
works, goods, consulting services and non-consulting services. No contracts are expected to exceed Operational
Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) thresholds. Procurement will be carried out by RUWASA and delegated LGA
entities. An assessment of procurement capacity found: (i) shortages of procurement qualified staff; (ii) capacity gaps in
planning, bid preparation and evaluation; (iii) weak contract management; and (iv) inadequate management of
procurement and contract documents. Mitigation measures include: (i) targeted procurement training for tender board
and PIU staff; (ii) hiring/seconding additional staff to support procurement and contract implementation at LGA and
regional levels; (iii) contract-management training for procurement and technical staff; and (iv) checks and audits to verify
contract compliance and quality.


                                                                                                                      Page 51
                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


43.      The Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) rates the program’s overall environmental and social
risk as Moderate, noting that none of its activities are likely to cause sensitive or irreversible impacts and that a screening
process will exclude any high-risk interventions from Program financing. Environmentally, SRWSSP II will bring clear
benefits including, safer drinking water and sanitation, lower pollutant loads to land and water bodies, more climate-
resilient WRM, and reduced GHG emissions from untreated fecal waste. Risks are assessed to be limited, site-specific, and
manageable and include impacts on water resources availability, localized pollution from effluent and air emissions, health
and safety risks, erosion and sediment from works, waste-handling issues, and localized vegetation loss from site
clearance.

44.     Socially, SRWSSP II is expected to expand water and sanitation access, reduce water related disease, save time for
women and children, enhance dignity and privacy for women and girls, promote inclusive development, and strengthen
local water user associations and community organizations. Identified social risks include: tariff affordability, service
distance for vulnerable groups, potential displacement of persons due to land acquisition, health and safety hazards,
inadequate planning linked to gender-based violence, communicable diseases, and possible conflict with Indigenous
communities.

45.     The ESSA finds Tanzania’s regulatory framework and prior implementing agency performance as broadly capable
of managing these issues, though capacity gaps, especially limited environmental and social staffing and resources are
flagged. Recommended actions are included to close these gaps are embedded in DLI verification through strengthening
community engagement and adherence to environmental and social requirements, as well as in the Program Action Plan
(PAP), which will be part of the Program Operations Manual.

46.     The IPF component of the Program has an environmental and social risk classification of Substantial mainly
because of the downstream environmental risk from the Zanzibar technical assistance that includes finalization of a Fecal
Sludge Management (FSM) and wastewater management strategy and support to the detailed designs and preparation of
tender documents for priority sanitation management infrastructures. An ESCP and SEP have been prepared for the IPF
component, in addition to appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary prepared by the World Bank and disclosed
on the World Bank website and in country on August 6, 2025 and September 9, 2025, respectively. During implementation,
the terms of reference of different studies under the IPF component will include environmental and social inputs to assess
and provide mitigation measures to the associated downstream risks. Furthermore, the technical assistance will include
preparation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments associated with the detailed designs of WSS infrastructure.

47.      The policy on Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50) is applicable to the Program, as some of the
proposed interventions may affect water resources considered as international waterways according to the Policy. The
World Bank, on behalf of the GoT, notified the other riparian countries (Kenya, Uganda, Burundi, Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Egypt, South Sudan, Sudan, Mozambique, Malawi, and Zambia) and informed the Nile Basin
Initiative, Lake Victoria Basin Commission, and Lake Tanganyika Authority of the proposed Program. As of August 11, 2025,
which was the deadline set out in the notification letters sent to the riparian countries to respond on the Program, no
opposition were received. Based on the outcome of the notification process and the assessment that the operation would
not cause appreciable harm, Regional Vice President (RVP) clearance was given on August 14, 2025, to proceed with
preparation of the operation.

G.      Risks

48.     The risk assessment is informed by the results of the Technical, Fiduciary, and Environmental and Social Systems
Assessments. Substantial risks and mitigation measures are summarized in Table 3.7 below. The overall risk rating of the
operation is Moderate.

                                                                                                                      Page 52
                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                                Table 3.7. Program Risks and Mitigation Measures

Risk            Rating          Risk Description                                 Mitigation Measure
Fiduciary       Substantial      (i) Shortages of qualified procurement          The program will implement a set of
                                staff; (ii) capacity gaps in planning, bid       targeted actions, including: (i) capacity
                                preparation and evaluation; (iii) weak           building through procurement and
                                contract      management;        and      (iv)   contract management training for key
                                inadequate management of procurement             staff at all levels; (ii) strengthening
                                and contract documents; (v) multilayer D-        internal controls via semi-annual internal
                                Fund approval processes that slow                audit reviews; (iii) addressing staffing
                                disbursements;        (vi)    misalignment       gaps by hiring or seconding procurement
                                between Program activities and the               and FM personnel to decentralized
                                national budget calendar impedes timely          entities; (iv) improving planning and
                                endorsement and integration of program           budgeting through timely submission of
                                budgets; (vii) complex coordination              annual work plans and budget reports;
                                across multiple institutions and varying         and (v) enhancing funds flow by
                                financial capabilities that results in delays    streamlining disbursement processes and
                                and communication breakdowns, and                conducting regular reviews to resolve
                                impacts the timeliness of funds flow and         bottlenecks. These measures are
                                financial reporting;       and (viii) weak       designed to ensure that fiduciary systems
                                internal audit function that reduces             operate     with     greater   efficiency,
                                timeliness and quality of financial              transparency,       and     accountability
                                oversight.                                       throughout program implementation.




                                                                                                                    Page 53
                                                                                                                Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                             ANNEX 3.1. MPA Phase II: Tanzania SRWSSP II -Results Framework, M&E Plan and Verification Protocol




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexpolicyandresult#doctemplate
Program Development Objective(s)
The program development objective is to increase and sustain access to at least basic water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in all rural districts.


PDO Indicators by Outcomes


   Baseline                                                                                Closing Period
   Increased access and sustainability of at least basic WASH services
   People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                Sep/2030
   0                                                                                       3,000,000
     ➢People provided with at least basic water - Youth (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                Sep/2030
   0                                                                                       1,500,000
     ➢People provided with at least basic water - Female (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                Sep/2030
   0                                                                                       1,530,000
   People provided with at least basic sanitation (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                Sep/2030
   0                                                                                       4,500,000
     ➢People provided with at least basic sanitation - Female (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                Sep/2030
   0                                                                                       2,250,000
     ➢People provided with at least basic sanitation - Youth (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                Sep/2030




                                                                                                                                                Page 54
                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


   0                                                                                         3,150,000
   People provided with basic hygiene (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                  Sep/2030
   0                                                                                         3,250,000
     ➢People provided with basic hygiene - Female (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                  Sep/2030
   0                                                                                         1,625,000
     ➢People provided with basic hygiene - Youth (Number of people) CRI DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                  Sep/2030
   0                                                                                         2,275,000
   Proportion of sustainably functioning rural water points (Percentage)
   Sep/2025                                                                                  Sep/2030
   0                                                                                         90
   Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD)
   USD (million dollars) of non-public financing mobilized to provide WASH services in rural areas (Amount(USD)) DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                  Sep/2030
   0                                                                                         20,000,000



Intermediate Indicators by Results Areas

   Baseline                                                                                 Closing Period
   Increased access and sustainability of at least basic WASH services
   Water supply points constructed and or rehabilitated (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                                 Sep/2030
   0                                                                                        12,000
   Basic or safely managed sanitation facilities constructed at household level (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                                 Sep/2030
   0                                                                                        900,000
   Public primary schools with access to WASH facilities (Number) DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                 Sep/2030
   0                                                                                        1,300
   Public healthcare facilities with access to WASH facilities (Number) DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                                 Sep/2030




                                                                                                                       Page 55
                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


0                                                                                      1,000
People reached with sanitation & hygiene behavior change communication/demand creation & market-based sanitation activities at community-level (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      4,500,000
Increase in the number of women who are able to access water from an improved source within 30 minutes or less (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      1,530,000
Basic hand hygiene facilities constructed at household level (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      650,000
Policy, Institutions and Regulation for strengthened service delivery
CBWSOs established with improved O&M capacity for professional water supply services delivery (Number) DLI
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      900
Participating district councils submitting accurate and complete WASH sector M&E data (Number) DLI
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      137
Participating district councils that have district-wide WASH Master plans (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      25
Operations and Maintenance support centers established by RUWASA (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      25
CBWSO Operations and Maintenance Backstopping Framework developed by RUWASA (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      1
CBWSOs regularly collecting and submitting accurate O&M data through the Operations digital monitoring and reporting system adopted by RUWASA (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      900
Rural Water Services Regulatory Improvement Plan adopted and implemented by RUWASA (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      1
Districts implementing a Fecal Sludge Management Strategy (FSMS) developed by RUWASA (Number)
Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
0                                                                                      25



                                                                                                                                                          Page 56
                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


   Integrated Water Resources Management Plans developed or updated (Text)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      9
   Aquifer mappings completed (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      9
   Hydromet stations for surface water monitoring installed (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      100
   Dams inventory and information management system developed (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      1
   Artisans trained on the construction of WASH infrastructures (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      500
   WASH Sector Planning and Regulation Strengthened (Text) DLI
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      Achieve 7 DLIRs
   Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD)
   Guidelines and regulations adopted to promote public-private partnerships in WASH services (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      1
   Rural water supply schemes constructed through public-private partnerships (PPPs) (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      206
   Amount of capital leveraged from private financing sources for rural WASH services (Amount(USD))
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      25,000,000
   Businesses and public institutions provided with electricity (Number)
   Sep/2025                                                                               Sep/2030
   0                                                                                      206



Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI)




                                                                                                            Page 57
                                                                                                               Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)




Period                                                                                 Period Definition
Period 1                                                                               Program Year 1 - FY25/26
Period 2                                                                               Program Year 2 - FY26/27
Period 3                                                                               Program Year 3 - FY27/28
Period 4                                                                               Program Year 4 - FY28/29
Period 5                                                                               Program Year 5 -FY29/30



Baseline                     Period 1                        Period 2                 Period 3                      Period 4        Period 5
1:People provided with at least basic water (Number of people )
0                            450,000                         900,000                  900,000                        450,000        300,000
0.00                         4,275,000.00                    8,550,000.00             8,550,000.00                   4,275,000.00   2,850,000.00
DLI allocation                                               28,500,000.00            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                15.24%
  ➢ 1.1:People provided with at least basic water - Female (Number of people )
0
0.00                         0.00                            0.00                     0.00                           0.00           0.00
DLI allocation                                               0.00                     As a % of Total DLI Allocation                0%
  ➢ 1.2:People provided with at least basic water - Youth (Number of people )
0
0.00                         0.00                            0.00                     0.00                           0.00           0.00
DLI allocation                                               0.00                     As a % of Total DLI Allocation                0%
2:People provided with at least basic sanitation (Number of people )
0                            750,000                         1,100,000                1,300,000                      950,000        400,000
0.00                         2,000,000.00                    3,000,000.00             3,500,000.00                   2,500,000.00   1,000,000.00
DLI allocation                                               12,000,000.00            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                6.42%
  ➢ 2.1:People provided with at least basic sanitation - Female (Number of people )
0
0.00                         0.00                            0.00                     0.00                           0.00           0.00
DLI allocation                                               0.00                     As a % of Total DLI Allocation                0%
  ➢ 2.2:People provided with at least basic sanitation - Youth (Number of people )
0




                                                                                                                                                   Page 58
                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


0.00                            0.00                           0.00                    0.00                           0.00           0.00
DLI allocation                                                 0.00                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation                0%
3:People provided with basic hygiene (Number of people )
0                               450,000                        700,000                 950,000                        750,000        400,000
0.00                            900,000.00                     1,400,000.00            1,900,000.00                   1,500,000.00   800,000.00
DLI allocation                                                 6,500,000.00            As a % of Total DLI Allocation                3.48%
  ➢ 3.1:People provided with basic hygiene - Female (Number of people )
0
0.00                            0.00                           0.00                    0.00                           0.00           0.00
DLI allocation                                                 0.00                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation                0%
  ➢ 3.2:People provided with basic hygiene - Youth (Number of people )
0
0.00                            0.00                           0.00                    0.00                           0.00           0.00
DLI allocation                                                 0.00                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation                0%
4:Public primary schools with access to WASH facilities (Number )
0                               260                            260                     260                            260            260
0.00                            5,200,000.00                   5,200,000.00            5,200,000.00                   5,200,000.00   5,200,000.00
DLI allocation                                                 26,000,000.00           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                13.9%
5:Public healthcare facilities with access to WASH facilities (Number )
0                               300                            400                     200                            100            0
0.00                            8,700,000.00                   11,600,000.00           5,800,000.00                   2,900,000.00   0.00
DLI allocation                                                 29,000,000.00           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                15.51%
6:CBWSOs established with improved O&M capacity for professional water supply services delivery (Number )
0                               860                            810                     450                            310            215
0.00                            10,020,000.00                  10,350,000.00           8,200,000.00                   6,410,000.00   4,580,000.00
DLI allocation                                                 39,560,000.00           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                21.16%
7:Participating district councils submitting accurate and complete WASH sector M&E data (Number )
0                               411                            411                     411                            411            411
0.00                            3,288,000.00                   3,288,000.00            3,288,000.00                   3,288,000.00   3,288,000.00
DLI allocation                                                 16,440,000.00           As a % of Total DLI Allocation                8.79%
8:WASH Sector Planning and Regulation Strengthened (Text )
0
0.00                            5,360,000.00                   10,950,000.00           690,000.00                     0.00           0.00




                                                                                                                                                    Page 59
                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


DLI allocation                                               17,000,000.00               As a % of Total DLI Allocation                9.09%
9:USD (million dollars) of non-public financing mobilized to provide WASH services in rural areas (Amount(USD) )
0
0.00                          3,000,000.00                   3,000,000.00                2,000,000.00                   2,000,000.00   2,000,000.00
DLI allocation                                               12,000,000.00               As a % of Total DLI Allocation                6.42%




                                                                                                                                                      Page 60
                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes


Increased access and sustainability of at least basic WASH services
People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI DLI (percentage of which safely managed,
disaggregated by gender and youth and urban-rural)
                     This indicator measures the cumulative number of people who benefited from access to at least
Description          basic (according to the Joint Monitoring Program) water supply services that have been
                     constructed through operations supported by the World Bank.
Frequency             Yearly
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for      Through the RSDMS, managed by RUWASA, and verified by the IVA.
Data Collection
Responsibility for    RUWASA
Data Collection
People provided with at least basic sanitation (Number of people) CRI DLI (percentage of which safely managed,
disaggregated by gender and youth and urban-rural)
                     The indicator measures the cumulative number of people who benefited from access to at least
Description          basic (according to the Joint Monitoring Program) sanitation services that have been constructed
                     through operations supported by the World Bank.
Frequency             Yearly
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
                     Initially through the Data from National Sanitation Management Information System (NSMIS),
Methodology for
                     managed by MoH, and subsequently through the RSDMS, managed by RUWASA, and verified by
Data Collection
                     the IVA. (once NSMIS and RSDMS are integrated).
Responsibility for    MOH
Data Collection
People provided with basic hygiene (Number of people) CRI DLI (disaggregated by gender and youth and urban-rural)
                     The indicator measures the cumulative number of people who benefited from access to at least
Description          basic (according to the Joint Monitoring Program) hygiene facilities that have been constructed
                     through operations supported by the World Bank.
Frequency             Yearly
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
                     Initially through the Data from National Sanitation Management Information System (NSMIS),
Methodology for
                     managed by MoH, and subsequently through RSDMS, managed by RUWASA, and verified by the
Data Collection
                     IVA. (once NSMIS and RSDMS are integrated).
Responsibility for    MOH
Data Collection
Proportion of sustainably functioning rural water schemes (Percentage)
                     The indicator measures the percentage of rural water schemes that are sustainably functioning,
Description          defined as being under management of CBWSO that has achieved Level 4+ or above according to
                     DLI 5
Frequency             Yearly
Data source          Approved Results Verification Report
                                                                                                       Page 61
                                                                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Methodology for       Through the RSDMS, managed by RUWASA, and verified by the IVA.
Data Collection
Responsibility for     RUWASA
Data Collection
Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD)
USD (million dollars) of non-public financing mobilized to provide WASH services in rural areas (Amount (USD)) DLI
                      The amount in USD of non-public financing that the GoT is verified as having mobilized to fund
Description
                      the provision of WASH services in rural areas
Frequency              Yearly
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for       Through review of RUWASA audited financial records
Data Collection
Responsibility for     RUWASA
Data Collection


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Results Areas


Increased access and sustainability of at least basic WASH services
Water supply points constructed and or rehabilitated (Number)
                      This indicator measures the number of new or rehabilitated water supply points (e.g., boreholes,
Description          protected springs etc.) that are operational and delivering safe water to communities as a result
                     of Program interventions.
                     Annual reporting during implementation; annual aggregation for ISR (Implementation Status and
Frequency
                     Results Report) and mid-term review.
                     Contractor completion reports, supervision consultant reports, and local government verification
Data source
                     records. Community feedback and GPS-tagged photos may also be used for triangulation.
Methodology for
                      Field verification using standardized checklists
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      RUWASA
Data Collection
Basic or safely managed sanitation facilities constructed at household level (Number)
                      This indicator tracks the number of household-level sanitation facilities constructed under the
                     Program that meet the criteria for basic or safely managed sanitation. These include improved
Description
                     facilities that hygienically separate excreta from human contact and are not shared with other
                     households.
Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source          Household surveys, and District councils’ sanitation records
                     Data is collected through field verification by implementing partners and local health officers
Methodology for
                     using standardized sanitation checklists. Household surveys are conducted to confirm usage and
Data Collection
                     functionality. GPS-tagged photos and beneficiary feedback are used for validation.
Responsibility for
                      District Councils, PO-RALG, MoH
Data Collection
Public primary schools with access to at least basic WASH facilities (Number) DLI
                                                                                                        Page 62
                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                      This indicator measures the number of public primary schools that have gained access to at least
                      basic functional and gender-sensitive WASH (Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene) facilities as a result
Description           of Program interventions. WASH facilities include safe water supply, separate sanitation facilities
                      for boys and girls, and handwashing stations with soap and water. The indicator supports
                      improved learning environments and health outcomes for schoolchildren.
Frequency              Annual reporting during implementation
                       School infrastructure completion reports, Ministry of Education WASH audits, third-party
Data source
                      verification agent (TPV) reports, and school-level WASH monitoring tools.
                       Data is collected through joint inspections by the implementing school, education officers, and
Methodology for
                      third-party verifiers using standardized WASH facility checklists. Verification includes physical
Data Collection
                      inspection, photographic documentation, and interviews with school staff
Responsibility for
                        District Councils, PO-RALG, MoE
Data Collection
Government run public healthcare facilities with access to at least basic WASH facilities (Number) DLI
                       This indicator measures the number of government run public healthcare facilities that have
                       gained access to at least basic WASH (Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene) services through Program
Description            support. WASH facilities include a reliable water source, improved sanitation, and hand hygiene
                       infrastructure (e.g., handwashing stations with soap and water), in line with appropriate
                       standards for healthcare settings.
Frequency               Annual reporting during implementation
                        Facility infrastructure completion reports, Ministry of Health WASH assessments, third-party
Data source
                       verification agent (TPV) reports, and health facility WASH monitoring tools.
                        Data is collected through joint inspections by the implementing facility, health officers, and
Methodology for
                       third-party verifiers using standardized WASH assessment tools. Verification includes physical
Data Collection
                       inspection, photographic documentation, and interviews with facility staff
Responsibility for
                        District Councils, PO-RALG, MoH
Data Collection
People reached with sanitation & hygiene behavior change communication/demand creation & market-based
sanitation activities at community-level (Number)
                        This indicator captures the number of individuals in target communities who have been reached
                       through structured sanitation and hygiene promotion campaigns, demand creation activities
Description            (e.g., CLTS, triggering), and market-based sanitation interventions. It reflects the project's efforts
                       to influence behavior change and stimulate demand for improved sanitation services and
                       products.
Frequency               Annual reporting during implementation
                        Implementing partner reports, community outreach logs, attendance registers from BCC
Data source
                       sessions, NGO/CBO activity reports, and household survey data
                        Data is collected through activity-based reporting by implementing partners and community
Methodology for        facilitators. Attendance and participation are tracked using sign-in sheets, mobile data collection
Data Collection        tools, and community health worker logs. Periodic household surveys are conducted to validate
                       reach and assess changes in knowledge, attitudes, and practices
Responsibility for
                        District Councils, PO-RALG, MoH
Data Collection

                                                                                                              Page 63
                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Increase in the number of women who are able to access water from an improved source within 30 minutes or less
(Number)
                        This indicator measures the number of women and girls who are able to access water from an
Description            improved source within 30 minutes or less, including the trip and waiting time, and who were
                       not served prior to the start of the Program.
Frequency               Yearly
Data source             Approved Results Verification Report
                       This indicator will be calculated by multiplying the proportion of households where women bear
                       the primary burden for water collection by the number of households upgraded to at least basic
Methodology for        water (per JMP definitions) and then multiplied by the average number of women/girls per
Data Collection        household to arrive at the estimated number of women benefitting from the reduced time
                       burden. During the results verification process, a verifier will assess by asking women and girls on
                       their perceptions on time saving by having a functioning water point near their houses.
Basic hand hygiene facilities constructed at household level (Number)
                       This indicator measures the cumulative number of households that have constructed
Description
                       handwashing and hygiene facilities at households
Frequency               Yearly
Data source             Approved Results Verification Report
                       Initially through the Data from National Sanitation Management Information System (NSMIS)
Methodology for
                       managed by MoH, and subsequently through RSDMS, managed by RUWASA, and verified by the
Data Collection
                       IVA. (once NSMIS and RSDMS are integrated).
Responsibility for
                       MoH
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                       MoH
Data Collection
Policy, Institutions and Regulation for strengthened service delivery
CBWSOs with improved O&M capacity for professional water supply service delivery (Number) DLI
                       This indicator measures the number of CBWSOs that has achieved one of either Level 4+, Level 3,
Description
                       Level 2 or Level 1, according to the verification protocol in the POM.
Frequency              Yearly
Data source            Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for        Data submitted by RUWASA, and verified by the IVA
Data Collection
Responsibility for     RUWASA
Data Collection
District Councils submitting sector M&E data that are timely, accurate and complete (Number) DLI
                       The indicator measures the number of districts which report timely, accurate and complete
Description
                       water monitoring and evaluation data as per the verification criteria of the World Bank Program
Frequency              Yearly
Data source            Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for
                       Data submitted by the implementing agencies and verified by the IVA
Data Collection


                                                                                                            Page 64
                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Responsibility for
                       MoH, MoEST and RUWASA
Data Collection
Rural Districts that have adopted and commenced implementation of District WASH Master plans (Number)
                      This indicator tracks the number of district councils that have formally adopted, and have
Description           commenced implementation of District WASH Master Plans, according to the requirements
                      under DLR 7-1.
Frequency              Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for
                      Data submitted by the implementing agencies and verified by the IVA
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                       District Councils, RUWASA, PO-RALG
Data Collection
Operations and Maintenance support centers established by RUWASA and are operational (Number)
                       This indicator measures the number of CBWSOs support centers established since the start of
Description           the Program, with the intention to provide technical assistance, spare parts, and capacity
                      building to CBWSOs to ensure sustainability of rural water supply systems.
Frequency              Annual reporting during implementation
Data source            RUWASA administrative records, O&M center establishment reports, field verification reports
                       Data is collected through review of RUWASA documentation confirming establishment and
Methodology for
                      operationalization of each center. Field visits are conducted to verify physical infrastructure,
Data Collection
                      staffing, service delivery, and inventory systems
Responsibility for
                       RUWASA
Data Collection
CBWSO backstopping mechanism for maintenance and repairs developed by RUWASA and are operational
(Number)
                      This indicator measures the number of CBWSOs that are supported by an established and
                      operational Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Backstopping Framework developed by
Description
                      RUWASA. The framework includes technical support, capacity building, spare parts supply chains,
                      and performance monitoring mechanisms to ensure sustainability of rural water services.
Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           RUWASA implementation reports, CBWSO performance assessments, training records.
                      Data is collected through review of RUWASA documentation confirming framework rollout and
Methodology for
                      operationalization. Field verification includes interviews with CBWSO representatives, review of
Data Collection
                      support logs, and assessment of service delivery improvements.
Responsibility for
                      RUWASA
Data Collection
CBWSOs for which RUWASA has published in annual reports, for at least 4 years of the Program, their performance
and financial data (Number)
                      This indicator measures the number of CBWSOs for which RUWASA has published in annual
                      reports, for at least 4 years of the Program, the performance and financial data, through the data
Description           monitoring and visualization platform under the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Service
                      Delivery and Management System, according to DLR 7-7. It reflects the institutionalization of
                      digital tools for performance monitoring and decision-making in rural water service delivery.

                                                                                                         Page 65
                                                                                                              Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           Digital system usage logs, CBWSO data submission records, RUWASA monitoring dashboards
                      Data is extracted from the RUWASA digital monitoring platform, which tracks submission
Methodology for      frequency, completeness, and accuracy of O&M data. CBWSOs are required to submit data on
Data Collection      key indicators such as system functionality, revenue collection, and maintenance activities.
                     Periodic audits and spot checks are conducted to validate data quality.
Responsibility for
                        RUWASA
Data Collection
Rural Water Services Regulatory Improvement Plan adopted and short- and medium-term action items fully
implemented by RUWASA (Number)
                       This indicator tracks the development, formal adoption of a Rural Water Services Regulatory
                       Improvement Plan, and full implementation of short- and medium-term action items by
Description            RUWASA, according to DLR 7-3. The plan is expected to strengthen regulatory oversight, improve
                       service delivery standards, and enhance accountability mechanisms for rural water supply
                       services.
Frequency               Annual reporting during implementation
Data source            Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for
                       Data submitted by the implementing agencies and verified by the IVA
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                        RUWASA
Data Collection
Districts piloting a Fecal Sludge Management Strategy (FSMS) developed by RUWASA (Number)
                       This indicator measures the number of districts that have adopted and are actively piloting a
Description            RUWASA-developed FSMS, according to DLR 7-6. The strategy includes safe collection, transport,
                       treatment, and disposal or reuse of fecal sludge.
Frequency               Annual reporting during implementation
Data source            Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for
                       Data submitted by the implementing agencies and verified by the IVA
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                        RUWASA
Data Collection
Integrated Water Resources Management Plans developed or updated (Text)
                       This indicator measures improvements in water resources sector governance through the
Description            development or updating of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Plans, with
                       emphasis on coordination, regulation, O&M, and financial sustainability.
Frequency               Annual reporting during implementation
                        Basin water board reports, Ministry of Water documentation, and stakeholder consultation
Data source
                       records.
Methodology for         Review of finalized IWRM plans, validation through stakeholder consultations, and assessment
Data Collection        of implementation readiness.
Responsibility for
                        Basin Water Boards (BWBs)
Data Collection
Aquifer mappings completed (Number)

                                                                                                      Page 66
                                                                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                      This indicator tracks the number of aquifer mapping exercises completed in each water basin to
Description
                      support groundwater resource planning and management.
Frequency              Annual reporting during implementation
Data source            BWBs technical documentation.
Methodology for        Review of completed aquifer mapping reports, GIS data, and validation by hydrogeological
Data Collection       experts.
Responsibility for
                      Basin Water Boards
Data Collection
Hydromet stations for surface water monitoring installed (Number)
                     This indicator measures the number of hydrometeorological (hydromet) stations installed at
Description
                     major rivers to monitor surface water quantity and quality.
Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           Installation reports, BWBs monitoring system logs, and contractor completion certificates.
Methodology for       Field verification of installed stations, review of operational status, and integration into national
Data Collection      water monitoring systems.
Responsibility for
                      Basin Water Boards
Data Collection
Dams inventory and information management system developed (Number)
                     This indicator tracks the development of a Management Information System (MIS) for cataloging
Description
                     dams, including their characteristics, safety status, and operational data.
Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           System development reports, BWBs records, and system usage logs.
Methodology for       Review of MIS functionality, data completeness, and user access logs. Field validation of sample
Data Collection      dam entries.
Responsibility for
                      Basin Water Boards
Data Collection
Artisans trained on the construction of WASH infrastructures (Number)
                     This indicator measures the number of local artisans (local fundis) trained through the project on
Description
                     the construction of WASH infrastructure, including latrines, water points, and drainage systems.
Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           Training attendance records, certification logs, and implementing partner reports.
Methodology for       Data collected from training providers and verified through participant lists, pre/post-training
Data Collection      assessments, and follow-up surveys on application of skills.
Responsibility for
                      PO-RALG, District Councils
Data Collection
Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD)
Approved, adopted and launched relevant policy documents providing for fiscal incentives to promote private
sector investment in water services through public-private partnerships (Number)
                     This indicator tracks the number of approved, adopted and launched relevant policy documents
                     providing for fiscal incentives to promote private sector investment in water services through
Description          public-private partnerships, according to DLR 7-5. These include frameworks that define roles,
                     clarify taxation policies, and outline fiscal incentives (e.g., tax exemptions, investment
                     guarantees) to attract inclusive WASH investments.

                                                                                                            Page 67
                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for
                      Data submitted by the implementing agencies and verified by the IVA
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      RUWASA
Data Collection
Executed PPP contracts for the development and/or operation and maintenance of rural water schemes (Number)
                      This indicator measures the number of executed PPP contracts for the development and/or
Description
                      operation and maintenance of rural water schemes, according to DLR 8-1
Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for
                      Data submitted by the implementing agencies and verified by the IVA
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      RUWASA
Data Collection
Amount of private capital mobilized for eligible investments in the WASH sector pursuant to the Program’s Private
Sector Participation Guidelines (Amount)(USD)
                      This indicator captures the total amount of private capital mobilized through PPP arrangements,
Description           blended finance mechanisms and other non-public sources such as carbon credits to support
                      eligible WASH infrastructure and service delivery, according to DLR 8-2.
Frequency             Annual reporting during implementation
Data source           Approved Results Verification Report
Methodology for
                      Data submitted by the implementing agencies and verified by the IVA
Data Collection
Responsibility for
                      RUWASA
Data Collection




                                                                                                       Page 68
                                                                                                            Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)




Verification Protocol: Disbursement Linked Indicators


 1: Number of people (re)gaining access to at least basic water supply services
                      US$ 7 / person (districts with above National Access Target within RUWASA jurisdiction80) who
                      has (re)gained access to at least basic water supply services in the Rural Districts81
 Formula
                      US$ 12 /person (districts with below National Access Target within RUWASA jurisdiction), who
                      has (re)gained access to at least basic water supply services in the Rural Districts;
                      Payments will be made in proportion to achievements. The water points must be constructed,
                      extended, or rehabilitated under the Program to be considered for disbursement. People must be
                      served by a functioning water point that is new, extended, or rehabilitated after the beginning of
                      the Program period and which meets the eligibility criteria, that will be defined in the POM. Any
                      water point which is classified as non-functional at the baseline is eligible for rehabilitation under
                      the Program.

                          Eligible water supply typologies are: (i) public tap or standpipe connection to a piped water
                          supply system (water point), (ii) borehole or protected dug well with a handpump, and (iii)
                          protected spring or a rainwater tank.

                          The water point must serve a population no more than 250 persons per outlet (no more than 500
                          persons for a double tap waterpoint) and must be located within a 30-minute round trip
 Description
                          collection time or 400-meter radius of the population served as determined by GIS measurement.
                          A user must be able to fill a 20 liter bucket in less than 2 minutes. There is no requirement for the
                          water point to be in a good state of repair. Water meters are installed and functioning at the inlet
                          and distribution points (hand pumps are excepted).

                          In case a water point is locked, a verifier should (i) observe any activities are happening, see if the
                          area is wet, or the water tank has water; and (ii) ask people in the community to see if the water
                          point is being used. The same protocol applies for an outage.

                          The water point is registered in RSDMS and has monthly meter readings (hand pumps are
                          excepted from meter readings requirement). At verification, a verifier should ask people in the
                          community, especially women and girls, on their perceptions of time saving by having a
                          functioning water point near their houses.


80
   RUWASA jurisdiction includes rural districts, with the exception of some urbanized town centers which are under the jurisdiction
of Urban Water Authorities
81
   Rural Districts are the 137 district councils including all LGAs in all regions in Mainland Tanzania with the exception of the following
47 LGAs, namely: Arusha CC, Babati TC, Bariadi TC, Bukoba MC, Bunda TC, Dodoma CC, Geita TC, Handeni TC, Dar es Salaam CC,
Ilemela MC , Iringa MC, Kahama MC, Kasulu TC, Kibaha TC, Kigamboni MC, Kigoma/Ujiji MC, Ifakara TC ,Kinondoi MC, Kondoa TC,
Korogwe TC, Lindi MC, Masasi TC, Makambako TC, Mbeya CC, Mbinga TC, Mbulu TC, Tunduma TC, Morogoro MC, Moshi MC,
Mpanda MC, Mtwara Mikindani MC, Mafinga TC, Musoma MC, Nanyamba TC, Newala TC, Njombe TC, Mwanza CC, Nzega TC, Singida
MC, Shinyanga MC, Songea MC, Sumbawanga MC, Tabora MC, Tanga CC, Tarime TC, Temeke MC, and Ubungo MC

                                                                                                                                     Page 69


                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)



              A person will be eligible to count toward the DLI 1 target if the following applies to the associated
              improved water point:
                  a) a registered CBWSO is managing the water scheme and community has been consulted
                     during the design phase;
                  b) During design consultations, regular awareness campaigns and capacity-building sessions
                     for community members have been implemented.
                  c) a cost-reflective tariff is charged for water supplied by the scheme
                  d) quality assurance and quality control procedures have been followed and the designated
                     offices have approved the scheme design, and quality of construction (this includes social
                     and environmental safeguards)
                  e) at least one of the CBWSO governance body positions must be held by a woman the
                     water supply scheme includes a Standard operational chlorination system (further
                     defined in the POM)(hand pumps are excepted) and water quality meets TZS: 789: 2008,
                     as tested every 3 months by the relevant Regional Water Quality Lab under MoW or
                     Water Quality Lab under Basin Water Board, and Chlorine residual is measured monthly
                     at the distribution points (hand pumps are excepted from Chlorine residual requirement)
                     (O&M manual to clarify RUWASA vs CBWSO responsibilities)
                  f) water meters are fitted and functioning at each inlet of a storage tank and at the
                     distribution point (bulk meter to measure the total production of the system so at the
                     pump house or borehole chamber box if it is a pumping system, or at the intake if it is a
                     gravity scheme.)
                  g) CBWSO has a standard water quality monitoring kit (as defined in the POM) and provides
                     evidence of at least monthly testing on site
                  h) The scheme has been screened for social and environmental eligibility under PforR Policy,
                     and RUWASA’s guideline for land acquisition, must have been followed
                  i) where a borehole is used as the water source, RUWASA to obtain drilling permit, a
                     geophysical survey must have been completed to guide the borehole location and drilling
                     process, at least two supervision visits must have been made by hydrogeologist during
                     drilling, the relevant Basin Water Board must have approved a borehole completion log
                     for the borehole (Including pumping test-step test, constant rate test of 24 hour or more
                     and recovery test), and a piezometer monitoring system must be installed in the borehole
                  j) CBWSO has obtained the water use permit from the Basin Water Board and proof of
                     annual fee payment to the Basin Water Board
                  k) The scheme has an O&M plan, an Asset Management Plan and a Water Safety Plan (as
                     defined in the POM)
                  l) With coordination with the respective Basin Water Board, a climate resilient risk
                     assessment (further defined in the POM) has been completed for the water scheme
                     relating to flooding, drought, landslides and high winds. Where drought has been
                     identified as a climate resilience risk, an assessment has been made of sustainable
                     groundwater/surface water abstraction rates that considers existing abstraction for other
                     uses, runoff/recharge rates and environmental and ecological needs. Design and



                                                                                                             Page 70


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                                 operational mitigation measures to address the climate resilience risks to the water
                                 scheme have been identified and adopted82
                              m) RUWASA’s existing Standard Operating Procedure for scheme handover to the CBWSO,
                                 has been followed

                         A functioning water point that is verified as new, extended, or rehabilitated in one Program
                         period which subsequently falls into disrepair will not be eligible for resubmission in a subsequent
                         Program period for additional disbursement under DLI 1.

                         If verification finds that less than 80 percent of the population reported with access to water
                         actually have access, the district will not be eligible to receive any disbursement for those results
                         under DLI 1 in the current Program period. However, the district may then resubmit the same
                         results for verification in the following year.

                         A district is only eligible to receive one payment per person of either US$ 7 / person or US$ 12 /
                         person during the whole Program period.

                         A district’s National Access Target status (i.e. whether or not the district is classified as being
                         above or below national target access) is the status that applies for that district at the time of
                         verification
 Data source/
                          MoW/ RUWASA
 Agency
 Verification Entity   Independent verification agent
                       Eligibility criteria will be checked through desk-based review of assessments, plans, reports,
                      records, permits and meeting minutes. The IVA will make phone calls to all CBWSO Chairpersons,
                      CBWSO Women Representative and Vice Chairpersons of the submitted water schemes, for
                      verbal verification of the functioning of all water points in a village as reported by the CDMT.
 Procedure
                      Physical visits to villages will take place on a random basis to verify CDMT and verbal data by
                      sampling in each scheme (90 percent confidence interval). Population served by each water point
                      will be calculated by GIS analysis of GoT census data. The district will be eligible to receive the
                      disbursement in accordance with the actual results under DLI 1 in the current Program period.
 2 : Number of people gaining access to at least basic sanitation and hygiene services
                      US$ 2 / person (districts with above National Sanitation Coverage Average within RUWASA
                      jurisdiction), with access to at least basic sanitation services in the Rural Districts
                      US$ 3 /person (districts with below National Sanitation Coverage Average within RUWASA
 Formula
                      jurisdiction), with access to at least basic sanitation services in the Rural Districts
                      US$ 2 / person (within RUWASA jurisdiction) with access to at least basic hygiene services in the
                      Rural Districts
 Description          Sanitation services

82
  An example climate resilience risk is flooding leading to debris clogging a surface water intake. The mitigation measure could be
improved intake screen design to reduce clogging and installing a jetty or breakwater to divert debris from entering the intake.
RUWASA is to prepare a checklist for climate resilient design for water scheme.

                                                                                                                                Page 71


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)



              Payments will be made in proportion to achievements. Access to at least basic sanitation services
              is defined according to the JMP as use of improved facilities which are not shared with other
              households. Improved sanitation facilities are those designed to hygienically separate excreta
              from human contact. Improved sanitation facilities include: (1) flush or pour flush toilets
              connected to either sewer systems, septic tanks, or latrine pits; (2) ventilated improved pit
              latrines; (3) pit latrines with a sanitary surface/ intact slab; and (4) composting toilets.

              The facility must have:
                  a) an intact slab (washable or non-washable but can be easily cleaned) having no cracks or
                      holes (other than drop hole) that exposes excreta
                  b) a fitted lid (except for VIP, Flush and Pour Flush)
                  c) provided with walls that protect the user and a door shutter (whether fixed or movable)
                      that provides privacy and security to the user
                  d) no signs of leakage or spillage of faecal matter to the surroundings
                  e) The substructure is constructed in line with specific standards, applicable for the site-
                      specific geology, soil type and topography and ease of safe emptying of FS (except where
                      environment allows for safe treatment and disposal of FS in situ and space allows
                      construction of new facility).
                  f) [Non-critical] The facility should have a climate resilient design (further defined in the
                      POM) where required (such as a raised latrine design for flood prone areas).

              New persons with access should be maximum 5 persons per household facility and not included
              in the previous reporting periods. The facility must be constructed in the report period being
              verified.

              Hygiene services

              Payments will be made in proportion to achievements. Access to at least basic hygiene services is
              defined according to the JMP as availability of a handwashing facility with soap and water at
              home. A handwashing facility is defined as being one of the following types of fixed or mobile
              facility:
                   a) a sink or basin with tap water
                   b) buckets with taps
                   c) tippy-taps
                   d) jugs or basins designated for handwashing.

              Soap includes bar soap, liquid soap, powder detergent, and soapy water but does not include ash,
              soil, sand or other handwashing agents.

              Water must be available in close proximity to the handwashing facility. There is no water quality
              requirement for handwashing.



                                                                                                           Page 72


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                      New persons with access should be maximum 5 persons per household facility and not included
                      in the previous reporting periods. The facility must be constructed or installed in the report
                      period being verified.

                      A district is only eligible to receive one payment per person gaining access to at least basic
                      sanitation services of either US$ 2 / person or US$ 3 / person during the whole Program period.

                      A district’s National Sanitation Coverage Average status (i.e. whether or not the district is
                      classified as being above or below national target access) is the status that applies for that district
                      at the time of verification
Data source/
                      MoH
Agency
Verification Entity   Independent Verification Agency
                      Verification to be representative at the district level—baseline average coverage will be 12
                      percent. The IVA shall carry out (a) a desk review of reports and data maintained by MoH, and (b)
                      physical verification of household sanitation and handwashing facilities and interviews with
                      households from villages that are randomly selected from the entire list of villages reported in the
                      Consolidated Results Report.

                      Household sanitation and household hygiene facilities will be sampled separately but samples
                      may overlap. The sample sizes of households are determined based on the underlying coverage
                      of at least basic sanitation and at least basic hygiene in the population reported, with 5% margin
                      of error. The household sample will be clustered by villages. No less than 2 percent of households
                      per sampled village should be physically inspected.
Procedure
                      If verification finds that less than 80 percent of the households reported with access to at least
                      basic sanitation or at least basic hygiene actually have access, the district will not be eligible to
                      receive any disbursement for those results under DLI 2 in the current Program period; however,
                      the district may then resubmit the same results for verification in a subsequent Program period.

                     Where feasible for sampled villages, the IVA will also report on:
                         a) universal access to sanitation at HHs (defined as access which meets the current
                             requirements of the members of the household); and
                         b) access to safely managed sanitation (defined as per the Joint Monitoring Program
                             definition).
3: Number of public primary schools with access to at least basic WASH services
Formula              US$ 20,000 per school that has gained access to at least basic WASH services in the Rural Districts
                     Payments will be made in proportion to the achievements. There is no payment for partial
                     achievement at an individual school. A public primary school must have at least basic access to
Description          water supply, sanitation and handwashing facilities services. Construction of these facilities must
                     have been adequately supervised. Specific requirements are listed below:



                                                                                                                       Page 73


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                            Water supply
                            Availability of water from an improved source (Rainwater, Borehole, protected spring, water from
                            Water Supply and Sanitation Authorities and RUWASA), that has been screened for
                            environmental and social eligibility according to the PforR Policy, is available at the school.

                            Sanitation and handwashing
                            Improved sanitation facilities in schools includes the following features: four dropholes for girls
                            one of which is suitable for students with special needs and a separate Menstrual Hygiene
                            Management room; four dropholes for boys one of which is suitable for students with special
                            needs, and a urinal. separate latrine blocks for girls and boys and a segregated block of latrines
                            for teachers with two dropholes; at least one handwashing facility with soap and water for every
                            drophole. All latrines have: i) washable floors. For this criteria a +/- 10 percent threshold is
                            allowable ii) 90% of doors are lockable to ensure privacy, iii) no leaks or feces/ sludge
                            overflowing the containment structure; iv) all latrines are connected to an inspection chamber,
                            septic tank and soak away or cesspit, which are in a good state of repair; v) latrines are kept clean
                            and in good condition; (vi) septic tanks have an accessible hatch for emptying; and (vii) which
                            includes climate resilient design (further defined in the POM) where required, such as raised
                            facilities in flood prone areas.83

                            Menstrual Hygiene and health
                            Menstrual hygiene room is available with water and soap, and access to functional incinerator
                            (further defined in the POM) for menstrual pad disposal; the school has a designated and active
                            menstrual counsellor (a female teacher). In schools without a female teacher an appropriate
                            female Parent or community health worker should be appointed to carry out this role.

                            A school WASH club must exist at the school and the task of cleaning or maintaining sanitary
                            facilities shared equally among girls and boys.

                            Supervision
                            The LGA has: i) carried out regular supervision during construction (at least twice through
                            construction period); ii) Signed off that the final construction adheres to the national standard
                            design, verified by an authorized professional (engineer, technician, architect, or qualified
                            surveyor); and iii) artisans/contractors registered in the government NEST system.

                            In addition, a school will be ineligible for disbursement under the Program if it has received
                            disbursement through achievement of Disbursement Linked Results under DLI 1 of the BOOST
                            (Boosting Student Learning Outcomes) Program (P169380).
 Data source/
                            MoEST
 Agency
 Verification Entity        Independent Verification Agency


83
     MoEST and PO-RALG to prepare a checklist for climate resilient design for school WASH facilities.

                                                                                                                            Page 74


                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                    The IVA shall carry out a desk review of reports, meeting minutes and data maintained by the
                    district and the EMIS; physical inspection of all facilities in 100 percent of schools.
Procedure
                    Where feasible, the IVA will also report on whether handwashing facilities are present inside or
                    outside of sanitation facilities
4: Number of government-run health care facilities with access to at least basic WASH services
                    US$ 29,000 per government-run healthcare facility that has gained access to at least basic WASH
Formula
                    services in the Rural Districts
                    Payments will be made in proportion to the achievements. There is no payment for partial
                    achievement at an individual HCF. A HCF must have at least basic WASH services including health
                    care waste management and environmental cleaning. Construction of these facilities must have
                    been adequately supervised.
                    Specific requirements are listed below.

                     Water supply
                     Availability of water from an improved source (Rainwater, Borehole, protected spring, water from
                     WSSAs or RUWASA) that has been screened for environmental and social eligibility according to
                     the PforR Policy. Climate resilient design (further defined in the POM) where required.

                     Sanitation
                     Functional improved toilets (Washable floor, durable wall, fixed with lockable doors, and roof) for
                     staff and clients; at least one stance for each sex and a stance for people with disabilities at main
                     OPD; at least one sex-separated toilet with menstrual hygiene facilities; provision of ramp,
                     handrails and hand washing facility in a toilet for people with disabilities; inspection chamber,
                     septic tank and soak away or cesspit are provided and are at good state of repair; and facilities
Description          are clean and free from feces. Septic tanks have an accessible hatch for emptying. Climate
                     resilient design (further defined in the POM) where required, such as raised facilities in flood
                     prone areas.

                     Hygiene
                     Handwashing facilities with water and soap or sanitizer are available at OPD and at least three (3)
                     locations (i.e. a consultation room, a drug dispensing unit, and an injection room), a labor
                     ward/room and within 5 m of toilets.

                     Waste management
                     Incinerator and placenta pit available and functional.
                     Safe and clearly marked containers are available for sharps, infectious, and non-infectious waste
                     at the healthcare facility and the waste is safely treated and disposed of (as defined in the POM).
                     Climate resilient design where required, such as raised facilities in flood prone areas.

                     Environmental cleaning
                     Protocols for cleaning are available, and 50 percent of staff with cleaning responsibilities have
                     received training


                                                                                                                     Page 75


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)



                          Supervision
                          The LGA has: i) carried out regular supervision during construction (at least twice through
                          construction period); ii) Signed off that the final construction adheres to the national standard
                          design, verified by an authorized professional (engineer, technician architect, or qualified
                          surveyor); and iii) artisans/contractors registered in the government NEST system.

                          HCF will be ineligible for disbursement under the Program, if it has received disbursement
                          through achievement of Disbursement Linked Results under the new Tanzania Maternal and Child
                          Health Investment Program.
 Data source/
                          MoH
 Agency
 Verification Entity
                   Independent Verification Agency
                   The IVA shall carry out a desk review of reports and data maintained by the district and the
                   NSMIS; physical inspection of all facilities and HCF records in 100 percent of HCFs. They will also
                   crosscheck the date of construction of the WASH facilities in HCF to ensure they were constructed
 Procedure
                   after the beginning of the SRWSS 2 Program. Check whether any disbursement has been received
                   for any HCF through achievement of Disbursement Linked Results under the new Tanzania
                   Maternal and Child Health Investment Program.
 5: Number of CBWSOs with improved O&M capacity for professional water supply service delivery. (cumulative)
                   US$ 8,000 for Basic Category (Level 4+), additional US$ 15,000 for Level 3, additional US$ 22,000
 Formula
                   for Level 2, additional US$ 32,000 for Level 1. Payment is per CBWSO.
                   The CBWSO meets criteria for improved O&M capacity for water supply services as follows:
                   Basic Category (Level 4+)
                        (a) Be registered, have an active management team
                        (b) At least one of the CBWSO governance board positions must be held by a woman and key
                            staff must have qualifications specified through the CBWSOs’ Administration and Human
                            Resources Management Guideline.
                        (c) Participate in at least one of the biannual district-level community of practice meetings
                            and has passed an annual performance assessment84 (including annual audit) done by
 Description                RUWASA or a contract service provider or a Support center, and attended a quarterly
                            meeting with the Regional and District managers
                        (d) Is using the GePG revenue system and has an Operating Cost Ratio of ≤ 1 (cost-reflective
                            tariff), including minor repair costs only
                        (e) Has a functional environmental, health and safety (EHS) manual that is used for the
                            operation of water supply and sanitation assets
                        (f) Has backstopping mechanism for maintenance and repair in the form of a written
                            agreement for O&M services established by CBWSOs individually or in clusters with
                            RUWASA or private sector service providers or operator; an urban utility; or a water trust



84
     Performance assessment requirement should be based on the model Kilimanjaro CBWSO assessment

                                                                                                                         Page 76


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                      that can provide technical and managerial support to each CBWSO; or CBWSO has a
                      framework contract with suppliers for spare parts.
                  (g) Has access to an office space and a set of basic working tools, adequate for the CBWSOs
                      maintenance responsibilities (further defined in the POM)
                  (h) Has adequate transportation provision including motorbikes (further defined in the POM)
                  (i) Has capacity to bear all costs of operations and minor maintenance costs.
                  (j) Has an approved budget, a financial plan and a business plan
                  (k) Has functional bulk water meter(s) for intake and water tanks and it is monitoring water
                      production and estimating NRW.
                  (l) CBWSO has an update asset register
                  (m) CBWSO is paying annual water fee to the respective Basin Water Board.
                  (n) CBWSO is implementing CBWSO’s ‘Scheme of Service’.
                  (o) CBWSO has a business plan and has implemented the plan. Plan must specify cost
                      reflective/financially sustainable tariff to be applied;
                  (p) CBWSO has been trained on data management for M&E (further defined in the POM).

              Level 3:
                  (q) Achieved Basic Category (Level 4+) and
                  (r) Has capacity to bear all costs of operations and maintenance (but not capacity to meet
                       the costs of depreciation and extension of service infrastructure)
                  (s) Has established and is implementing Water Quality Monitoring plan (or Water Safety
                       Plan)
                  (t) The water scheme has the standard chlorination system (further defined in the POM) and
                       CBWSO is measuring free and residual chlorine (hand pumps are excepted) (non-critical
                       condition until XXXX)
                  (u) Has implemented hygiene and sanitation awareness campaign
                  (v) Is actively implementing water source protection measures.

              Level 2:
                  (w) Achieved Level 3, and
                  (x) Has capacity to bear all costs of operations and maintenance, short term depreciation
                       (but no capacity to meet the costs of extension of service infrastructure).

              Level 1:
                  (y) Achieved Level 2, and
                  (z) Has capacity to bear all costs of Operations and maintenance, short term depreciation
                       and part of extension of service infrastructure. And/or CBWSO has performance based
                       service contract or is a part of a PPP contract framework which has innovation
                       investments such as solar pumping and pre-paid meters.

              A village will receive payment depending on the category that it reaches as well as in proportion
              to the percentage of functioning water points (as defined in the POM as well as in DLI 1) that are
              managed by the CBWSO. Further details are provided in the POM.

                                                                                                            Page 77


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Data source/
                      RUWASA (RSDMS)
Agency
Verification Entity   Independent Verification Agency
                      Basic category (Level 4+): Review of CBWSO/best modal registration at the district level and
                      RSDMS data. Review of staff records, qualification certificates and payroll scheme data,
                      backstopping and technical support agreements, GePG records, EHS manual and related
                      operation documents (i.e. EHS training records, records of accidents and near misses if any,
                      permits to work in confined spaces or at heights if any, use of PPE, safe storage of oils/chlorine
                      and any other documents that shows the manual is functioning) annual performance appraisal,
                      assessment and audit documents, meeting minutes of meetings with Regional and District
                      managers and intersectoral coordination meetings, geolocated timestamped photos of all bulk
                      water meters, office space and tools, metering and NRW records, motorbike ownership and
                      registration documents, CBWSO asset register, evidence of scheme of service being
                      implemented], CBWSO business plan and documents showing official approval by RUWASA that
                      KPIs in plan have been implemented, framework contract or support center agreement, evidence
                      of framework for major and minor repairs is operationalized], M&E data management training
                      records Phone calls to CBWSO/best modal chairperson, CBWSO women representative. The
                      biannual community of practice meetings will be verified through review of meeting minutes and
                      outputs. Review of cash book, tariff, and CBWSO/best modal bank statements. The records will
                      be collected during the biannual community of practice meeting at the district level.

                      Level 3 and 2: As per Basic category plus review of water quality plan/water safety plan, chlorine
Procedure             residual test records, approved budget, hygiene and sanitation campaign records and geolocated
                      timestamped photos of water source protection measures.

                      Level 1: As per 2 and 3 plus geolocated timestamped photos of innovation investments.

                      Functioning water points eligibility criteria will be assessed through desk-based review and
                      physical sampling. The IVA will make phone calls to all CBWSO chairpersons and Vice
                      Chairpersons, for verbal verification of functioning of all water points in a village as reported by
                      the CDMT.
                      Physical visits to villages will take place on a random basis to verify CDMT and verbal data. The
                      sample size for physical verification would be approximately 20 villages per district, covering an
                      average of 7 water points in each village equivalent to 140 water points per district. GIS analysis
                      of census data will be used to verify that water points serve a population.

                      In case a water point is locked, a verifier should (i) observe any activities are happening, see if the
                      area is wet, or the water tank has water; and (ii) ask people in the community to see if the water
                      point is being used. The same protocol applies for an outage.

                      Where feasible, the IVA will also report on the number of household connections in each sampled
                      village, covering an average of 7 household connections per sampled village.



                                                                                                                        Page 78


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


 6: Number of District Councils submitting sector M&E data that are timely, accurate and complete
                       USD8,000 per compliant District Council that reported timely, accurate and complete water
                       sector data85 to RUWASA covering a period of every month.
                       US$8,000 per compliant district council that reported timely, accurate and complete household
 Formula               sanitation sector data86 to MoH covering a period of at least every quarter.
                       US$8,000 per compliant district council that reported timely, accurate and complete public
                       primary school WASH data87 to MoE covering a period of at least every school term (3 school
                       terms in a year)
                       Payments will be made annually in proportion to the achievements every year (up to a maximum
                       of 5 years per district) in which district councils report accurate and complete water, sanitation or
                       public primary school WASH sector data digitally for villages as per the following criteria (further
 Description           defined in the POM):
                       1. Timely: The District Councils need to submit reports on time.
                       2. Accurate: The reports need to adhere to the accuracy criterion (further defined in POM)
                       3. Complete: The reports need to adhere to the completeness criterion.
 Data source/
                       MoW/ RUWASA, MoH, MoEST
 Agency
 Verification Entity   Independent Verification Agency
                       Assessment against performance criteria for water supply and sanitation M&E data accuracy,
 Procedure             timeliness and completeness (as defined in the POM). The results should be presented for each
                       implementing agency (i.e. RUWASA, MoH and MoEST)
 7: WASH sector planning, sustainability and regulation strengthened (Text)
                       Milestone 7-1: US$ 4,360,000; Milestone 7-2: US$ 5,000,000; Milestone 7-3: US$ 2,000,000;
 Formula               Milestone 7-4: US$ 1,500,000; Milestone 7-5: US$ 1,000,000; Milestone 7-6: US$ 2,450,000;
                       Milestone 7-7: US$ 690,000.
                       Payments will be made in proportion to the achievements against the following milestones:

                          Minimum Access Condition: WASH Sector coordination and district-level planning: The National
                          WASH Coordination Strategy has been formally approved by MoW.

                          7-1: At least 50% of Rural Districts (i.e., no less than 69 Rural Districts) have adopted and
 Description              commenced implementation of their respective District WASH Master Plans.

                          A District is considered to have adopted its WASH Master Plan when all the following are met:
                              • Formal Endorsement: The Master Plan is formally approved by the District Council and
                                   RUWASA District Manager (resolution or signed declaration).
                              • Public Disclosure: The plan is made publicly available (e.g., district website, public
                                   noticeboard, or shared with stakeholders).


85
   Water sector data is water point inventory data for both existing and new water points constructed under the Program
86
   Sanitation sector data is sanitation and hygiene data for both existing and new facilities at villages and HCFs under the Program
87
   School WASH data is water, sanitation and hygiene data for both existing and new facilities at schools under the Program

                                                                                                                                 Page 79


                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                  •   Integration: Key elements (targets, priorities, budgets) are reflected in the district’s
                      annual or medium-term development plans and budgets.
              Minimum Content Requirements
              Each District WASH Master Plan must, at a minimum, include the following level of detail:
                 • Executive Summary
                 • Situational Analysis - Baseline WASH data (disaggregated); Mapping of existing
                      infrastructure/services; Gap and needs assessment
                 • Vision, Goals, and Targets - Alignment with national targets
                 • Strategic Priorities and Interventions to achieve universal WASH access - Water supply,
                      sanitation, hygiene, climate resilience, gender, and inclusion
                 • Investment and Financing Plan - Costed interventions and financing sources
                 • Institutional Arrangements - Roles and responsibilities, coordination, capacity building
                 • Operations, Maintenance, and Sustainability - O&M strategy, asset management, CBWSO
                      strengthening
                 • Monitoring, Evaluation, and Reporting - Results framework, data systems, feedback
                      mechanisms
                 • Risk Assessment and Mitigation
                 • Annexes - Maps, data tables, stakeholder consultations, etc.

              Implementation: A District is considered to be implementing its WASH Master Plan when the
              following are evidenced:
                   • Budget Execution: Funds allocated/disbursed for plan activities.
                   • Operational Activities: Tangible WASH activities underway (e.g., construction, campaigns,
                       monitoring).
                   • Monitoring and Reporting: At least one annual master plan implementation progress
                       report produced using plan indicator
              7-2: RUWASA has fully established 25 operational CBWSOs support centers, one per Region.
              A CBWSOs Support Service Center is considered “fully established” when the following criteria are
              met and evidenced:
              Formal Designation:
                   • Official letter or resolution from RUWASA management or District Council designating the
                       center as the district’s O&M support service center for CBWSOs.
                   • Written mandate specifying the center’s functions and service area.
              Physical Infrastructure - Dedicated office space in the region, accessible to CBWSOs, and
              equipped with basic furniture and equipment.
              Staffing
                   • Minimum core team in place: At least two qualified water technician/engineer
                   • Staff have clear terms of reference
              Technical Capacity and Resources - Inventory of essential tools, equipment, and spare parts
              maintained and available.
              Reliable transport (motorbike or vehicle) available for field visits.
              Service Delivery Functions - Center provides, at minimum:


                                                                                                          Page 80


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                  • Technical troubleshooting and repair support (on-call and on -demand)
                  • Preventive maintenance planning and supervision
                  • Training and capacity building for CBWSOs
                  • Support for water quality monitoring
                  • Facilitation of spare parts supply chains
                  • Data collection and reporting to RUWASA/district authorities
              Operational Systems
                  • Up-to-date records of all CBWSOs in the district (asset registers, maintenance logs,
                     service requests).
                  • Transparent system for logging/responding to service requests, with defined response
                     times.
              Budget and Financing
                  • Approved annual budget for the center, with evidence of funds allocated and disbursed.
              Stakeholder Engagement
                  • Regular meetings/forums with CBWSOs (at least quarterly).
                  • Center is known to and accessible by all CBWSOs in the district.

              7-3: RUWASA: (a) has adopted a Rural Water Services Regulatory Improvement Plan; and (b) has
              fully implemented the short- and medium-term action items therefor.

              Rural Water Services Regulatory Improvement Plan (RWSRIP) is considered “adopted” when the
              following conditions are met:

                  •    Formal Endorsement: The plan is formally approved by the responsible authority (e.g.,
                       RUWASA Board, Ministry of Water, or other designated regulatory body) through a
                       signed resolution, official letter, or gazetted notice.
                  • Public Disclosure: The adopted plan is made publicly available (e.g., published on the
                       RUWASA website, shared with district councils, and/or posted in public offices)
                  • Communication: The plan is disseminated to all relevant stakeholders, including district
                       councils, CBWSOs, and sector partners, with evidence of communication.
              Minimum Content of Short-Term and Medium-Term Action Plans
              Short-Term Actions (1–2 years)
              Short-term actions should focus on foundational regulatory improvements and immediate
              priorities for strengthening rural water service delivery. At a minimum, these should include:
                  • Establishing/Strengthening Regulatory Functions:
              Setting up or reinforcing the regulatory unit/department within RUWASA or relevant authority.
              Assigning staff and clarifying roles for regulatory oversight at national and regional levels.
                  • Development and Rollout of Key Regulatory Instruments:
              Drafting and adopting standard operating procedures (SOPs) for service quality, tariff setting, and
              compliance monitoring.
              Issuing guidelines for CBWSO registration, licensing, and minimum service standards.
                  • Data Systems:


                                                                                                            Page 81


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


              Establishing or upgrading digital data systems for monitoring CBWSO performance and scheme
              functionality.
                  • Capacity Building:
              Training district staff and CBWSOs on regulatory requirements, reporting, and compliance.
              Awareness campaigns for communities on service standards and grievance mechanisms.
              Medium-Term Actions (typically 2–5 years)
              Medium-term actions should build on the short-term foundation and focus on institutionalizing
              regulatory practices and scaling up improvements. At a minimum, these should include:
                  • Institutionalization and Scaling:
                           • Rolling out regulatory audits and compliance inspections to all districts.
                           • Institutionalizing annual performance reviews and benchmarking for CBWSOs.
                  • Tariff and Financial Regulation:
                           • Implementing cost-reflective tariff frameworks and regular tariff reviews.
                           • Introducing performance-based financing or incentives for well-performing
                                CBWSOs.
                  • Service Quality and Customer Protection:
                           • Enforcing minimum service standards (e.g., water quality, reliability, response
                                times).
                           • Operationalizing grievance redress mechanisms and customer feedback systems.
                  • Sustainability and Innovation:
                           • Promoting asset management planning and preventive maintenance
                                requirements.
                           • Supporting innovation in service delivery (e.g., digital monitoring, solar pumping,
                                PPPs).
                  • Policy and Legal Reforms:
                           • Proposing amendments to sector laws or regulations to strengthen rural water
                                regulation.
                           • Aligning district and national policies with the regulatory improvement plan.
              Definition of “Fully Implemented” Short- and Medium-Term Action Plans
              A short- or medium-term action plan is considered “fully implemented” when:
                  • All actions listed for the relevant period (short- or medium-term) are completed or
                       operational, with evidence such as:
                           • Official reports, audit findings, or inspection records
                           • Updated SOPs, guidelines, or regulatory instruments
                           • Training records and attendance lists
                           • Functioning data systems and regular reporting
                           • Documented stakeholder engagement and communication
                           • Budget allocations and expenditure reports for regulatory activities
              7-4: The Recipient has:
              (a)      amended the National Water Fund Regulations to enable the provision of loans to
              CBWSOs; and
              (b)      developed and adopted a performance-based criteria for resource allocation for urban
              and rural water services

                                                                                                            Page 82


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)



              7-5: MoW has approved/adopted relevant policy documents providing for fiscal incentives to
              promote private sector investment into water services through public-private partnerships.
              The following minimum threshold must be met:
                  • At least one national policy, regulation, or statutory instrument has been formally
                      adopted and is in force, explicitly enabling PSP in rural WSS
                  • Standard procurement and contracting guidelines for rural water PPPs have been issued
                      and disseminated.
                  • Tariff-setting and adjustment mechanisms for private operators are operational and
                      documented.
                  • Service standards and monitoring frameworks for private operators are in place and
                      being applied.
                  • At least one incentive or support mechanism for PSP has been adopted (e.g., fiscal
                      incentive, guarantee, or technical assistance scheme).

              Supporting documentation may include: gazetted regulations, policy documents, procurement
              manuals, contract templates, tariff guidelines, monitoring reports, and published performance
              data.

              7-6: RUWASA has:
              (a)      formally adopted a Fecal Sludge Management Strategy and piloted its implementation in
              at least one Rural District per Region; and
              (b)       undertaken an internal re-organization establishing a sanitation unit led by Head of Unit
              reporting directly to RUWASA’s Director General and staffed with sufficient staff
              The FSM Strategy is considered “formally adopted” when the following are met:
                   • Approval” The strategy is endorsed by RUWASA’s Board or the Ministry of Water through
                       a formal resolution, memo, or gazetted notice.
                   • Publication: The strategy is publicly available (e.g., RUWASA website, sector bulletin,
                       shared with stakeholders).
                   • Communication: Evidence of dissemination to regional and district offices, CBWSOs, and
                       other stakeholders (e.g., circulars, workshops, webinars).
              Piloting is considered achieved when the following are met in at least one district per region:
                   • Construction or rehabilitation of FSM infrastructure (e.g., sludge collection points,
                       treatment facilities)
                   • Training of CBWSOs or local operators on FSM practices
                   • Establishment of FSM monitoring and reporting systems to provide continuous evidence
                       that FSM services are being delivered (e.g., sludge collection logs, treatment plant
                       operation reports, service contracts).
                   • quarterly reports submitted to RUWASA HQ documenting progress, challenges, and
                       lessons learned.




                                                                                                            Page 83


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
The World Bank
Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


              To verify that RUWASA has undertaken internal re-organization to establish a Sanitation Unit as a
              directorate, with sufficient staffing and a director reporting directly to the Director General.

              Verification Criteria

              Organizational Structure.
                 • Official organogram of RUWASA showing the Sanitation Unit as a directorate, with the
                     Director of Sanitation reporting directly to the Director General.
                 • Formal documentation (e.g., Board resolution, internal memo, or government gazette)
                     confirming the establishment of the directorate.

              Minimum Staffing Requirements: The Sanitation Directorate must have full-time positions filled
              with qualified staff with clear job descriptions and evidence of appointment (contracts or letters).

              7-7: RUWASA has published annual reports, for at least 4 years of the Program, the performance
              and financial data collected monthly from CBWSOs through the data monitoring and visualization
              platform under the RUWASA Service Delivery and Management System.

              Minimum operational and financial Data Content Requirements
                  • Technical/Operational Performance Data
              Scheme Functionality Status
              Number and type of water points/schemes managed
              Functionality status (functional, partially functional, non-functional)
              Downtime (number of days out of service per month)
              Water Production and Consumption
              Volume of water produced (m³/month)
              Volume of water sold/distributed (m³/month)
              Number of connections/households served
              Water Quality
              Results of periodic water quality tests (e.g., residual chlorine, bacteriological tests)
              Breakdowns and Repairs
              Number and type of breakdowns reported
              Response and repair times (days from report to resolution)
              Preventive maintenance activities conducted
                  • Financial Data
              Revenue
              Total revenue collected (by source: tariffs, fees, other)
                  • Expenditure
              Total O&M expenditure (breakdown by category: staff, energy, chemicals, repairs, spare parts,
              etc.)
              Capital expenditure (if any)
                  • Customer Service


                                                                                                             Page 84


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                      Number of customer complaints received and resolved


Data source/
                      MoW/ RUWASA/MoE/MoH
Agency
Verification Entity   Independent Verification Agency
                      7-1: Desk Review of Master Plan document for minimum content; evidence of formal
                      endorsement and public disclosure; integration into district planning/budget documents; and
                      evidence of implementation (budget, activity, monitoring, etc.)
                      Physical verification of a random sample of districts visited to confirm implementation and
                      stakeholder engagement.

                      7-2: RUWASA submits a list of established centers with supporting documentation for each. Desk
                      Review of: official designation and mandate documents; staff lists and contracts; inventory and
                      asset registers; budget and expenditure reports; service request and response logs; and training
                      and meeting records. Physical verification of a random sample of centers visited to confirm
                      physical infrastructure, staffing, resources, and service delivery. IVA prepares a report
                      summarizing findings, listing compliant centers, and documenting any deficiencies.

                      7-3: Review of Regulatory Improvement Plan and minutes of official meeting to adopt the plan,
                      and review of documentation including budget allocations, progress reports and financial reports
                      relating to the implementation of the Regulatory Improvement Plan actions.
Procedure
                      7-4: Review of official legal documentation. Review of developed performance-based resource
                      allocation criteria and minutes of official meeting adopting the criteria.

                      7-5: Review of official draft policies and fiscal incentives documentation, as well as the published
                      revised/new policy. Review of official documents relating to the launch of the policies.

                      7-6: (a) Desk review of relevant documents and on-the-ground actions that demonstrate the
                      operationalization of the FSMS to confirm that the implementation in each district meets the
                      minimum criteria for pilot implementation (as defined in the POM). (b) Desk review of: official
                      organogram and establishment documentation; list of staff, job descriptions, and appointment
                      letters/contracts; and recent work plans, reports, and minutes showing directorate activities.

                      7-7: Desk review of monthly data extracts from the RSDMS for all CBWSOs for data completeness,
                      timeliness, consistency and plausibility for each CBWSO (further defined in the POM). Physical
                      review of random samples of CBWSOs visited to cross-check reported data with physical records
                      and interviews
8: Non-public financing leveraged for the water supply and sanitation sector (Amount (USD))




                                                                                                                      Page 85


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                         Milestone 8-1: US$20,000 per water scheme88 under PPP for the first 50 water schemes, and
 Formula                 US$6,410 for each additional water scheme thereafter; Milestone 8-2: US$0.5 per US$1 of private
                         financing allocated to the sector
                         For milestone 8-1, payments will be made in proportion to the cumulative number of water
                         schemes:

                         8-1; RUWASA has executed public-private partnership (“PPP”) contract(s) for the development
                         and/or operation and maintenance of 206 water schemes.

                         A PPP contract may not be awarded to a specific water scheme more than once.

                         8-2; The Recipient has mobilized US$20,000,000 in private capital for eligible investments in the
                         WASH sector pursuant to the Program’s Private Sector Participation Guidelines.

                         Payments will be made in proportion to the amount of financial resources provided by private
                         entities leveraged for water, sanitation and hygiene investments under the Program. This DLI will
                         provide 50 percent of the total bankable project cost. For example, for a project cost of
                         US$100,000 with US$50,000 of private financing, the DLI payment would be US$50,000. Activities
                         financed under DLRs 8-1 will not be eligible for DLR 8.2.

                         For a project to be eligible the project must be implementing the Private Sector Participation
 Description
                         guidelines

                         An “eligible investment in the WASH sector” for the purposes of DLR 8.2 must meet the following
                         criteria:
                         Sector Scope
                              • The investment must be in the rural water supply, sanitation, or hygiene (WASH) value
                                   chain, including:
                                       • Water supply infrastructure (source development, treatment, storage,
                                            distribution)
                                       • Sanitation infrastructure (household, institutional, or public toilets, fecal sludge
                                            management, wastewater treatment)
                                       • Hygiene facilities (handwashing stations, menstrual hygiene management
                                            infrastructure)
                                       • Digital or smart solutions for WASH service delivery, monitoring, or payment
                         Investment Typology
                         Eligible investments may include, but are not limited to:
                              • Design, construction, rehabilitation, or expansion of rural water supply schemes (e.g.,
                                   boreholes, piped schemes, solar-powered systems)



88
  A water scheme is an organized standalone system for sourcing, treating, storing, and distributing water which may include the
following infrastructure: water source(s), pumping, treatment, storage, and piped networks.

                                                                                                                              Page 86


                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                          •   Operation and maintenance (O&M) of water supply or sanitation systems under a PPP or
                              service contract
                          • Development and management of fecal sludge management (FSM) value chains (e.g.,
                              collection, transport, treatment, reuse/disposal)
                          • Provision of WASH services in schools, health facilities, or public spaces
                          • Supply chain investments (e.g., spare parts, water treatment chemicals, sanitation
                              products)
                          • Innovative financing mechanisms (e.g., microfinance for household toilets, results-based
                              financing for WASH entrepreneurs)
                      Private Sector Participation
                          • The investment must involve a formal contract or agreement between a public entity
                              (e.g., RUWASA, District Council, school, healthcare facility, CBWSO) and a private sector
                              entity (company, cooperative, social enterprise, or NGO acting commercially).
                          • The private partner must contribute capital (equity, debt, or in-kind) and/or take on
                              operational risk.
                      Compliance and Alignment
                          • The investment must comply with national WASH policies, technical standards, and
                              environmental and social safeguards.
                          • The investment must be aligned with the objectives of SRWSSPII and be included in the
                              district or national WASH plans.
Data source/
                      MoW/RUWASA/MoEST/MoH
Agency
Verification Entity   IVA
                      8-1: PPP contract signed by all parties. Review of records on online dashboard with data from live
                      remote monitoring feature that will be available at each site. Calls to all CBWSOs to verify that the
                      schemes are being implemented under a PPP contract. Review of detailed photos of each site
                      taken by the contractor and uploaded to a cloud folder. Physical visits to 10 schemes to confirm
                      scheme existence and under PPP arrangement.
Procedure
                      8-2: Desk Review of contracts, investment agreements, business plans, proof of private capital
                      mobilization, technical designs, etc. to check: sector scope and typology of each investment;
                      existence and terms of PPP or private sector contract; evidence of private capital contribution;
                      compliance with technical, environmental, and social standards; and alignment with the
                      programme and district/national WASH plans. Physical verification of a random sample of
                      investments visited to confirm physical implementation and operational status.




                                                                                                                     Page 87


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)



                       ANNEX 3.2 MPA Phase II Tanzania SRWSSP-2 Program Action Plan

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexprogramactionplan#doctemplate
Action                                Responsibilit                                            Completion
Description         Source       DLI# y               Timing                                   Measurement
RUWASA achieves Technical        NA   RUWASA          Other      Within 24                     ISO certification
ISO certification                                                months of                     status officially
                                                                 Program                       issued
                                                                 effectiveness
Implementing        Environmenta NA   RUWASA, PO- Other          6 months after                One
Agencies appoints l and Social        RALG, MoW,                 effectiveness                 environmental
E&S focal points at Systems           MoH,   MoEST,                                            and one social
the regional and                      District                                                 focal points
Program level                         Councils                                                 appointed and in
                                                                                               place by each
                                                                                               implementing
                                                                                               agency

Align DLI            Fiduciary         NA      PO-RALG,         Recurren    Yearly             DLI verification
verification and     Systems                   RUWASA,          t                              and activity plans
program planning                               MoW, MoH,                                       submitted in sync
with government                                MoEST                                           with national
budget cycle                                                                                   budget calendar

Strengthen           Fiduciary         NA      Internal Audit   Other       Within first 12    SRWSSP 2
internal audit       Systems                   Units of                     months             included in
systems and                                    MoW, PO-                                        annual audit
establish                                      RALG,                                           plans; tracking
centralized                                    RUWASA                                          system
tracking of audit                                                                              operational; audit
findings                                                                                       follow-up reports
                                                                                               produced

Strengthen           Fiduciary         NA      PO-RALG,         Other       Training rollout   Training sessions
Efficiency in        Systems                   RUWASA,                      in Year 1;         conducted;
procurement                                    LGAs                         monitoring         contract
processing and                                                              ongoing            management KPIs
contract                                                                    through all        integrated into
management:                                                                 program years      agency
Training for                                                                                   performance
Tender Board                                                                                   reviews
members, user
                                                                                               PAP Measures:
departments, and
                                                                                               Training for

                                                                                                               Page 88


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


PIU officials on                                                                              Tender Board
procurement                                                                                   members, user
planning,                                                                                     departments, and
document                                                                                      PIU officials on
preparation, and                                                                              procurement
contract                                                                                      planning,
management.                                                                                   document
                                                                                              preparation, and
                                                                                              contract
                                                                                              management.

Implement and        Environmenta     NA      RUWASA,         Other        6 months after     Protocol
operationalize the   l and Social             MoH, MoEST                   effectiveness      developed and
voluntary land       Systems                  and RBWB                                        cleared by the
donation                                                                                      Bank
protocols
developed under
phase 1program
Secure land titles   Environmenta     NA      RUWASA,         Other        To be achieved     Land Title Reports
for all sites        l and Social             MoH, MoEST                   for each           shared with the
designated for the   Systems                  and RBWB                     proposed site      Bank
construction of                                                            prior to
WASH facilities                                                            commencemen
                                                                           t of
                                                                           construction
                                                                           works
Integrating          Environmenta     NA      RUWASA,         Other        Awareness          Conduct
SEA/SH and STD       l and Social             MoH, MoEST                   creation reports   awareness
awareness            Systems                  and RBWB                     to be shared       sessions and
programs into                                                              annually as part   share report with
Program activities                                                         of Program         the Bank
                                                                           Annual Progress
                                                                           Reports
Building the         Environmenta     NA      RUWASA,         Other        Continous          Training reports
capacity of          l and Social             MoH, MoEST                   throughout         shared with the
contractors and      Systems                  and RBWB                     program            Bank
other project                                                              implementation
implementers on
worker rights,
GRM, land
donation protocol
and GAP



                                                                                                               Page 89


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


Internal auditors    Fiduciary        NA      All             Other        Recurrent,        Will be
of the IAs will      Systems                  implementign                 Continuous        continually
conduct internal                              agencies                     process           tracked as part of
audit review of                                                                              the
the government                                                                               implementation
program as part of                                                                           support missions
their regular
expenditure audit
review and make
the reports
available on
request
Enforcement of       Fiduciary        NA      All             Other        On-going          PAP Measures:
Fraud and            Systems                  implementing                 throughout        Completed
corruption                                    agencies                     program           orientation on
practices                                                                  implementation    World Bank
                                                                                             guidelines for
                                                                                             combating fraud
                                                                                             and corruption;
                                                                                             bi-annual
                                                                                             reporting on
                                                                                             instances



Carry out program    Fiduciary        NA      MoW   and       Other        Once at mid-      Report to be
procurement          Systems                  MoWEM                        term review       shared with the
compliance and                                                             and once at the   Bank
value for money                                                            end of the
audit by the CAG                                                           program
firm at mid-term
review and at the
end of the
program using the
terms of reference
agreed with the
Bank
Strengthen           Fiduciary        NA      PO- RALG,       Other        Immediately       Number         of
Capacity to          Systems                  RUWASA &                     after the         employees hired
support and                                   Ministry of                  program
handling the                                  Water                        effectiveness
procurement and
contract
management

                                                                                                            Page 90


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


activities:
Hiring/Seconding
staff to support
the program
implementation
Allocate adequate    Fiduciary        NA      All             Other        All through      (1) Amount of
resources and        Systems                  implementing                 program          resources
undertake regular                             agencies                     implementation   allocated
training and                                                                                specifically to
capacity-building                                                                           enhance
on                                                                                          financial/fiduciary
Financial/Fiduciar                                                                          risks
y risk                                                                                      management
management to                                                                               (US$) capacity; (2)
enhance staff                                                                               Number of
skills and                                                                                  conduct regular
capacities                                                                                  trainings and
                                                                                            capacity building
                                                                                            sessions
                                                                                            conducted for
                                                                                            financial/fiduciary
                                                                                            risks
                                                                                            management staf
                                                                                            f

Development and      Fiduciary        NA      All             Other        By the 31st of   (1) Approved
timely submission    Systems                  implementing                 March each       Annual workplans
of comprehensive                              agencies                     year             and budgets, (2)
annual workplans,                                                                           Approved
budgets, financial                                                                          financial reports
records and
reports
Develop audit        Fiduciary        NA      All             Other        Annually by      Days delayed
calendar and         Systems                  Implementing                 December 31      beyond Dec 31
strengthen                                    Agencies                                      deadline
coordination of
the audit process
Ensure that firms    Fiduciary        NA      MoW             Other        Throughout the   List of contracts
or persons           Systems                  (mainland)                   Program          awarded is to be
debarred or                                   and MoWEM                    implementation   submitted to the
suspended by the                              (Zanzibar)                                    Bank every six
Bank are not                                                                                months indicating
awarded a                                                                                   eligibility check


                                                                                                            Page 91


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


contract by                                                                     was done before
verifying the same                                                              awarding the
prior to award                                                                  contracts
under the
Program during
the debarment or
suspension
period.




                                                                                              Page 92


                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (P508698)


                      ANNEX 3.3. MPA Phase II: Tanzania SRWSSP II Implementation Support Plan

                                         Main focus of Implementation Support

Time                             Focus                    Skills Needed                     Resources Estimate
First twelve months             Supervision              M&E, ICT monitoring
                                                         systems, water supply, water
                                                                                           8 staff weeks/year
                                                         resources, hygiene and
                                                         sanitation
First twelve months             Training and supervision water supply, water
                                of verification          resources, hygiene and
                                                                                           5 staff weeks/year
                                                         sanitation evaluation and
                                                         survey design
0-48 months                     Technical assistance to
                                improve (a) M&E
                                approaches, (b)
                                                        Legal, fiduciary, institutional,
                                sustainability of water
                                                        social, water and sanitation,
                                supply schemes, (c)                                        8 staff weeks/year
                                                        economics, engineering/
                                FSM, and (d) water
                                                        procurement
                                resources
                                management, (e)
                                planning and reporting


                           Task Team Skills Mix Requirements for Implementation Support

                                  Number of Staff
Skills Needed                                                 Number of Trips               Comments
                                  Weeks
Legal                             1                           None                          Headquarters based
Procurement                       8                           2                             Country office based
Financial management              8                           2                             Country office based
Governance                        2                           2                             Country office based
Social/gender                     5                           2                             Country office based
Environment                       4                           2                             Country office based
M&E/verification                  6                           2                             Headquarters based
Technical (WASH)                  12                          2–3                           Country office based


                                       Role of Partners in Program Implementation

Name                                                Institution/Country                     Role
                                                                                             Participation in missions, review
 Danish International Development Agency             Denmark
                                                                                             of outputs related to PPP


                                                                                                                           Page 93


                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)


                 ANNEX 3.4 MPA Phase II: Tanzania SRWSSP II Investment Project Financing Component

1.       Overview and Purpose: The IPF component of SRWSSP II) is designed to complement the PforR by providing
targeted technical assistance, institutional strengthening, and capacity-building support. With a total allocation of US$15
million, the IPF aims to enhance the effectiveness, sustainability, and resilience of rural WASH service delivery across
mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar.

2.      The IPF will support strategic priority areas, as agreed with the GoT: (i) Strengthening the framework for
sustainable water resources management; (ii) Value for money audits; (iii) Financing effective program administration and
implementation support; (iv) Supporting the evaluation of the Water Sector Development Program Phase III (WSDP III)
and preparation of its successor; (v) Advancing institutional reforms and capacity building; and Providing targeted support
to the Zanzibar Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals (MoWEM) to operationalize the 2025 Water and Sanitation Policy.

3.       In the mainland Tanzania, Key Areas of technical Support under sustainable WRM to be provided include the
following: Conducting aquifer mapping and developing a national groundwater information system; Updating IWRM
plans; Enhancing the financial performance of Basin Water Boards; Establishing a national dam inventory; Procuring
groundwater and surface water monitoring equipment and supporting the creation of a WRM Center of Excellence. Under
Program Implementation Support, the IPF will enhance implementation capacity through: support to the IVA for results
validation, Project management consultancy to strengthen procurement, FM, M&E, environment and social standards,
and coordination, and updating and dissemination of key environment and social instruments (GRM, Gender Action Plan,
EP, Environmental and Social Management Framework, and Resettlement Policy Framework).

4.      Recognizing the distinct institutional and service delivery challenges in Zanzibar, the IPF will provide tailored
technical assistance to the MoWEM and other stakeholders to support the implementation of the newly adopted 2025
Water and Sanitation Policy. Priority activities include: Strengthening of the Water Department through procurement of
working tools and software’s for the 2 newly established Divisions (Water Resource Management and Water Supply and
Sanitation Management divisions) under MoWEM; Procurement of Groundwater investigation and monitoring
equipment; Technical assistance for developing faecal sludge and wastewater management strategy, detailed designs,
and tender documents for priority sanitation investments; Detailed design and tender documents for water schemes
development in Pemba; Drafting the National Water and sanitation Act of 2006 and its Regulations; and Rehabilitation
works for Zanzibar Water Institute. These interventions in Zanzibar are strategically designed to strengthen sector
governance, enhance institutional readiness, and lay the foundation for a future standalone water and sanitation
investment operation.

5.       FM arrangements for the IPF component executed by the MoW Mainland and MoWEM Zanzibar. The MoWEM
has experience in managing World Bank financed energy projects, but it would be the first time managing the water sector
project. While the experience can be leveraged, a dedicated accountant to support SRWSSP would be required. The
project Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) will be prepared by the MoW and MoWEM and submitted to the World
Bank for approval by March 31 each year. The World Bank may disburse funds by reimbursing the borrower, advancing
loan proceedings to the borrower's account, making direct payments to third parties, or entering special commitments
for third-party payments. Using advance method, a DA will be maintained by the MoW and MoWEM at the Bank of
Tanzania in US dollar currency. Additional Operational Bank accounts in TZ shillings will be maintained in commercial
banks. The MoW and MoWEM will produce quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) on withdrawals made to the DA and
submit them to the World Bank within 45 days after the end of each reporting period. Approved eligible expenditure will
be documented in the client connection system. On an annual basis, MoW and MoWEM will submit audited annual


                                                                                                                      Page 94


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)


financial statements to the World Bank within six months after the end of the financial year. Audits will be conducted by
the Controller and Auditor General and Office of Controller and Auditor General of Zanzibar respectively.

6.      For the IPF window, the procurement activities under the project will be carried out in accordance with the World
Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers’ (Procurement Regulations), sixth edition of February 2025; World Bank
‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and
Grants’, dated October 15, 2006, and revised in January 2011, and July 1, 2016 (Anti-Corruption Guidelines); and other
provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreements. The project will use the STEP tool to plan, record, and track
procurement transactions. As per the requirement of the Procurement Regulation sixth edition, the borrower will
undertake Early Market Engagement for all international procurements for the packages with a cost estimate equal to or
more than US$10 million.

7.      PPSD. The MoW and MoWEM have prepared a PPSD which defines the market approaches and selection methods
for the major contracts. The procurement plan for the first 18 months was prepared jointly by the MoW and MoWEM and
approved by the World Bank. The Borrower will regularly update the PPSD on at least an annual basis or more frequently
as requested by the World Bank. The updated PPSD should include findings from the EME and the same should be
submitted to the Bank for review and clearance.

8.       Procurement arrangements: In Mainland, the procurement activities will be implemented through the systems
and PIU established under WSDP-2 in the MoW. The PIU will manage procurement functions for the IPF component
including procurements of the beneficiaries’ agencies. For Zanzibar, the MoWEM will be responsible for the procurement
activities by having a dedicated technical team supported by the existing ZESTA’s PIT (ZESTA Procurement Officers and
Accountants) which is implementing Zanzibar Energy Sector Transformation and Access Project (P169561). Both PIUs have
experience of implementing World Bank operations.




                                                                                                                    Page 95


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
