Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                FINAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND
                               SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT
                                   (ESSA) - METRO DHAKA
                                    WATER SECURITY AND

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   RESILIENCE PROGRAM -
                                      P506770P506770)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Final Environment and Social Systems
                                          Assessment (ESSA)

                                            January 2026


                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                      1                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                        4

Overview                                                                                                 4

DWATER - Key Environmental & Social Risks                                                                4

Overall Strategy for Managing DWATER’s E&S Risks                                                         4


1     PROGRAM DESCRIPTION                                                                                8

1.1    Introduction                                                                                      8

1.2    Brief Description, Geographical Scope, Duration, and Objectives of the Program                    9

1.3    Identification of Boundaries Between the Government Program and the World Bank-Financed Program
       10

1.4    Institutional Arrangements for Program Implementation                                          11

1.5    Borrower’s Previous Experience with Implementation of Bank / Other Development Partners’ Financed
Programs                                                                                               13


2     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL EFFECTS OF DWATER                                                      14

2.1    Key Environmental & Social (E&S) Risks of the Program                                          14

2.2    E&S benefits and opportunities of the program                                                  17

2.3    Mapping of E&S risks to PforR core principles                                                  19


3     ASSESSMENT OF BORROWER’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
      23

3.1    Description of Borrower’s Environmental and Social Management Systems                          23

3.2    Analysis of Institutional Framework and Capacities                                             27

3.3    Assessment of Borrower’s Systems against PforR Core Principles and Planning Elements           29

3.4    Grievance Redress System (GRS)                                                                 30

3.5    Outcomes from Stakeholder Consultations Held During the ESSA                                   32


4     RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                                 35

4.1    Summary of Findings from the ESSA                                                              35




                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


4.2    Strategy to Address the Findings from the ESSA                                                      36

4.3    Details of DWATER’s E&S Program Action Plans (PAPs)                                                 38

4.4    Role of E&S IPF TA Support and PAPs for Achievement of DWATER’s DLRs and for the Future             41


5     ANNEXES                                                                                              43

5.1    Annex A – List of E&S Laws and Regulations Relevant to DWATER                                       44

5.2    Annex B – Program Exclusion List                                                                    46

5.3    Annex C – List of Participants in Various Stakeholder Consultations Held During the ESSA Preparation 47




Final ESSA                                              3                                       January 2026
                                                                                                        Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

OVERVIEW

The Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (hereafter referred to as DWATER) is designed
as a Program-for-Results (PforR) operation and is the second in a series of Multi-Phase Programmatic
Approach (MPA) projects in the water sector supported by the World Bank in Bangladesh. This operation
seeks to strengthen institutional capacities and systems within relevant departments of the Government
of Bangladesh (GoB) for future water security and resilience in the country. While the environmental and
social (E&S) risks associated with this operation’s institutional capacity-building and systems
strengthening activities are moderate to low, pilot investments in canal restoration and rehabilitation,
sanitation, waste management and drainage in high-density urban areas pose substantial E&S risks. The
implementing agencies’ (IAs) capacities to manage these (and other program) risks are weak and they do
not have adequate systems, policies or procedures to manage the risks. The E&S risks of the IPF-TA
component that would support the implementation of the PforR operation are also assessed as
substantial given the potential downstream E&S impacts that might arise from implementing the
outcomes of many of those activities either through the current PforR operation or subsequent projects
in the MPA.


DWATER - KEY ENVIRONMENTAL & SOCIAL RISKS

 Environmental Risks                                   Social Risks
 o Improper disposal of dredged materials and          o Involuntary resettlement of non-title
    sludge (soil and water contamination, odor,            holders (NTHs) and informal occupiers (IOs)
    dust, vector issues)                               o Exclusion of vulnerable groups (women,
 o Pathogen exposure and odor from sanitation              low-income, disabled)
    and fecal sludge management                        o Weak        stakeholder engagement and
 o Pollution and safety risks from poorly operated         grievance redress mechanisms
    solid waste systems                                o Labor influx, SEA/SH risks, child labor,
 o Air and noise pollution, debris-related drainage        unsafe conditions
    blockages, hazardous waste, and traffic            o Community health and safety threats
    congestion from construction                           (disease, traffic accidents, injuries)
 o Surface and groundwater contamination from          o Potential for social tension, unrest, and
    spills and waste                                       project delays if social risks not managed
 o Occupational and community health and safety            sensitively
    risks due to exposure to contaminated materials
    and unsafe construction sites


OVERALL STRATEGY FOR MANAGING DWATER’S E&S RISKS
The Program embeds a comprehensive risk mitigation plan, integrating Technical Assistance (TA), Program
Action Plan (PAP) commitments, and Disbursement-Linked Indicators/Results (DLIs/DLRs) (please refer to



Final ESSA                                         4                                      January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


Table 1). The approach is sequenced: policy and capacity building in early years, followed by enforcement
and monitoring. The mitigation measures suggested through this PforR operation will not only strengthen
the IAs capacities to manage E&S risks of this PforR operation but would also enable IAs to manage E&S
risks and impacts of other government and IFI funded programs and schemes that they implement.
Moreover, successful implementation of the measures suggested will provide a blueprint for other IAs
that will be involved in subsequent projects under the MPA to manage E&S risks of those programs /
projects. The highlights of the overall strategy are:
     • Actions are interdependent; TA finances expert support for PAP actions covering the government
        program, while DLIs/DLRs incentivize timely completion of activities under the Bank Program.
     • The E&S risk mitigation strategy is sequenced – high risk activities and investments are excluded
        from this phase of the MPA. This phase emphasizes system-building and framework development
        through piloting in lower-risk areas, with the aim of scaling up in future MPA phases.
     • The strategy adopts a two-pronged approach – (a) prohibition of forced evictions; and (b)
        promotion of community engagement and co-management of canals and other urban water
        bodies, aiming to prevent re-encroachment and manage any involuntary resettlement and
        pollution impacts in line with international standards
     • The strategy proposes the adoption of a Socially Responsible Encroachment Management
        Framework for the Blue Network Program to supplement the Program’s ESMS. The framework is
        based on (a) principles of fair, transparent, and participatory approaches to managing
        encroachment along Dhaka’s drainage canals (b) negotiated, non-coercive solutions—such as
        regularization, in-situ upgrading, and relocation with livelihood support—while safeguarding
        public safety, flood management, and canal functions, (c) meaningful community participation,
        with vendor committees and local representatives actively involved in designing relocation and
        compensation solutions.
     • By FY28 enabling policies and ESMS should be in place, shifting focus to enforcement and outcome
        achievement through FY31.
     • The Clean Canal/Pond Scorecard is the composite indicator for measurable pollution reduction
        and resilient, community-maintained canals and drains.
     • Mitigation measures for the E&S risks of the IPF-TA component are embedded in the program’s
        Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
     •
Table 1: DWATER - Proposed E&S Program Action Plans

                                                                                           Completion
 PAP #         E&S PAP Description              Responsibility         Timing
                                                                                         Measurement
 1         Designation and                    CCs and BWDB       Recurrent   Yearly   Documentation
           operationalization of                                                      confirming the
           environmentally compliant                                                  operationalization
           interim                                                                    of the sites,
           containment/storage sites                                                  environmental
           for dredged materials and                                                  compliance and
           sludge by each agency                                                      disposal of dredged
                                                                                      material.
 2         Establish dedicated E&S            DWASA, DNCC,       Due Date    31-      Government Orders
           units (ESUs) and staffed           DSCC and NCC                   Dec-     for the creation of
           with at least 1 environment                                       2026     ESUs within each


Final ESSA                                               5                                    January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


         expert, 1 social expert and 1                                      agency and list of
         health and safety expert                                           staff on the payroll
                                                                            with dedicated
                                                                            duties
 3       Mechanism for joint        MoWR, LGD,          Due Date     30-    (1) Guidelines and
         management of small drains DNCC and DSCC                    Jun-   byelaws for Joint
         and canals developed and                                    2027   GoB-Community
         operationalized                                                    Canal Management
                                                                            Committees
                                                                            adopted. (2) Joint
                                                                            GoB-Community
                                                                            Canal Management
                                                                            Committees formed
                                                                            for selected canals.
 4       Policy framework for            MOWR and LGD   Due Date     30-    Copy of approved
         mitigating adverse impacts                                  Jun-   policy
         on Non-Title Holders (NTHs)                                 2027
         and Informal Occupiers
         (IOs) settled on the right of
         ways of water bodies
         adopted for Blue Network
         around Dhaka program
 5       Policy Framework for            MOWR and LGD   Due Date     30-    Copy of approved
         sustainable management of                                   Jun-   policy
         dredged material and                                        2027
         sludge adopted for Blue
         Network around Dhaka
         program
 6       Environment and Social          LGD, DWASA,    Due Date     31-    Government order
         Management System               DNCC, DSCC and              Dec-   mandating the
         (ESMS) developed and            NCC                         2027   adoption of ESMS
         adopted including                                                  by all agencies.
         procedures, tools,                                                 Annual reports
         templates, and trainings                                           generated from
                                                                            ESMS for WB’s
                                                                            review and budget
                                                                            allocation under
                                                                            separate heads.
 7       ESMS fully integrated with      LGD, DWASA,    Due Date     30-    Documentation and
         other infrastructure,           DNCC, DSCC and              Jun-   system generated
         planning and risk               NCC                         2028   reports from
         management functions                                               agencies to show
                                                                            E&S risk screening,



Final ESSA                                       6                                  January 2026
                                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                                            ESMP preparation,
                                                                            completion of all
                                                                            the licenses,
                                                                            permits and
                                                                            compliance
                                                                            requirements, and
                                                                            monitoring
                                                                            procedure for
                                                                            implementation.

 8       Institutional capacity and   BWDB, DNCC,      Due Date      30-    Agencies to deploy
         monitoring systems for       DSCC, and NCC                  Dec-   one environmental
         dredged material and                                        2028   engineer, one
         sludge management                                                  occupational health
         established                                                        & safety officer, and
                                                                            one logistics
                                                                            specialist, develop
                                                                            environmental
                                                                            monitoring and
                                                                            tracking system,
                                                                            and carry out
                                                                            annual
                                                                            environmental
                                                                            audits of dredged
                                                                            material and sludge
                                                                            operations.




Final ESSA                                      7                                   January 2026
                                                                                             Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



1 PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

1.1 INTRODUCTION

Bangladesh is endowed with substantial water resources, with a network of more than 430 rivers and
canals that provide freshwater for drinking, agriculture, industries, fisheries, and other economic sectors.
However, rapid urbanization and economic transformation have sharply increased water demand across
residential, industrial, and agricultural sectors. Dhaka, the capital city and one of the world’s most densely
populated megacities, faces acute water security challenges. Severe pollution, poor sanitation coverage,
weak solid waste management, drainage congestion, and recurring flooding threaten public health,
environmental sustainability, and the livability of Metro Dhaka.

Urban settlements and industrial clusters in and around Dhaka discharge untreated sewage and effluents,
including hazardous chemicals and heavy metals, into rivers and canals. This has led to sedimentation,
encroachment, reduced flow capacity, and impaired navigability, causing massive pollution and
ecosystem degradation. Inadequate coverage and poor quality of water supply and sanitation (WSS)
services in Metro Dhaka are adversely affecting water security and livability1. Inadequate sanitation
services are both a major contributor to this pollution and increasingly at risk from it. Dhaka city’s
sewerage system covers only about 20 percent of the population, with an additional small fraction served
by fecal sludge management systems; coverage in adjacent cities such as Narayanganj is even lower. Solid
waste collection and treatment services remain inadequate, resulting in indiscriminate dumping that
blocks drainage and worsens flooding risks. These challenges are compounded by climate change impacts,
including more intense rainfall and flooding, placing further stress on already fragile systems.

Institutional and governance challenges exacerbate these service delivery gaps. Overlapping mandates,
fragmented responsibilities, and weak inter-institutional coordination at both national and local levels
hinder integrated planning and enforcement. City corporations and utilities face severe human resource
constraints, limited technical expertise, and weak monitoring and asset management systems. Regulatory
enforcement remains weak due to limited capacity of the Department of Environment and other agencies
to monitor industrial pollution, enforce punitive measures, and prevent encroachments in wetlands and
river corridors.

Addressing these complex, interlinked challenges require a multi-sectoral, phased approach that
combines governance reforms, institutional development, and infrastructure investments. Such an
approach must: (i) improve water supply, sanitation, and solid waste management service delivery while
reducing pollution and flood risks; (ii) strengthen policy and regulatory frameworks to enforce standards
and address encroachment; (iii) enhance institutional capacity for integrated urban water management;
and (iv) build financial sustainability, including private capital mobilization.

The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has prioritized the Blue Network Program to restore and secure
Dhaka’s rivers, canals, and drainage channels as an integrated system for flood control, sanitation, and
water security. Within this broader framework, the World Bank is supporting the Metro Dhaka Water


1   Safely managed water supply and sanitation service coverage in Bangladesh stands at 54% and 29% respectively.


Final ESSA                                               8                                          January 2026
                                                                                                             Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


Security and Resilience Program (DWATER) through a Program-for-Results (PforR) operation focused on
sanitation, solid waste management, drainage, and canal rehabilitation in Dhaka North, Dhaka South, and
Narayanganj City Corporations and DWASA, alongside an IPF Technical Assistance component to
strengthen institutional systems, develop policies, and prepare investments. Development partners
including ADB, AIIB, AFD, and EKN have expressed interest in complementary support and potential co-
financing in future phases.

This ESSA has been undertaken in line with World Bank PforR policy requirements2. The ESSA reviews
government policies, acts, and institutional capacity of the Local Government Division (LGD), DNCC, DSCC,
NCC, DWASA, and supporting agencies BWDB and WARPO under the Ministry of Water Resources
(MoWR) and DoE under the Ministry of Climate Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC)
through IPF IA to manage Environmental and Social (E&S) risks and impacts of the Program. It identifies
strengths and weaknesses of existing systems, highlights gaps in legal and institutional frameworks, and
proposes measures to strengthen E&S risk management through a structured, sequenced approach of
providing the Borrower targeted technical assistance through the IPF component of the project to help
them achieve certain critical Program Action Plan (PAP) commitments which, in turn, are critical
prerequisites for the Borrower to meet some Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) conditions. The ESSA
is informed by document review, institutional assessments, and consultations with stakeholders, and is
structured around the six core principles of the PforR policy.


1.2 BRIEF DESCRIPTION, GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE, DURATION, AND OBJECTIVES OF THE
    PROGRAM

The DWATER Program is a priority operation under the GoB’s Blue Network Program, designed to restore
the functionality of rivers, canals, and drainage systems to improve water security, reduce pollution, and
build resilience against flooding. The Program combines a PforR operation (US$550 million) focused on
service delivery outcomes with an IPF Technical Assistance component (US$50 million) that supports
institutional reforms, policy frameworks, and preparatory activities.

The geographic scope of the World Bank financed Program is limited to the jurisdictions of Dhaka North
City Corporation (DNCC), Dhaka South City Corporation (DSCC), Narayanganj City Corporation (NCC), and
the Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (DWASA). Specific activities in DNCC’s jurisdiction will
be implemented by BWDB in line with their mandate. These areas, covering approximately 360 square
kilometers, represent the core of the Metro Dhaka region most severely affected by waterlogging,
flooding, untreated wastewater, and unmanaged solid waste. Under the IPF TA, in addition to all the
agencies supported under PforR Program, support will also be extended to the Bangladesh Water
Development Board (BWDB), WARPO, and the Department of Environment (DoE) for river restoration
master planning, sediment/dredged material management, water quality management and pollution
monitoring and enforcement. The overall Program will be coordinated by the Local Government Division
(LGD) of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development, and Cooperatives.




2   World Bank Guidance on Program for Results Financing Environmental and Social Systems Assessment


Final ESSA                                              9                                        January 2026
                                                                                                        Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to provide safely managed sanitation and solid waste
management services and reduce water pollution in selected areas of Metro Dhaka. The Program will run
for six years (FY26–FY31) and will focus on two main result areas:
     1. Results Area 1 (RA#1): Improved Financial, Institutional, and Technical Capacity. This RA will
         incentivize priority interventions to strengthen the financial, institutional, and technical capacity
         of CCs and DWASA for delivery of safely managed sanitation and SWM services for pollution
         reduction and water quality improvement.

       2. Results Area 2 (RA#2): Urban water pollution reduction. This RA will support reduction of urban
          pollution loads and concentration in selected water bodies –through incremental improvements
          in wastewater, fecal sludge and solid waste management services, including interception and
          diversion networks and cleaning up priority canals/ponds and drains.

The PDO-level results indicators are:

  i.      Provide safely managed sanitation services in selected areas of Metro Dhaka (Outcome indicator
          - 550,000 people provided with safely managed sanitation services by FY 31 (FY 25 baseline 0), of
          which 260,000 are women (includes women below the age of 18) and 275,000 are youth (includes
          men and women below the age of 18)

  ii.     Provide improved solid waste management services in selected areas of Metro Dhaka (Outcome
          indicator – by FY 31 500,000 people will have access to improved SWM services from a baseline
          of 0 in FY 25)

 iii.     Reduce water pollution in targeted water bodies of Metro Dhaka (Outcome indicator – by FY 31
          20 per cent of targeted reached in selected canals and retention ponds in Metro Dhaka will have
          reduced loads of key pollutants from a baseline of 0 in FY 25); and

 iv.      Strengthen institutional capacity of Metro Dhaka for water pollution reduction (Outcome
          indicators- (i) Improved financial, institutional and technical (FIT) capacity of DWASA to deliver
          WWM services (measured by the FIT score of 100 in FY 29 against a baseline of 0 in FY 25, and (ii)
          Improved financial, institutional and technical (FIT) capacity of selected City Corporations to
          deliver both FSM and SWM services (measured by the FIT score of 100 in FY 29 against a baseline
          of 0 in FY 25)

The World Bank ESSA team undertook field visits during February–September 2025 to review current
practices and challenges across DNCC, DSCC, NCC, DWASA, and BWDB including interactions with
stakeholders and affected communities. Findings from these visits informed the risk assessment and
recommendations in this ESSA.


1.3 IDENTIFICATION OF BOUNDARIES BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM AND
    THE WORLD BANK-FINANCED PROGRAM

The Government of Bangladesh’s Blue Network Program (interchangeably referred to as ‘the
Government’s Program’ or the small ‘p’ throughout this document) represents a long-term, multi-phase


Final ESSA                                           10                                         January 2026
                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


initiative (2025-2040) to restore the rivers and canals around Dhaka to improve livability, resilience, public
health, and economic sustainability. The World Bank–financed DWATER Program (interchangeably
referred to as ‘the Bank’s Program’, or ‘the PforR Program’ or the big ‘P’ throughout this document)
constitutes the second phase of this broader government program, supported through a hybrid PforR and
IPF operation.

While the overall objectives of the Government’s Program and the Bank’s Program are aligned, there are
important differences in duration, geographic scope, and thematic coverage. The Blue Network is
designed as a 15-year program covering the entire metropolitan area of Dhaka including Dhaka city,
Narayanganj, Gazipur, Savar, Keraniganj, and Purbachal with an estimated total investment need of about
US$ 8.5 billion. By contrast, the PforR Program will run for six years (FY26-FY31) and focus on three priority
hotspots - Dhaka city, Narayanganj, and Gazipur, which were identified in the Dhaka Rivers UIP TA and
confirmed through GoB and World Bank dialogue as areas with the highest population density, pollution
loads, service delivery gaps, and exposure to flood risks. The remaining metropolitan areas (Savar,
Keraniganj, and Purbachal) will be supported in subsequent phases of the Blue Network Program with
additional financing expected from the Government, the World Bank, and other development partners
(ADB, AIIB, AFD, EKN, and others).

Thematically, the Blue Network Program focuses on two overarching goals – (a) reducing pollution in
rivers and canals and (b) improving water flows and restoring ecological quality. The PforR Program
contributes to these goals while expanding the scope to include interlinked urban water security
challenges such as safe sanitation and fecal sludge management, solid waste collection and treatment,
and stormwater drainage and canal rehabilitation. In this way, the PforR not only contributes directly to
reducing river pollution and enhancing flood resilience but also strengthens service delivery systems and
governance structures critical to sustaining long-term outcomes.

In terms of financing, the Blue Network’s first phase requires approximately US$ 1 billion, while the World
Bank Program mobilizes US$ 600 million (US$ 550 million PforR and US$ 50 million IPF TA). This financing
will be complemented by GoB budget allocations and is expected to be scaled up through co-financing
and parallel financing by development partners, as well as private sector participation, particularly
through the piloting of innovative financing mechanisms such as water bonds under the IPF TA.

In summary, the World Bank Program represents a strategically focused subset of the larger Blue Network
Program covering high-risk areas, piloting institutional reforms, and strengthening governance and service
delivery systems, while laying the groundwork for scaling to the wider metropolitan area in future phases
of the MPA.


1.4 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

DWATER will be co-led and managed by the Local Government Division (LGD) of the Ministry of Local
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRDC), the Ministry of Water Resources
(MoWR), and Department of Environment under the Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate
Change (MoEFCC).

The five primary implementing agencies (IAs) for the PforR operation are:


Final ESSA                                           11                                         January 2026
                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


    •   Dhaka North City Corporation (DNCC)
    •   Dhaka South City Corporation (DSCC)
    •   Narayanganj City Corporation (NCC)
    •   Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (DWASA)
    •   Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB)

Under the IPF Technical Assistance component, support will be provided to the LGD, DNCC, DSCC, NCC,
DWASA, BWDB, WARPO and DOE for activities related to river restoration master planning, sediment and
dredged material management, and pollution monitoring and enforcement.

The program’s implementation arrangements are summarized hereunder:

Program Management Structure: The Program will be jointly managed by MoLGRD&C, MoWR, and DoE,
with specific activities implemented by city corporations and agencies under the Local Government
Division, as well as MoWR and BWDB for pollution and water quality improvements.
Program Coordination Unit (PCU): A dedicated PCU will be set up in LGD, led by a National Program
Director, to oversee, coordinate, supervise, and report on the Program, with operating costs funded by
the IPF component.
Joint Task Force (JTF): A JTF, co-led by the Secretaries of LGD, MoWR, and MoEFCC, will include heads of
all implementing agencies and meet quarterly to review progress, provide strategic guidance, and resolve
inter-agency issues
Program Steering Committees (PSC): Each ministry (LGD, MoWR, MoEFCC) will have its own PSC, chaired
by the respective Secretaries to the ministry, to coordinate and monitor Program activities within their
agencies on a quarterly basis.
Program Implementation Units (PIUs): Each implementing agency will establish a PIU with technical
experts to plan, implement, and report on Program activities, leveraging existing agency resources and
supporting recruitment and training as needed.
External Support Arrangements: The IPF component will fund external consultants and technical services,
including Program Management Consultants for the PCU and Technical Support Consultants for PIUs, to
ensure adequate expertise and timely implementation.
Program Performance Agreements (PPA): City corporations and DWASA will sign PPAs with LGD before
Program effectiveness, detailing activities, results, funding, and technical support, with Bank review and
formal approval required.
Program Operations Manual (POM): A POM specifying (i) the activities and timetable of actions under
the Program; (ii) detailed roles and responsibilities of all IAs; (iii) procurement, FM, and M&E
arrangements; (iv) verification protocols for DLIs/DLRs; (v) anti-corruption measures; and (vi)
environmental and social compliance requirements, including screening procedures, exclusion lists, and
monitoring frameworks will be prepared to guide program implementation.
Independent Verification Agent (IVA): An IVA will be engaged under the IPF TA to verify achievement of
the Program’s DLIs and related results, ensuring transparency and accountability.

Through these arrangements, the Program aims to establish robust systems that integrate environmental,
social, technical, and fiduciary functions across multiple agencies, while creating permanent capacity in
the city corporations and DWASA to manage E&S risks effectively beyond the Program period.




Final ESSA                                         12                                       January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



1.5 BORROWER’S PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE WITH IMPLEMENTATION OF BANK / OTHER
    DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS’ FINANCED PROGRAMS

Bangladesh has a long history of implementing large infrastructure and service delivery programs with
support from development partners, including the World Bank. The LGD has managed successive local
governance and service delivery projects, including Bank financed operations, and has prior experience
adopting project based Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMFs) under safeguard
policies. LGD has also demonstrated capacity in program coordination, fiduciary management, and
working with bilateral and multilateral agencies such as JICA, ADB, and AIIB.

However, the primary implementing agencies under this Program i.e., DNCC, DSCC, NCC, DWASA, and
BWDB have only limited prior experience in implementing Bank financed projects under the
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). DNCC and DSCC have implemented small-scale Bank
engagements in the past, primarily under older safeguard policies, with little institutionalization of
environmental and social systems. NCC has no prior Bank project experience, making its institutional
capacity for ESF compliance especially weak. DWASA and BWDB has experience managing large-scale
infrastructure projects, including with World Bank financing, but its environmental and social capacity
relies heavily on staff deputed temporarily from other Bank projects rather than permanent in-house
units.

Supporting agencies under the IPF TA also have capacity gaps. BWDB has implemented large, Bank-
financed water management projects and has some experience with environmental assessments, but its
systems for dredged material management and resettlement remain weak. The Department of
Environment (DoE) is the national regulatory authority for pollution control and environmental
compliance but suffers from chronic staffing and resource shortages, limiting its capacity for real-time
monitoring, enforcement, and oversight of urban pollution management.

Across all IAs, common weaknesses include the absence of dedicated E&S units, inadequate staffing, lack
of systematic screening and monitoring procedures, and limited contractor oversight. None of the city
corporations allocate dedicated annual budgets for E&S risk management. These limitations highlight the
need for capacity strengthening, onboarding of E&S specialists, development of Environmental and Social
Management Systems (ESMSs), and establishment of monitoring and reporting protocols.




Final ESSA                                        13                                      January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



2 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL EFFECTS OF DWATER

DWATER aims to deliver significant environmental and social improvements in Metro Dhaka, such as
cleaner canals, improved drainage, better waste management, and safer sanitation. However, these
activities carry substantial E&S risks, especially due to the dense urban setting. Environmental risks
include contamination from dredged sediments, unsafe disposal, air and noise pollution, and health
hazards for workers and communities. Social risks stem from involuntary resettlement and adverse
impacts on non-title holders and informal occupiers, with the potential for social conflict and unrest if not
managed responsibly.



The program’s success depends on robust institutional arrangements, capacity building, and effective
implementation of mitigation measures, such as sediment testing, safe transport and disposal, community
ownership and engagement, and strengthened E&S policy and management frameworks.



Despite these risks, the program offers major opportunities: restoring drainage capacity to reduce
flooding, improving water quality, enabling safe reuse of dredged materials and sludge, and building
institutional capacity for long-term urban resilience. The ESSA maps these risks and mitigation measures
against the World Bank’s six PforR core principles, emphasizing that without proper management, risks
could overwhelm implementing agencies, but with strategic design and reforms, the program can deliver
lasting environmental and social benefits for Dhaka



2.1 KEY ENVIRONMENTAL & SOCIAL (E&S) RISKS OF THE PROGRAM

2.1.1 Environment Risks

The most material environmental risks arise from the dredging and cleaning of canals in DNCC and DSCC.
Activities related to this would involve excavation and handling of large volumes of polluted sediments
and mixed solid waste in the middle of densely populated neighborhoods. If these sediments are not
properly tested, dewatered, stored, transported, and disposed of or reused under safe conditions, they
can create secondary contamination of soil and water, as well as odor, dust, and vector problems for
nearby communities.

Sanitation and fecal sludge management activities carry risks of pathogen exposure, odor nuisance, and
unsafe sludge reuse, while solid waste management interventions may result in dust, leachate pollution,
and worker safety concerns if mechanized systems are poorly operated. More general construction phase
impacts include air and noise pollution, drainage blockages from debris, hazardous construction wastes,
and traffic congestion. Across all activities, occupational and community health and safety (OHS/CHS) risks


Final ESSA                                           14                                        January 2026
                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


are substantial, especially for workers handling contaminated materials and for communities exposed to
unsecured construction sites, heavy traffic, and unsafe waste storage.

While biodiversity impacts are expected to be limited given the highly urbanized setting, canal corridors
do provide aquatic habitat and ecological functions that could be disrupted if dredging is carried out
during sensitive spawning seasons. There is also a potential for chance finds of cultural heritage objects
during excavation, as well as temporary access issues for nearby religious and cultural sites. Dhaka’s
monsoon climate adds another layer of risk, since heavy rains could cause dredged materials to overflow
from temporary sites or wash pollutants back into canals, while simultaneous work on multiple canals
could strain disposal and traffic systems.

The following outlines the key risks with explanations of how and why they matter:

Canal dredging and cleaning (DNCC and DSCC) - One of the core program activities is to dredge and clean
the clogged canals in Dhaka North and South City Corporations. These canals have accumulated layers of
polluted sediments mixed with household and industrial waste.
    • Stirring up contaminated sediments. When dredging machines disturb the canal bed, fine particles
        get suspended in the water, making it murky and sometimes releasing dangerous substances such
        as heavy metals, oils, and bacteria back into the water. This can affect water quality and aquatic
        life.
    • Handling and drying dredged materials. The mud and waste pulled out of canals must be dried
        and stored temporarily. If this material is simply piled up without proper lining or covering,
        rainwater can wash pollutants into the soil or back into the canal. Dried sediments can also create
        dust, bad odor, and attract flies and rodents.
    • Transport and disposal. Moving dredged materials by trucks creates its own risks: spills onto
        roads, dust blowing from uncovered loads, and traffic safety problems. If these materials are
        dumped indiscriminately, they can contaminate land, reduce soil fertility, and spread harmful
        substances into communities.
    • Fuel and chemical use. The dredging machines use large amounts of fuel and sometimes chemicals
        for sediment treatment. Poor storage or handling could cause spills, fires, or exposure to workers
        and nearby residents.

These risks mean that dredged materials must be properly tested, stored, transported, and either treated
or reused (e.g., for land filling, construction sub-base) in safe ways.

Sanitation and fecal sludge management (FSM) - The Program also supports expansion of sanitation
facilities and better management of fecal sludge.
     • Spillage of untreated sewage. During construction of pipelines or transfer of sludge, leaks and
          spills could expose workers and communities to harmful pathogens.
     • Odor and nuisance. Poorly managed small treatment plants or drying beds can create strong
          odors, attract flies and mosquitoes, and lower the quality of life for nearby households.
     • Sludge by-products. If sludge is not treated properly before being reused (e.g., for composting) or
          disposed of, it can contaminate land and water sources.

Solid waste management - Another focus is improving solid waste transfer stations and recycling facilities
and replacing manual waste pickers with mechanical equipment.



Final ESSA                                          15                                       January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


    •   Air, dust, and leachate. Waste handling sites can generate dust, bad smells, and dirty runoff water
        (leachate), which if not captured and treated, can pollute nearby drains and canals.

Worker safety - Mechanical compactors, conveyors, and loaders pose risks such as entanglement,
crushing, or heat stress for workers if safety protocols are weak.

Fire hazards - Piles of mixed waste, especially those containing batteries or flammable materials, can
easily catch fire.

Construction related risks - Across all program components, civil works will involve:
   • Air and noise pollution from trucks, excavators, and demolition.
   • Traffic congestion and access problems when roads are cut or materials are stockpiled on streets.
   • Runoff pollution when rain washes construction debris or chemicals into drains.
   • Waste generation from construction sites, including concrete washout, paints, oils, and hazardous
       materials that must be carefully separated.

Health and safety risks - Both workers and surrounding communities face potential hazards.
For workers, risks include cave-ins during excavation, injuries from heavy machinery, chemical exposure,
and accidents caused by poor equipment maintenance or inadequate protective gear.
For communities, risks include open trenches, unsafe detours, noise, dust, and possible contact with
contaminated dredged materials if sites are not properly fenced and secured.

Impacts on biodiversity and cultural property - Although the works are located in heavily urbanized areas,
canals are still habitats for small number of fishes, animals and aquatic organisms. Dredging at the wrong
time of year could disturb spawning. There is also a small chance of finding buried cultural artifacts
(“chance finds”) during excavation. Temporary access restrictions to mosques, temples, or other cultural
sites may occur during works.

Climate and cumulative effects - Dhaka’s monsoon climate magnifies the risks. Heavy rains can cause
dredged materials to overflow from temporary sites or wash pollutants into surrounding areas. If several
canals are being worked on at the same time, the pressure on disposal sites and local traffic will multiply.


2.1.2 Social Risks

Dhaka is one of the most densely populated megacities in the world. The city is also the main economic
engine of the country and attracts hundreds of thousands of migrants from other parts of the country
who come into the city to pursue a living and, eventually settle down in and around the city. Given the
(growing) scarcity of land in the Metro Dhaka area, the issue of people encroaching and occupying public
and private lands is real and a growing concern. Development projects in the Metro Dhaka area often face
interminable delays and are derailed because the country does not have the necessary policy and
regulatory framework and mechanisms that can deal with the issues of NTHs and IOs in a socially
responsible, acceptable (in terms of international standards on land acquisition and involuntary
resettlement) manner.




Final ESSA                                          16                                        January 2026
                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


The canals, small drains and ponds on and around which activities related to this PforR operation will be
undertaken have approximately a thousand NTHs and IOs3. In case the adverse impacts of project
activities on these potential PAPs, though temporary, are not addressed effectively, a strong public
resistance to any intervention is very likely. In case the concerned implementing agencies resort to using
powers vested upon them by the Government and forcibly evicting such PAPs, there is a strong likelihood
of widespread unrest and social conflict. Given the socio-political headwinds in Bangladesh, such a
situation can escalate rapidly leading to incalculable material harm to people and properties.


2.2 E&S BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES OF THE PROGRAM

While the Program carries substantial environmental risks if not managed properly, it also offers major
environmental benefits and opportunities for Metro Dhaka, both in the immediate term and in laying the
foundation for longer-term improvements in urban water security, public health, and resilience. The major
E&S benefits and opportunities of the program are:


2.2.1 Cleaner canals and reduced urban flooding
By dredging and cleaning priority canals in DNCC and DSCC, the Program will help restore their drainage
capacity, reducing the chronic problem of waterlogging and localized flooding. This will not only ease daily
hardships for residents but also lower the risk of disease outbreaks linked to stagnant water, such as
dengue and cholera. Canal rehabilitation also creates an opportunity to integrate nature-based solutions
(e.g., vegetated banks, riparian buffers), which can improve water quality, provide habitat, and enhance
urban biodiversity.


2.2.2 Co-management of urban water bodies involving communities
Strategic engagement of communities in the management of canals and water bodies, as envisaged under
the program, can significantly help build community ownership of the assets and aid in their long-term
management. Through a system of checks and measures adopted by the communities and concerned IAs,
future re-encroachments of these assets can also be prevented.


2.2.3 Pollution reduction and improved water quality
The Program aims to cut pollution loads entering rivers and canals by strengthening solid waste
management and sanitation systems. Improved fecal sludge collection and treatment and expanded
access to safely managed sanitation services will significantly reduce the discharge of untreated sewage
into water bodies. Upgrading waste transfer stations, introducing material recovery facilities (MRFs), and



3
  During preparation, the task team contracted an independent consulting firm to assess the numbers of NTHs and
IOs that are likely to be impacted if canal restoration and rehabilitation works were to be undertaken in the selected
canals identified under the PforR operation on the present day. The study findings revealed the following numbers
of NTHs and IOs in the selected canals as on the dates of the survey (20-31 August 2025): (i) Bauniabadh Canal – 27,
(ii) Kajla Canal – 410, (iii) Mridhabari Canal – 125, (iv) Rupnagar Canal – 26, (v) Titas Canal – 3, (vi) Zia Sarani Canal -
363


Final ESSA                                                  17                                              January 2026
                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


reducing open dumping will prevent large amounts of solid waste from blocking drains or being dumped
directly into canals, thereby improving both water quality and public health outcomes.


2.2.4 Safer handling and potential reuse of dredged materials and sludge
One of the most transformative opportunities lies in the policy and SOP development for dredged material
and sludge management, supported by the IPF TA. Currently, these materials are often disposed of
indiscriminately, creating secondary pollution. Under the Program, technical studies, piloting, and
demonstration projects can enable safe treatment and beneficial reuse of dredged materials (e.g., for land
reclamation, engineered fill, or soil improvement) and fecal sludge (e.g., as compost, energy recovery).
This not only reduces the burden on landfills but also converts waste into a resource, aligning with the
principles of circular economy.


2.2.5 Strengthened institutional systems and regulatory capacity
The Program will help build the environmental management capacity of DNCC, DSCC, NCC, and DWASA,
which currently lack strong systems or trained staff. Through the establishment of Environmental and
Social Units (ESUs), development of Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS), and
integration of E&S requirements into procurement and contract management, the Program creates an
opportunity to embed long-term institutional reforms. This will improve not only the Program’s
performance but also the way these agencies handle future infrastructure and service delivery projects.


2.2.6 Climate resilience and adaptation
Metro Dhaka is one of the most climate-vulnerable megacities in the world. By restoring drainage canals,
improving flood resilience, and reducing pollution, the Program directly supports climate adaptation
goals. Better waste and sludge management reduces methane and greenhouse gas emissions from
uncontrolled dumping, while cleaner waterways and improved stormwater flows help the city adapt to
more intense monsoon rains and future climate shocks.


2.2.7 Community health and quality of life improvements
Finally, the Program will bring tangible improvements to urban livability: cleaner neighborhoods, reduced
odor and nuisance from waste and sewage, safer work conditions, and less exposure of communities to
contaminated materials. These improvements will disproportionately benefit the poor and vulnerable
populations who often live closest to polluted canals and informal dumpsites.


2.2.8 Overall
In sum, the Program offers a unique opportunity to reverse long-standing trends of urban water pollution
and flooding in Dhaka. By combining physical investments (canal cleaning, drainage, sanitation, waste
management) with policy reform, institutional strengthening, and piloting of innovative solutions for
dredged material and sludge reuse, it has the potential to deliver long-lasting environmental and public
health gains while contributing to climate resilience and sustainable urban development.




Final ESSA                                         18                                       January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



2.3 MAPPING OF E&S RISKS TO PFORR CORE PRINCIPLES

The ESSA assessed the PforR program design against the six core principles outlined in the Bank’s Guidance
for PforR financing and found that:

    •    All six core principles are applicable for the PforR Operation
    •    Without proper mitigation measures (i.e. in an as-is, or no-program case) it will be very difficult
         for the IAs to manage the program’s E&S risks
    •    The PforR program design strategically embeds measures that will strengthen the IAs’ overall
         program (including E&S) management abilities.
    •    The PforR lays the foundation for significantly strengthening the E&S risks and impact
         management function within the IAs and, once these take root, will assist the IAs in implementing
         GoB’s E&S laws and regulations and also filling the gaps therein through adoption of (elements
         of, if not in their entirety) international standards and Good International Industry Practices
         (GIIPs)

Table 2 below contains a summary of E&S risks (mapped against the PforR Principles for ESSA) of key
activities that would be undertaken vide this PforR operation, highlights the impacts, and provides a high-
level outline of the type of mitigation measures needed to address the risks and impacts.

Table 2: DWATER - Summary of E&S Risks & Impacts, Relevant PforR Principles and High Level Mitigation Measures

 Activity          Key E&S          Risks    and Why              It Relevant     High Level Mitigation /
                   Impacts                       Matters              PforR Core Management Measures
                                                                      Principle(s
                                                                      )
 Canal             Environment                      Canals       cut • CP#1       Environment
 dredging      &       • Stirring       up          through dense • CP#2              • Sediment testing &
 cleaning                 polluted                  urban areas; • CP#3                  classification
 (DNCC,                   sediments        -        unsafe           • CP#4           •  Treated dewatering
 DSCC)                    turbidity       &         handling         • CP#6              effluent
                          contaminant               directly affects                  • Lined & covered
                          release (heavy            water quality,                       storage
                          metals,      oils,        soil     health,                  • Covered transport
                          pathogens)                and       public                     & wheel wash
                       • Unsafe                     safety.                           • Engineered
                          drying/storage                                                 reuse/disposal
                          → odors, dust,                                          Social
                          leachate                                                    • Policy, guidelines
                       • Unsafe transport                                                for       community
                          - spills, dust,                                                management       of
                          accidents                                                      urban water bodies
                       • Inadequate                                                   • Empowering
                          disposal/reuse →                                               communities     for
                          land                                                           taking ownership of
                          contamination


Final ESSA                                                  19                                              January 2026
                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


              Social                                                         urban water bodies
                  • Temporary          or                                    and preventing re-
                     permanent loss                                          encroachments
                     of      livelihoods
                     and         adverse
                     economic
                     impacts on NTHs
                     and IOs
                  • Potential         for
                     social      conflict
                     and widespread
                     unrest
                  • Possibility of re-
                     encroachment
 Sanitation & Environment                   Direct public •   CP#1   Environment
 FSM              • Sewage/sludge           health        •   CP#3       • Bunded        transfer
                     spills       during    exposure                        bays
                     transfer               through                      • Leachate capture
                  • Odors & flies at        pathogens and                • Sludge treated to
                     small treatment        nuisance                        standards before
                     units                  odors                           reuse/disposal
                  • Unsafe reuse →          undermines               Social
                     contamination          program                      • EHS       and     OHS
              Social                        acceptance.                     standard
                  • Possibility        of                                   embedded           in
                     manual                                                 contracts        and
                     scavenging         –                                   monitored
                     community and                                       • Re-skilling       and
                     worker safety                                          livelihood
                  • Adverse                                                 restoration plans
                     livelihood
                     impacts on SWM
                     workers
 Solid waste Environment                    Urban          • CP#1    Environment
 managemen        • Dust, odors, dirty      residents live • CP#3        • Lined & roofed pads
 t                   runoff         from    adjacent    to • CP#4           • Machine guarding
                     stations               waste sites;                    & LOTO
                  • Worker         injury   poor control                 • Waste segregation
                     risks          from    can     spread                  (batteries,
                     machines               disease and                     recyclables)
                  • Fire hazard from        create safety                • Fire/odor/vector
                     mixed waste            risks.                          control
              Social                                                 Social
                  • Community and                                        • EHS      and   OHS
                     worker safety                                          standard
                                                                            embedded        in


Final ESSA                                       20                                  January 2026
                                                                                             Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                   •   Temporary loss                                       contracts       and
                       of livelihood                                        monitored
                                                                         • Livelihood
                                                                            restoration plans
                                                                            (including       re-
                                                                            skilling)
 Construction Environment                 Dense           •   CP#1   Environment
 works     (all   • Air     &     noise   neighborhood •      CP#3       • Contractor ESMPs
 subsectors)         pollution            s        mean                  • Dust suppression &
                  • Drainage              thousands                         noise control
                     blockage from        affected daily;                • Erosion & sediment
                     debris • Polluted    unmanaged                         measures
                     runoff               works worsen                   • Waste
                  • Hazardous             flooding and                      segregation/dispos
                     construction         pollution.                        al
                     wastes                                              • Traffic
                  • Worker safety                                           management plans
                  • Traffic
                     disruptions
 Health      &    • Injuries      from    Risk        of •    CP#3      •   Site fencing &
 Safety              excavation       &   accidents                         signage
 (workers &          heavy machinery      could    delay                •   PPE programs
 community)       • Community             works,                        •   Excavation/confine
                     contact       with   damage trust,                     d space safety
                     contaminated         and endanger                  •   Traffic
                     dredged              lives.                            management       &
                     materials                                              notifications
                  • Traffic hazards
 Biodiversity     • Disturbance of        Though urban, •     CP#2      •   Seasonal timing for
 & Cultural          fish spawning &      canals remain •     CP#4          dredging
 Property            aquatic life         ecological                    •   Chance         find
                  • Chance finds of       corridors;                        procedures
                     buried heritage      cultural assets               •   Access planning &
                  • Temporary             are      highly                   liaison
                     access issues for    sensitive.
                     mosques/temple
                     s
 Climate &        • Monsoon        rain   Dhaka’s heavy •     CP#1      •   Weather-sensitive
 Cumulative          washing              rainfall      •     CP#5          scheduling
 Risks               pollutants           amplifies                     •   Surge capacity in
                  • Disposal/traffic      pollution                         storage/treatment
                     overloading          wash-off and                  •   Phased canal works
                     when multiple        operational
                     canals cleaned       strain.
                     simultaneously



Final ESSA                                      21                                  January 2026
                                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     22                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



3 ASSESSMENT OF BORROWER’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND
  SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS

3.1 DESCRIPTION OF BORROWER’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
    SYSTEMS

This section provides an overview of the Government of Bangladesh’s policy and legal framework and
assesses their applicability to the Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program. It also considers
the capacity of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRDC)/Local
Government Division (LGD), Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (DWASA), and the City
Corporations (CCs) to apply these laws and procedures in practice, with particular attention to the E&S
Core Principles for PforR operations. The analysis highlights both the strengths and the systemic gaps in
the current framework, especially in relation to pollution management, dredged material handling,
resettlement practices, labor management, and grievance redress and sets the stage for identifying
actions needed to strengthen institutional capacity and close policy gaps. Detailed references to the
specific laws and regulations relevant to program activities are presented in Annex A.


3.1.1 Policy and Legal Framework

Bangladesh has established a wide set of environmental and social (E&S) laws and policies over the past
three decades that provide the formal foundation for environmental protection, pollution control, land
acquisition, labor management, and community health and safety. The system is anchored in the
Environmental Conservation Act (ECA) 1995 and the recently updated Environmental Conservation Rules
(ECR) 2023, which classify projects by risk, mandate Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for Red-category projects and set sector-specific pollution
standards. On the social side, the Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Act (ARIPA) 2017
governs compensation for land acquisition, while the Bangladesh Labor Act 2006 (amended) and Labor
Rules 2015 address occupational health, labor rights, and child labor. Complementary rules such as the
Solid Waste Management Rules 2021, E-Waste Rules 2021, Medical Waste Rules 2008, and the
Bangladesh Water Act 2013 address specific environmental issues relevant to this Program.

3.1.1.1 Alignment with Program E&S Risks

When measured against the environmental and social risks of the program as identified in Section II of
this document, the existing legal framework demonstrates both strengths and significant gaps. For
example:

    1. Canal dredging and handling of contaminated sediments
          o Relevant framework: ECA 1995, ECR 2023 (pollution control, waste management),
               Hazardous Waste Rules, Solid Waste Rules 2021.
          o Gap: No dedicated legal framework or SOPs for safe excavation, dewatering, transport,
               storage, treatment, and reuse/disposal of dredged materials and sludge. Existing rules


Final ESSA                                         23                                      January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                treat these as generic “wastes,” which is inadequate for managing risks of heavy metals,
                hydrocarbons, pathogens, and odor.
            o Needed response: A national policy and SOPs for dredged material and sludge
                management need to be included in the Program’s DLI and IPF TA.
   2.   Wastewater, fecal sludge, and sanitation
            o Relevant framework: Water Act 2013, ECR 2023 (effluent standards), FSM guidelines
                (non-binding).
            o Gap: Weak enforcement of effluent discharge standards; absence of binding national FSM
                standards for treatment and reuse; no systematic regulatory oversight of small-scale
                decentralized systems.
            o Needed response: Stronger FSM regulations, technical standards for reuse products, and
                capacity in DoE and city corporations to monitor compliance.
   3.   Solid waste management
            o Relevant framework: Solid Waste Rules 2021, E-Waste Rules 2021, Medical Waste Rules
                2008.
            o Gap: Rules are relatively recent but enforcement capacity is limited. Segregation at
                source, transfer station management, and safe disposal remain weak in practice.
            o Needed response: Operational guidelines and performance monitoring systems for waste
                transfer stations and MRFs need to be integrated into city corporation ESMSs.
   4.   Occupational health and safety (OHS)
            o Relevant framework: Labor Act 2006, OHS Policy 2013, BNBC 2020.
            o Gap: OHS provisions exist but are generic and poorly enforced in municipal works.
                Contractor obligations for PPE, excavation safety, confined space entry, and handling of
                contaminated wastes are not explicitly required under sectoral rules.
            o Needed response: Labor Management Procedures (LMPs) and OHS action plans should
                be embedded in PIU systems, with budget and supervision mechanisms.
   5.   Community health and safety (CHS)
            o Relevant framework: ECA 1995, Water Act 2013, BNBC 2020, public health regulations.
            o Gap: Weak integration of CHS risks in clearance processes (traffic management,
                odor/nuisance, exposure to contaminated sediments). No binding requirements for
                stakeholder engagement or community information during urban works.
            o Needed response: Adoption of community health and safety protocols (traffic,
                dust/noise, odor, access management) should be included in contract clauses and
                monitored through PIUs.
   6.   Resettlement and land acquisition
            o Relevant framework: ARIPA 2017.
            o Gap: While ARIPA provides compensation to legal titleholders, it does not adequately
                address non-title holders (NTHs), informal occupiers (IOs), and livelihood restoration
                requirements. This is a major risk in canal rehabilitation, where large numbers of NTHs
                and IOs are present.
            o Needed response: Development of a policy framework for NTHs and IOs, should be
                included in the Program’s DLI, and further supported under the Program’s PAP and IPF
                TA, to complement ARIPA provisions and align with ESS5 principles.
   7.   Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress




Final ESSA                                        24                                      January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


             o    Relevant framework: ECR 2023 introduces some provisions for public consultation, but
                  these are limited to large projects requiring EIA. No uniform GRM requirement across
                  sectors.
             o    Gap: Lack of systematic, legally mandated stakeholder engagement and GRM
                  mechanisms across all project types.
             o    Needed response: Establishment of project-level SEPs and GRMs under the Program, with
                  disclosure requirements and third-party monitoring.

A summary of Bangladesh’s key E&S regulations and gaps / weaknesses in their implementations /
enforcement is provided in Table 3.

Table 3: Key E&S Laws in Bangladesh Applicable to DWATER and Their Gaps / Weaknesses

 Law / Policy / Regulation       Relevance to DWATER Program                  Gaps / Weaknesses
 Environmental                   Core framework for environmental             Focused on project-level EIAs;
 Conservation Act (1995)         clearance, pollution standards, EIA          weak       enforcement      capacity;
 &         Environmental         requirements; applies to canal               limited provisions on community
 Conservation        Rules       dredging, FSM, SWM, drainage                 health/safety and systematic
 (2023)                          works.                                       stakeholder engagement.
 Bangladesh Water Act            Controls water use and pollution;            No detailed procedures for
 (2013)                          relevant to canal rehabilitation and         managing contaminated sediments
                                 sanitation discharges.                       or FSM discharges; enforcement
                                                                              limited.
 Solid            Waste          Regulates     waste      segregation,        Implementation weak; lack of
 Management        Rules         collection,    transfer,    disposal;        source segregation and monitoring
 (2021)                          relevant to MRFs and canal waste.            systems.
 E-Waste Management              Indirectly relevant where mixed              Enforcement capacity low; weak
 Rules (2021); Medical           waste enters drains or MRFs.                 coordination       with    municipal
 Waste Rules (2008)                                                           systems.
 Hazardous        Waste          Covers       handling/disposal      of       No explicit coverage of dredged
 Management provisions           hazardous waste; relevant for                material/sludge;          procedures
 (ECR 2023)                      contaminated dredged material.               unclear for reuse/disposal.
 ARIPA (2017)                    Governs land acquisition and                 Provides compensation only to
                                 compensation; applies to canal               titleholders; excludes non-title
                                 rehabilitation and drainage works            holders (NTHs); weak on livelihood
                                 requiring land.                              restoration.
 Labor      Act    (2006,        Governs labor rights, OHS, child labor       Enforcement inconsistent; OHS
 amended) & Labor Rules          prohibition; relevant for construction       standards       not    systematically
 (2015)                          and O&M.                                     applied in municipal works.
 Occupational Health &           Provides policy guidance on OHS for          Not      legally    binding;    poor
 Safety Policy (2013)            workers; relevant for dredging, waste        implementation at contractor level.
                                 handling, FSM.
 Bangladesh      National        Provides safety standards for Implementation capacity limited;
 Building Code (2020)            design/construction of waste and oversight of municipal facilities
                                 sanitation facilities.                 weak.




Final ESSA                                                 25                                         January 2026
                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


 Biodiversity Act (2017); Protects biodiversity and natural         Limited integration with urban
 Wildlife Conservation    habitats; relevant for canals and         works; weak enforcement in peri-
 Act (2012)               wetlands.                                 urban habitats.
 Antiquities Act (1968,   Protects cultural heritage and chance     Chance finds procedures not
 amended 1976)            finds; relevant for excavation in         mainstreamed      in   municipal
                          canal/drainage works.                     contracts.
 National Strategy for Guides sanitation and FSM systems;           Non-binding; lacks enforceable
 Water      Supply     & relevant for decentralized treatment.      standards for FSM operations and
 Sanitation (2014); Draft                                           sludge reuse.
 FSM Framework
 Public Health Ordinance Provides authority to control public       Outdated and rarely applied; weak
 (1944)                   health    hazards;     relevant    for    enforcement.
                          managing           CHS          during
                          dredging/waste handling.

3.1.1.2 Overall Assessment

The legal framework of Bangladesh is reasonably comprehensive in coverage but weak in depth and
enforcement. It provides the backbone for addressing the types of E&S risks identified in the Program but
lacks the detailed standards, procedures, and institutional arrangements to manage them effectively in
the urban context of Metro Dhaka. In particular, there are no binding policies, laws or SOPs for
management of dredged material and sludge and for addressing adverse project impacts on NTHs and
IOs. Additionally inadequate enforcement of OHS and CHS provisions under the applicable laws, and
insufficient requirements for stakeholder engagement and monitoring are limiting factors for effective
program implementation.

Synthesis
    • Strong coverage: Core environmental clearance (ECA/ECR), waste management rules, land
         acquisition (ARIPA), labor rights.
    • Critical gaps: dredged material/sludge management, treatment/reuse standards for FSM,
         protection of non-title holders, systematic OHS/CHS enforcement, and robust stakeholder
         engagement/GRMs.
    • Program response: DLIs, PAPs, and IPF TA explicitly should target these gaps through new
         policy/SOPs, ESMS development, capacity building, and framework for NTHs. These weaknesses
         can be addressed through the PforR program by:
             o Including DLIs and / or PAPs on dredged material/sludge management and NTH policy
                  framework;
             o Establishing E&S Units (ESUs) in city corporations and DWASA with specialist staff;
             o Developing agency-specific ESMSs to fill operational gaps; and
             o Using the IPF TA component to assist in the preparation of national policies, SOPs, and
                  capacity-building measures to strengthen the legal framework over time.
This alignment will ensure that the Program both complies with existing national laws and contributes to
closing the identified regulatory and institutional gaps.




Final ESSA                                         26                                      January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



3.2 ANALYSIS OF INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND CAPACITIES

The institutional arrangements for managing environmental and social (E&S) risks in Bangladesh are well
established on paper, but implementation capacity remains uneven across agencies, particularly at the
city corporation and utility levels. The Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program will be
implemented primarily through four key agencies - Dhaka North City Corporation (DNCC), Dhaka South
City Corporation (DSCC), Narayanganj City Corporation (NCC), and Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage
Authority (DWASA) with overall program coordination led by the Local Government Division (LGD) under
the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRDC). The Ministry of
Water Resources (MoWR), Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB), and Department of
Environment (DoE) will provide support through the IPF-TA component, but they are not direct
implementing agencies under the PforR.


3.2.1 Institutional Roles and Mandates

3.2.1.1 Central Ministries and Regulators

Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRDC) – Local Government
Division (LGD): LGD is the lead coordinating ministry for the Program, overseeing city corporations and
DWASA. It has experience in implementing Bank-financed projects, mainly under traditional safeguards
and project-specific ESMFs. However, LGD lacks an embedded E&S risk management system and relies
heavily on external consultants for compliance. The Bangladesh Environmental and Social Overview
Assessment (ESOAs) identifies LGD’s challenges as weak inter-agency coordination, low enforcement
authority over city corporations, and limited budgetary allocation for safeguards.

Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) and Department of Environment (DoE):
MoEFCC sets national environmental policy, while DoE is the statutory regulator under the Environmental
Conservation Act 1995 and ECR 2023. DoE issues environmental clearances, monitors compliance, and
enforces pollution control standards. In practice, however, DoE struggles with outdated laboratory
facilities, shortage of skilled inspectors, and limited enforcement power in urban contexts. As highlighted
in the ESOA, enforcement tends to be reactive, with insufficient monitoring of industrial effluent, solid
waste dumping, and dredged material handling directly relevant to the DWATER Program.

Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR), Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB), and Water
Resources Planning Organization (WARPO): MoWR provides policy oversight on water resource
management. BWDB is responsible for flood control, river training, and embankments, while WARPO is
mandated for river basin planning and integrated water resources management. Although BWDB and
WARPO are not implementing agencies for the PforR, they will play important roles under the IPF-TA
component in developing dredged material and sludge management frameworks and supporting
river/canal restoration strategies. Both institutions face structural challenges, including dependence on
donor-driven projects, weak integration with local governments, and fragmented planning.

3.2.1.2 Core Implementing Agencies




Final ESSA                                          27                                       January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


DNCC, DSCC, and NCC have broad municipal mandates that include solid waste management, drainage,
canal maintenance, and sanitation. However, none of these agencies currently have dedicated E&S units
or standardized operating procedures for risk management. Environmental functions are usually handled
by general engineering or conservancy departments with limited technical staff, while social issues are
managed through ad hoc arrangements. Budget allocations for E&S activities are minimal and largely
reactive (e.g., solid waste collection, roadside cleaning).

DWASA is mandated for water supply and sewerage services in Dhaka. While it has some exposure to
World Bank projects (e.g., Dhaka Sanitation Improvement Project), its dedicated E&S staffing is temporary
and linked to specific projects. It lacks embedded institutional structures for systematic environmental
and social risk management.

3.2.1.3 Other Relevant Institutions

Ministry of Labor and Employment (MoLE): Oversees labor laws and occupational health and safety
regulations. Enforcement remains weak, with limited capacity to monitor OHS in municipal projects and
informal labor environments.

Ministry of Land (MoL): Manages land acquisition processes under the Acquisition and Requisition of
Immovable Property Act (ARIPA) 2017. While ARIPA provides procedures for compensating titleholders,
it does not adequately address non-title holders or informal settlers—posing a major gap for canal
rehabilitation activities under the Program.
National Human Rights Commission (NHRC): Provides oversight on rights-based issues, including
displacement and community grievances, though its role in urban development programs is limited in
practice.
Civil Society and NGOs: Active in Dhaka in areas of waste management, water supply advocacy, and rights
of slum dwellers. While not formally part of the institutional framework, their involvement can enhance
stakeholder engagement and independent monitoring.


3.2.2 Institutional Weaknesses and Gaps

The ESSA and PAD risk assessments highlight several critical weaknesses:
    • Absence of institutionalized E&S management systems in the city corporations and DWASA;
       reliance on project-specific consultants rather than permanent staff.
    • Limited accountability and enforcement mechanisms: contractors are seldom held accountable
       for environmental pollution, OHS lapses, or community health and safety incidents.
    • Weak inter-agency coordination, especially between CCs and DWASA, often leading to
       fragmented planning and overlapping responsibilities in drainage and sanitation.
    • Gaps in social risk management, particularly in addressing land acquisition, involuntary
       resettlement, and impacts on NTHs and IOs. National frameworks provide limited guidance for
       compensation or livelihood restoration for informal occupiers, which is a major gap for canal
       rehabilitation activities.
    • Inadequate grievance redress systems: existing citizen complaint mechanisms are fragmented,
       often not accessible to vulnerable groups, and lack systematic documentation or follow-up.




Final ESSA                                         28                                      January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


    •   Low capacity for monitoring and enforcement of safeguards, with limited field inspections and
        inadequate reporting formats across IAs.

While Bangladesh’s national regulatory system provides a reasonably comprehensive framework, the
capacity of DNCC, DSCC, NCC, and DWASA to operationalize this framework remains limited. Their lack of
institutionalized E&S units, weak inter-agency coordination, and limited enforcement practices pose
substantial risks to program implementation. However, the design of the Metro Dhaka Program explicitly
incorporates targeted capacity-building measures, dedicated E&S staffing, and system development
supported by the IPF-TA component, which if effectively implemented can significantly enhance
institutional performance and bring the program into closer alignment with the PforR Core Principles.



3.3 ASSESSMENT OF BORROWER’S SYSTEMS AGAINST PFORR CORE PRINCIPLES AND
    PLANNING ELEMENTS

Bangladesh’s policy and legal framework for environmental and social management is reasonably
comprehensive and, in many respects, aligns with the principles of the World Bank’s Program-for-Results
(PforR) Financing Policy and Directive. The overarching objectives of the framework such as maintaining
ecological balance, ensuring environmentally sound development, protecting public health, and
addressing labor standards are consistent with the PforR Core Principles of (i) avoiding, minimizing, or
mitigating adverse impacts; (ii) promoting environmental and social sustainability in program design; and
(iii) supporting informed decision-making on the environmental and social effects of development.

The Environmental Conservation Act (ECA) 1995 and the Environmental Conservation Rules (ECR) 2023
remain the cornerstone of environmental regulation. These instruments provide a framework for
environmental clearance, including categorization of projects (Green, Yellow, Orange, and Red) and
requirements for screening and assessment. For example:
    • Solid waste transfer stations fall under the Yellow category and require environmental clearance.
    • Canal dredging and dredged material management is Orange (if under 5 km) and Red (if above 5
       km, encouraged to exclude from the PforR, and if included, requires appropriate legal and
       institutional framework embedded in the core project design).
    • Other activities such as sewerage connections, drainage rehabilitation, and network expansion
       are not explicitly listed in the ECR and therefore typically do not require clearance.

This provides assurance that the Program will only support Yellow and Orange category activities under
the PforR, with more environmentally intensive Red category investments suggest excluding by design, if
even included, requires robust legal and institutional framework embedded in the core project design.
The DoE has, in other multi-subproject programs, issued blanket clearances subject to submission of
required documents, and a similar approach may be adopted here.

The legal framework also incorporates supporting rules such as the Noise Pollution Control Rules (2006)
and Clean Air Rules (2022), alongside sectoral instruments like the Bangladesh National Building Code
(2006), the Labour Act (2006, amended 2018), and the Labour Rules (2015). Together, these provide a
basis for addressing occupational health and safety, pollution prevention, and construction-related risks
all highly relevant to drainage, solid waste, dredging, and sanitation works under the Program.


Final ESSA                                         29                                      January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



However, significant gaps and limitations remain when the framework is assessed against the PforR Core
Principles:
    • The ECA/ECR regime does not adequately address community health and safety, particularly in
        dense urban settings where construction and dredging pose high risks.
    • National laws lack explicit protocols for screening and managing social risks, including
        resettlement impacts on non-title holders, SEA/SH, and labor influx issues central to the
        Program’s canal rehabilitation and drainage activities.
    • While labor standards exist under the Labour Act, enforcement is limited, and coverage of
        informal workers (who dominate construction and waste management) is weak.
    • There is no government-wide Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) or set
        of SOPs applicable to the Program; instead, frameworks developed under donor financed projects
        (e.g., DWASA, BWDB) remain project-specific and not institutionalized.
    • Monitoring and enforcement capacity at DoE and line agencies is insufficient, with compliance
        checks often limited to paperwork rather than robust field inspections.

Given these limitations, while the existing GoB framework provides a useful foundation, it cannot on its
own ensure consistent application of the PforR Core Principles across all activities. To close these gaps,
the Program design includes development of agency-specific Environmental and Social Management
Systems (ESMSs), standard operating procedures for dredged material and sludge management,
frameworks for non-title holders, and capacity building for city corporations and DWASA. These measures,
supported by the IPF-TA, will complement the national framework and ensure that localized and program-
specific risks are adequately managed.


3.4 GRIEVANCE REDRESS SYSTEM (GRS)

Bangladesh has a centralized Grievance Redress System (GRS), hosted at www.grs.gov.bd, which provides
a digital platform for citizens to submit complaints across government institutions. Both the Ministry of
Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRDC)/Local Government Division (LGD)
and the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR), along with the four implementing agencies (DNCC, DSCC,
NCC, and DWASA), are users of this system. However, the effectiveness of the GRS at the institutional
level remains uneven, with weak capacity for timely response, low awareness among communities, and
limited accessibility for marginalized groups.

To ensure the Program meets the PforR Core Principle on accountability and stakeholder engagement,
a Program-specific Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) should be established and interlinked with the
centralized GRS. This will provide an accessible and transparent forum for affected persons to raise
concerns, make suggestions, and resolve grievances related to program planning, construction activities,
environmental and social risks, and service delivery.


3.4.1 Proposed Program-Level GRM Design

The Program GRM is suggested to be structured in three tiers to reflect the different levels of
implementation and to allow early resolution of complaints:


Final ESSA                                         30                                       January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



    1. Tier One – Field/Ward Level GRC:
           o Located at the community level, directly accessible to affected persons.
           o Handles day-to-day grievances related to construction impacts (e.g., dust, noise,
               temporary access restrictions), OHS lapses, and service disruptions.
           o Provides quick response within short timelines (7–10 days).
    2. Tier Two – Project/PIU Level GRC:
           o Managed at the level of each implementing agency’s Program Implementation Unit (PIU).
           o Handles complaints not resolved at field level, including more complex issues like land
               use restrictions, waste disposal, or OHS violations by contractors.
           o Works closely with E&S focal points to ensure corrective actions are implemented.
    3. Tier Three – City Corporation/Agency Level GRC:
           o Chaired at the City Corporation or DWASA level.
           o Addresses unresolved or escalated grievances, including policy-related issues,
               compensation disputes, and systemic matters.
           o Provides oversight of lower-tier GRCs and ensures reporting to LGD/MoWR.

Each GRC will include representation from beneficiary stakeholders, including affected households,
women, minority groups, NGOs working on gender, HR, or SEA/SH, and respected community leaders.
This inclusive structure ensures that vulnerable groups have representation in decision-making forums.

3.4.1.1 Accessibility and Technology Integration

To enhance accessibility, the Program GRM will be linked to both web-based and offline systems:
    • Online submission through www.grs.gov.bd.
    • Mobile-based tools including toll-free numbers, SMS hotlines, and mobile apps.
    • Physical complaint boxes at ward offices and PIU offices.
    • Standardized grievance forms in Bangla and English to minimize literacy barriers.

LGD’s ESU, supported by MoWR, will train GRS focal points in each IA on proper recording, referral, and
disclosure procedures. Reports on grievance handling will be integrated into the Program’s monitoring
system and linked to DLI/PAP verification.

3.4.1.2 Gender-Based Violence (GBV)/SEA/SH Complaints

Recognizing the possibility of SEA/SH risks in activities covered under the PforR, the Program recommends
the establishment of a GBV-sensitive GRM:
    • All GBV-related complaints will be handled confidentially, using a survivor-centered approach
        consistent with World Bank guidelines and the Good Practice Note on GBV.
    • Survivors will be referred to specialized NGOs contracted by LGD to provide psychosocial support,
        legal aid, and access to medical and protection services.
    • Dedicated female focal points will be appointed in each IA, and separate reporting channels will
        be established for GBV cases.

3.4.1.3 Link to World Bank GRS and Inspection Panel



Final ESSA                                         31                                      January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


Affected communities and individuals may also raise complaints directly with the World Bank’s corporate
GRS (www.worldbank.org/GRS) or the Inspection Panel (www.inspectionpanel.org) if they believe harm
has occurred or may occur due to noncompliance with Bank policies. Complaints may be submitted at any
time after concerns have first been raised through the Program GRM.

In summary, while Bangladesh’s centralized GRS provides a useful starting point, it is recommended that
the Program should establish a multi-tiered, inclusive, and technology-enabled GRM tailored to the
specific risks of canal dredging, sanitation, and solid waste activities in Metro Dhaka. This system will be
directly linked with DLIs and PAPs on stakeholder engagement, SEA/SH prevention, and institutional
strengthening, ensuring that grievances are not only addressed but also used as a tool to improve
accountability, transparency, and service delivery.


3.5 OUTCOMES FROM STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS HELD DURING THE ESSA

Between April 2025 to October 2025, the E&S members of the task team had several rounds of discussions
with key officials in each IA, sought written responses to the detailed E&S systems and capacity
assessment questionnaires. This was supplemented through three stakeholder consultation workshops
held in June 2025 and October 2025. The participants’ lists for these three workshops is attached in Annex
C of this document.

The initial phases of the stakeholder consultations and workshops (from April to June 2025) focused on
informing the stakeholders about the PforR instrument, the various assessments required to be done as
a part of the preparation of the operation and the need for information, co-ordination and co-operation
from the stakeholders to complete the ESSA. The subsequent interactions with the stakeholders –
including individual meetings, focused group discussions (FGDs) and a multistakeholder consultation
meeting held on 16 October 2025 were focused on disseminating the ESSA findings and recommendations
and seek feedback on the same.

In addition to the above, in August 2025, the task team commissioned a local consulting firm
headquartered in Dhaka to do an independent assessment of the numbers of NTHs and IOs that might be
impacted on account of the canal restoration and rehabilitation works planned for the six selected canals
under the PforR Operation. During this assessment, nearly a thousand people were contacted and their
views sought on the need for restoring and rehabilitating these canals, the likely social and economic
impacts of such works and possible ways to mitigate these impacts.

The outcomes of the stakeholder consultations held during the ESSA are summarized hereunder:

    •   Officials from the IAs who were contacted were curious to know the differences between the
        various World Bank financing instruments – IPF, PforR and DPF – and their roles and
        responsibilities, especially for the planned PforR Operation, both during preparation and
        implementation
    •   Valuable inputs were provided, both verbally and through written responses to an ESSA
        questionnaire that was shared with the IAs on E&S risk management capacities, organization
        structures, management systems and procedures including the strengths and weaknesses of each
        element.


Final ESSA                                          32                                        January 2026
                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


   •   Officials from IAs acknowledged the E&S management capacity gaps identified through the ESSA
       and expressed the need for the agencies to have structured processes for E&S risk management
       supplemented with trainings, capacity building and hand holding support.
   •   NTHs and IOs that might potentially be adversely impacted by activities related to canal
       restoration and rehabilitation expressed their apprehensions at being forcibly evicted and the
       impacts that such actions might have on their livelihoods and on their families
   •   Residents in dwellings adjoining canal embankments (both titleholders and NTHs), vendors and
       owners / operators of small businesses, temporary daily occupiers of spaces on canal
       embankments (viz. rickshaws, small food vending carts, etc.) - mostly, but not all, being NTHs and
       IOs - expressed a strong need for reviving water flows in the canals through regular, planned canal
       clean-up activities as long as such activities did not result in any permanent adverse impacts on
       their lives and livelihoods. They also expressed their willingness to co-operate with the concerned
       authorities and, if required, participate in canal restoration and rehabilitation activities.
   •   Participants in the draft ESSA disclosure workshop held on 16 October 2025 again endorsed the
       ESSA findings and recommendations on the proposed E&S PAPs the structured TA supported
       through the related IPF-TA component of the operation to help the IAs achieve the PAPs and the
       importance of the PAPs in helping the IAs achieve related DLRs. Some of the specific feedback
       from participants were:
           o The Director General (DG) and Additional Secretary (AS), LGD, who chaired the
                multistakeholder ESSA disclosure workshop started the meeting by saying that the LGD
                had gone through the draft ESSA carefully and agreed with the findings and
                recommendations emerging from the assessment.
           o A representative from the National Rivers Conservation Commission, GoB appreciated the
                phasing and structuring of the recommendations and expressed the need for a strong co-
                ordination amongst all key government institutions to achieve the objectives of this
                ambitious operation
           o A representative from Nari Pokkho, a non-governmental organization (NGO), urged the
                Bank and GoB to focus on the impact of program activities on women and strongly
                endorsed the recommendation on joint canal management between the CCs / DWASA
                and communities. The need to prohibit forced evictions to achieve program objectives
                was also strongly endorsed.
           o A representative from WARPO dwelled upon the consequences of human actions and
                behavior on groundwater contamination and urged the Program to focus on (a)
                preventing undesirable behaviors that lead to groundwater contamination, and (b)
                incentivize desirable behaviors
           o A representative from NCC expressed concerns about drain cleaning and SWM in densely
                packed urban settlements around the Metro Dhaka area and wanted the Program to
                focus on identifying potential landfill sites well in advance so that storage and disposal of
                SWM, dredged materials and sludge could be done in a manner that were compliant to
                applicable national laws and regulations on this issue.
           o The Joint Secretary (JS), Planning from LGD and the nodal person from GoB for the
                DWATER Program concluded the meeting by saying that the LGD strongly endorsed the
                findings brought out by the ESSA and the recommendations made in the ESSA to
                strengthen institutional systems and management capacities of the IAs to manage E&S
                risks of the Program. He urged the IAs to study the ESSA recommendations carefully and
                work closely with the Bank during implementation to action the recommendations.



Final ESSA                                          33                                        January 2026
                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     34                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



4 RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations from the environment and social systems assessment of the program and its key
stakeholders are based on the key findings from the ESSA exercise.


4.1 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS FROM THE ESSA

The key findings of the ESSA are summarized below:

    I.   Critical capacity constraints

The key implementing agencies, especially DNCC, DSCC, NCC and LGD have very weak capacities in
managing E&S risks and impacts pertinent to the project. DWASA has one Environment and one Social
specialist (on deputation) for the World Bank funded DSIP project. However, these specialists are not a
part of DWASA’s regular staff and may or may not be assigned to this PforR program.

   II.   Lack of systems, procedures and guidelines for E&S risk management

Compounding the capacity constraints issue is the fact that none of the IAs have any framework to manage
or monitor E&S risks and impacts in a systematic manner.

  III.   Gap in policy and regulatory framework
         a) From the social risk perspective, activities related to small canals clean up (rehabilitation and
             restoration) will have adverse involuntary resettlement impacts on several non-title holders
             (NTHs) and informal occupiers (IOs) along canal embankments. GoB does not have the
             necessary policy, laws, rules or regulations consistent with international standards to
             effectively manage these impacts.
         b) From the perspective of environmental risks, while Bangladesh has adopted several relevant
             policies and legal instruments, most organizations involved in dredging and sludge handling
             lack the required institutional frameworks and SOPs required to comply with these laws.
             Critical gaps remain in terms of clear procedures, technical protocols, trained manpower,
             budget and dedicated equipment for the safe excavation/dredging, handling, transport,
             storage, and disposal or beneficial use of dredged materials and sludge. As a result,
             compliance with the existing regulatory framework is inconsistent and resultant
             environmental risks are significant.

In the absence of facilitative policy and regulatory frameworks, systems and procedures and required
capacities for management of E&S risk and impacts of the project, specifically interventions required for
the rehabilitation and restoration of small canals and drains, the agencies of GoB typically resort to – (a)
forced evictions of NTHs and IOs, and (b) ad hoc, unscientific excavation, handling, storage, transport and
disposal of dredged materials and sludge.




Final ESSA                                           35                                        January 2026
                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


Both these practices have the potential to significantly exacerbate social conflicts and environmental
harm. This is especially more serious given the current socio-political headwinds faced by Bangladesh. The
resultant reputational risks are high both for the Bank and GoB.


4.2 STRATEGY TO ADDRESS THE FINDINGS FROM THE ESSA

The ESSA proposes a two-pronged strategy to address the key findings from the ESSA:

    (A) Put communities in the front and center to build ownership and ensure sustainability of possible
        solutions
    (B) Ensure that E&S risk management of the program is supported by a robust policy framework and
        required institutional mechanisms

To implement this strategy, the ESSA recommends a sequenced, strategic mix of IPF-TA support, Program
Actions (referred to as Program Action Plan or PAP) and Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs). The IPF TA
support would be provided to help GoB and the concerned IAs meet their E&S PAP commitments. The
meeting of the PAPs would be an essential pre-requisite for the Bank funded PforR Operation to proceed
towards meeting the E&S related DLRs and help the IAs manage E&S risks of the entire Blue Network
Program. In addition, the ESSA proposes a strong Program Exclusion List (please see Annex B) which
prohibits the program from financing or supporting activities that have high E&S risks or have the potential
for causing harm to the reputations of the Borrower and the Bank.

Figure 1 depicts the strategic sequencing of the key ESSA recommendations:

Figure 1: Summary of ESSA Recommendations for DWATER




Final ESSA                                             36                                     January 2026
                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Legends




As can be feen from Figure 1,

1. The ESSA proposes IPF-TA support through from FY 26 to FY 29-30 for the achievement of key PAPs.
   The IPF-TA support would be in the form of (a) salaries / fees of experts / specialists as required to
   meet the program needs; (b) capacity building, training and handholding support; (c) purchase of
   specialized equipment, tools, software, etc. needed to meet program needs; (d) funding for
   workshops, seminars, study tours of GoB officials, staff and consultants as needed to meet program
   objectives; (e) payment for consultancy services to undertake studies, assessments, plans, strategies,
   etc. as needed to meet program needs; and (f) other miscellaneous expenses acceptable to the Bank
   under the IPF-TA component. The Bank is also prepared to provide GoB additional high level strategic
   support on E&S risk management through it’s ES Hands-on Extended Implementation Support (ES
   HEIS) facility. This would be in addition to the IPF-TA support envisaged for the Program.
2. The PAP actions are sequenced in manner that helps GoB and the key IAs achieve significant
   institutional strengthening before undertaking risky activities; program policies aim to address
   existing legal vacuums and enable GoB to undertake potentially risky activities on the ground in a form
   and manner acceptable to the Bank and other IFIs. If successfully implemented and acceptable to GoB,
   these policy interventions have the potential to be scaled up later and be converted into necessary
   legislation(s).




Final ESSA                                         37                                       January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


3. Achievement of all PAPs contribute significantly to the IAs being able to successfully implement
   required interventions in SWM, FSM and pollution control of selected stretches of water bodies
   thereby enabling them to achieve some of the Program’s key DLRs.


4.3 DETAILS OF DWATER’S E&S PROGRAM ACTION PLANS (PAPS)

The ESSA recommends eight key program actions:

E&S PAP Action 1: Establishment of an Environment and Social Unit (ESU) in key IAs – DWASA, DNCC, DSCC
and NCC – responsible for implementing SWM, FSM and canal and small drains restoration and
rehabilitation activities. Rationale – to address the E&S risk management capacity gaps in these
institutions. Scope of application – the ESUs are expected to be a permanent part of the IAs and would
help the IAs manage E&S risks and impacts of all programs and schemes implemented by the IAs.

E&S PAP Action 2: Development of Environment and Social Management Systems (ESMS) in key IAs -
DWASA, DNCC, DSCC and NCC – responsible for implementing SWM, FSM and canal and small drains
restoration and rehabilitation activities. Rationale – to provide the ESUs in the IAs a comprehensive set of
policies / principles, guidelines, tools, SOPs, templates, reporting formats to systematically manage E&S
risks and impacts of all activities implemented by the IAs as required under national laws and regulations
as well as international E&S standards. Scope of application – the ESMSs will be applicable for all programs
and schemes implemented by the IAs.

E&S PAP Action 3: Policy framework for mitigating adverse impacts on Non-Title Holders (NTHs) and
Informal Occupiers (IOs) settled on the right of ways of water bodies. Rationale – (a) to address an existing
legal vacuum w.r.t. adverse social and livelihood impacts of the Blue Network Program’s interventions on
NTHs and IOs (b) prevent potential reputational risks to GoB (and, by association, to the World Bank), (c)
prevent potential risks of social conflict. Scope of application – for the entire Government Program (i.e.
the small ‘p’), potentially scalable to other programs of GoB and even future legislation(s).

E&S PAP Action 4: Policy Framework for sustainable management of dredged material and sludge adopted
for Blue Network around Dhaka program. Rationale – (a) to address an existing legal and procedural
vacuum w.r.t. management of dredged material and sludge (b) prevent potential long term harm to the
environment, people and ecosystems. Scope of application – for the entire Government Program (i.e. the
small ‘p’), potentially scalable to other programs of GoB.

E&S PAP Action 5: Develop and operationalize a mechanism for joint management of small drains and
canals. Rationale – an innovative strategy to encourage and empower community participation in the
management of urban water bodies and, potentially, prevent future encroachments on or along urban
water bodies. Related PAPs – PAP Actions 3 and 2. Scope of application – for the PforR Operation (the big
‘P’) implemented jointly and severally by MoWR, LGD, DNCC and DSCC to begin with, potentially scalable
to the entire Blue Network around Dhaka Program (the small ‘p’) and other programs and schemes of
GoB.

E&S PAP Action 6: Establish institutional capacity and monitoring systems for dredged material and sludge
management. Rationale – an innovative strategy to encourage and empower community participation in


Final ESSA                                           38                                        January 2026
                                                                                                       Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


the management of urban water bodies and, potentially, prevent future encroachments on or along urban
water bodies. Related PAPs – PAP Actions 2 and 4. Scope of application – for the PforR Operation (the big
‘P’) implemented jointly and severally by BWDB, DNCC, DSCC and NCC to begin with, potentially scalable
to the entire Blue Network around Dhaka Program (the small ‘p’) and other programs and schemes of
GoB.

E&S PAP Action 7: ESMS fully integrated with other infrastructure, planning and risk management
functions and supports implementation of pilot activities under the PforR Operation implemented by LGD,
DWASA, DNCC, DSCC and NCC. Rationale – (a) Demonstrate the effectiveness of the ESMS developed for
the IAs through PAP Action 2, (b) help refine the ESMSs through field implementation experiences, (c)
integrate E&S risk management with all other planning and risk management functions of the IAs in a
structured manner. Related PAPs – PAP Action 2. Scope of application – for the PforR Operation (the big
‘P’) implemented jointly and severally by LGD, DWASA, DNCC, DSCC and NCC to begin with, potentially
scalable to the entire Blue Network around Dhaka Program (the small ‘p’) and other programs and
schemes of GoB.

E&S PAP Action 8: Designation and operationalization of environmentally compliant interim
containment/storage sites for dredged materials and sludge by each IA. Rationale – (a) enable IAs to be
compliant with national laws and regulations, (b) prevent long term harm to the environment and
ecosystems that currently occur on account of unscientific and ad hoc disposal of toxic material. Related
PAPs – PAP Actions 1, 2, 4 and 7. Scope of application – for the PforR Operation (the big ‘P’) implemented
jointly and severally by BWDB, DNCC, DSCC and NCC to begin with, potentially scalable to the entire Blue
Network around Dhaka Program (the small ‘p’) and other programs and schemes of GoB.

As indicated in Section 4.2, the IPF-TA component of the operation will support GoB and related IAs in
meeting the Program’s PAP commitments.

The sequencing, description, responsibilities for implementation, timing and means of verification of
completion of the E&S PAPs is presented in Table 4 below:

Table 4: DWATER - Proposed PAPs

                                                                                        Completion
 PAP #         E&S PAP Description        Responsibility           Timing
                                                                                      Measurement
 1         Designation and               CCs and BWDB       Recurrent     Yearly   Documentation
           operationalization of                                                   confirming the
           environmentally compliant                                               operationalization
           interim                                                                 of the sites,
           containment/storage sites                                               environmental
           for dredged materials and                                               compliance and
           sludge by each agency                                                   disposal of dredged
                                                                                   material.
 2         Establish dedicated E&S       DWASA, DNCC,       Due Date      31-      Government Orders
           units (ESUs) and staffed      DSCC and NCC                     Dec-     for the creation of
           with at least 1 environment                                    2026     ESUs within each
                                                                                   agency and list of


Final ESSA                                         39                                       January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


         expert, 1 social expert and 1                                      staff on the payroll
         health and safety expert                                           with dedicated
                                                                            duties
 3       Mechanism for joint        MoWR, LGD,          Due Date     30-    (1) Guidelines and
         management of small drains DNCC and DSCC                    Jun-   byelaws for Joint
         and canals developed and                                    2027   GoB-Community
         operationalized                                                    Canal Management
                                                                            Committees
                                                                            adopted. (2) Joint
                                                                            GoB-Community
                                                                            Canal Management
                                                                            Committees formed
                                                                            for selected canals.
 4       Policy framework for            MOWR and LGD   Due Date     30-    Copy of approved
         mitigating adverse impacts                                  Jun-   policy
         on Non-Title Holders (NTHs)                                 2027
         and Informal Occupiers
         (IOs) settled on the right of
         ways of water bodies
         adopted for Blue Network
         around Dhaka program
 5       Policy Framework for            MOWR and LGD   Due Date     30-    Copy of approved
         sustainable management of                                   Jun-   policy
         dredged material and                                        2027
         sludge adopted for Blue
         Network around Dhaka
         program
 6       Environment and Social          LGD, DWASA,    Due Date     31-    Government order
         Management System               DNCC, DSCC and              Dec-   mandating the
         (ESMS) developed and            NCC                         2027   adoption of ESMS
         adopted including                                                  by all agencies.
         procedures, tools,                                                 Annual reports
         templates, and trainings                                           generated from
                                                                            ESMS for WB’s
                                                                            review and budget
                                                                            allocation under
                                                                            separate heads.
 7       ESMS fully integrated with      LGD, DWASA,    Due Date     30-    Documentation and
         other infrastructure,           DNCC, DSCC and              Jun-   system generated
         planning and risk               NCC                         2028   reports from
         management functions                                               agencies to show
                                                                            E&S risk screening,
                                                                            ESMP preparation,



Final ESSA                                       40                                 January 2026
                                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                                                   completion of all
                                                                                   the licenses,
                                                                                   permits and
                                                                                   compliance
                                                                                   requirements, and
                                                                                   monitoring
                                                                                   procedure for
                                                                                   implementation.

 8        Institutional capacity and     BWDB, DNCC,        Due Date     30-       Agencies to deploy
          monitoring systems for         DSCC, and NCC                   Dec-      one environmental
          dredged material and                                           2028      engineer, one
          sludge management                                                        occupational health
          established                                                              & safety officer, and
                                                                                   one logistics
                                                                                   specialist, develop
                                                                                   environmental
                                                                                   monitoring and
                                                                                   tracking system,
                                                                                   and carry out
                                                                                   annual
                                                                                   environmental
                                                                                   audits of dredged
                                                                                   material and sludge
                                                                                   operations.


4.4 ROLE OF E&S IPF TA SUPPORT AND PAPS FOR ACHIEVEMENT OF DWATER’S
    DLRS AND FOR THE FUTURE

The IPF-TA component of the PforR Operation will provide significant support to GoB and the related IAs
in achieving the eight E&S PAPs mentioned in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.

The sequenced achievement of the PAPs as per timelines indicated in Table 4 will help the IAs in meeting
2 key DLRs:
    (i)     Selected CCs and BWDB finalize Community-Based Pollution Reduction Plan (CBPRP) for
            targeted canal reach or pond and
    (ii)    Each of the selected CCs and BWDB scores 100 marks on the ‘Clean Canal/Pond Scorecard’ –
            on the achievement of which the Borrower can claim reimbursements from the Bank.

However, this careful sequencing of TA support for achievement of PAPs and IAs incentivized and
rewarded through DLRs after achievement of PAPs have a wider goal and implication – (i) to provide the
IAs the necessary building blocks to systematically manage and mitigate E&S risks and impacts of not just
this PforR Operation, but for the entire Blue Network around Dhaka Program, (ii) enable management of


Final ESSA                                         41                                      January 2026
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


E&S risks and impacts of other operations – either IPF or PforR – that would be a part of the larger MPA,
(iii) enable the IAs to be compliant with not just Bangladesh’s own E&S laws and regulations, but also the
E&S requirements of IFIs; and (iv) become a benchmark for socially responsible urban water bodies
management for other countries across the world facing similar complex urban growth and development
challenges as Dhaka.




Final ESSA                                         42                                       January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




5 ANNEXES




Final ESSA                                     43                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



5.1 ANNEX A – LIST OF E&S LAWS AND REGULATIONS RELEVANT TO DWATER

This annex summarizes the main environmental and social (E&S) legal instruments of Bangladesh relevant
to the Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program. It highlights their relevance to the Program’s
activities: canal dredging and cleaning, drainage rehabilitation, sanitation and fecal sludge management
(FSM), solid waste management (SWM), occupational and community health and safety (OHS/CHS), land
acquisition and resettlement, biodiversity protection, and cultural heritage management.

1. Environmental Protection and Pollution Control
    • Environmental          Conservation      Act    (ECA)    1995    (as    amended      2010,     2013)
         Establishes the Department of Environment (DoE) as the primary environmental regulator;
         mandates environmental clearance for projects. Relevant for all Program activities, particularly
         dredging, drainage works, FSM, and SWM.
    • Environmental                     Conservation             Rules              (ECR)             2023
         Updates project categorization, requires EIAs for high-risk (Red) projects, sets ambient quality
         standards (air, water, noise), includes provisions for consultation. Relevant for canal cleaning,
         waste facilities, FSM systems, and construction activities.
    • Bangladesh                              Water                        Act                        2013
         Provides a framework for integrated water resources management; controls pollution and
         unauthorized use of water bodies. Relevant for canal rehabilitation and preventing untreated
         discharges into rivers/canals.
    • Hazardous          Waste Management Rules (draft; provisions under ECR 2023)
         Governs handling, storage, and disposal of hazardous substances. Relevant to dredged material
         handling (if contaminated), sludge management, and construction waste (oils, solvents, paints).
2. Waste Management
    • Solid                    Waste                 Management                  Rules                2021
         Provides regulatory requirements for waste segregation, collection, transportation, treatment,
         and disposal. Relevant to Program’s MRFs, transfer stations, and canal-cleaning waste streams.
    • E-Waste                             Management                       Rules                      2021
         Addresses electronic waste handling and recycling. Relevant for solid waste systems where e-
         waste may be mixed.
    • Medical                              Waste                        Rules                         2008
         Sets requirements for safe collection, treatment, and disposal of medical waste. Relevant
         indirectly for integrated city SWM systems.
3. Sanitation and Fecal Sludge Management (FSM)
    • National          Strategy      for    Water      Supply     and     Sanitation     2014     (policy)
         Provides guidance on sanitation service delivery, including FSM. Non-binding but relevant for
         decentralized treatment promoted under the Program.
    • National FSM Institutional and Regulatory Framework (draft/operational guidelines)
         Sets roles for DPHE, city corporations, and WASAs in FSM. Relevant for Program’s FSM
         interventions but lacks full legal backing.
4. Occupational and Community Health and Safety (OHS/CHS)
    • Bangladesh Labor Act 2006 (amended 2013, 2018) & Labor Rules 2015
         Regulates occupational health, worker safety, minimum wage, and prohibition of child labor.
         Relevant for construction works, FSM operations, and solid waste facilities.



Final ESSA                                          44                                       January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


    •    Occupational              Health             and           Safety             Policy            2013
         Policy guidance on worker health and safety, though implementation is weak. Relevant to all
         Program contractors and municipal O&M activities.
    • Bangladesh                National            Building           Code            (BNBC)            2020
         Contains provisions on structural safety, fire safety, OHS, and disaster resilience. Relevant for
         design and operation of waste transfer stations, treatment facilities, and drainage infrastructure.
    • Public        Health     (Emergency       Provisions)     Ordinance       1944     (still   in    force)
         Provides authority to control public health hazards. Relevant for managing community health risks
         from dredged sediments and untreated waste.
5. Land Acquisition and Resettlement
    • Acquisition         and    Requisition     of     Immovable       Property     Act      (ARIPA)    2017
         Governs acquisition and compensation for titled landowners. Relevant for canal rehabilitation,
         drainage, and waste facilities that require land clearance. Does not cover non-title holders
         (squatters, encroachers), a gap the Program will address through PAP and DLI.
    • Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition (policy elements under ARIPA)
         Provides guidance on compensation but limited in scope for livelihood restoration.
6. Biodiversity and Natural Resources
    • Bangladesh                            Biodiversity                       Act                       2017
         Protects biodiversity and ecosystems. Relevant for canal corridors and potential ecological
         impacts of dredging.
    • Wildlife               (Conservation             and            Security)           Act            2012
         Protects wildlife and habitats. Relevant if dredging impacts aquatic species in canals.
    • Wetlands          Conservation Act 2000 (part of broader water/ecology rules)
         Provides protection against encroachment and pollution of wetlands. Relevant for
         floodplain/wetland areas around canals.
7. Cultural Heritage and Physical Cultural Resources (PCR)
    • Antiquities                    Act                 1968                (amended                   1976)
         Protects cultural heritage, monuments, and chance finds. Relevant if archaeological or cultural
         artifacts are discovered during canal dredging or construction.
    • Local            Government           Acts          (City       Corporation           Acts        2009)
         Indirectly relevant, as city corporations oversee local heritage and religious sites that could be
         affected during works.
8. Cross-cutting Climate and International Commitments
    • Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) 2009; Mujib Climate Prosperity
         Plan                                                                                      2021–2041
         National policies to strengthen adaptation and resilience. Relevant for flood resilience and
         climate-related measures in canal/drainage works.
    • Paris                Agreement             (ratified            2016);             NDC             2021
         Commitments to reduce GHG emissions and strengthen adaptation. Relevant for solid waste,
         FSM, and methane reduction from uncontrolled dumping.
    • ILO Core Conventions, Convention on Biological Diversity, Basel Convention (hazardous waste)
         Provide overarching obligations, aligning with labor rights, biodiversity protection, and safe waste
         handling




Final ESSA                                           45                                         January 2026
                                                                                                        Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



5.2 ANNEX B – PROGRAM EXCLUSION LIST

The Bank supported PforR will not invest in, support or implement any activity that will or could involve:

    1. Forced evictions of non-title holders and informal occupiers for any activity supported under the
        PforR
    2. Acquisition (and subsequent usage) of land without – (a) paying full compensation at market rates
        plus Resettlement and Rehabilitation assistance to Titleholders as per the ARIPA Act of 2017; and
        (b) Resettlement and Rehabilitation assistance, and, if required, livelihood restoration assistance
        to non-title holders and / or informal occupiers in a manner acceptable to the World Bank.
    3. Air, water, or soil contamination due to project activities leading to significant adverse impacts on
        the health or safety of individuals, communities, or ecosystems
    4. Significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats or critical cultural heritage sites
    5. Activities involving harmful or exploitative form of child labor or forced labor.
    6. Activities causing adverse impacts on cultural property resources
    7. Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under Bangladesh laws or regulations
        or international conventions and agreements.
    8. Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding beer and wine).
    9. Production or trade in tobacco.
    10. Trade in wildlife or wildlife products regulated under CITES.
    11. Production or trade in radioactive materials.
    12. Production or trade in or use of unbounded asbestos fibres.
    13. Production or trade in products containing PCBs.
    14. Production or trade in pharmaceuticals subject to international phase outs or bans.
    15. Production or trade in ozone depleting substances (ODS) subject to international phase out.
    16. Production or trade in pesticides/herbicides subject to international phase outs or bans as agreed
        by GoB based on Stockholm convention.




Final ESSA                                           46                                        January 2026
                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



5.3 ANNEX C – LIST OF PARTICIPANTS IN VARIOUS STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS
    HELD DURING THE ESSA PREPARATION




Final ESSA                                     47                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     48                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     49                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     50                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     51                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     52                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     53                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     54                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     55                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     56                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     57                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)




Final ESSA                                     58                    January 2026
                                                                            Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



Bauniabadh Canal - List of Stakeholders Met During Rapid Social Assessment Survey (in August 2025)

       Chaina
 Sl.   ge              Name      of                     Use of Type of
 N     Numbe    side   Head      of                     structur Structur     Nature of Ownersh
 o     r        ?      HH/Business Moholla              e        es           business  ip Status
       0+100-                       Mirpur-14                    Semi
 1     0+100    Left   WASA         Kalvat              Wasa     Pucca                       Own
                                                        Squatter
                                                        s
       4+700-   Righ   Md. Wahiduz Sagupta              residenc Semi
 2     4+800    t      zaman       Housing project      e        Pucca                       Own
                                                        Squatter
                                                        s
       0+400-          Md.     Iliyas Uttor             residenc Tin-
 3     0+400    Left   Khan           Ibrahimpur        e        made                        Own
                                                        Squatter
       2+600-   Righ                                    s        Tin-
 4     2+700    t      Aiyub Ali      Matikata          Business made         Furniture      Own
                                                        Squatter
       4+600-   Righ   Mst. Halima Sagupta              s        Tin-
 5     4+700    t      Begum        Housing project     Business made         Tea stall      Own
                       Jame Omar
       0+400-          Ibne Khattab                                Semi
 6     0+400    Left   jame Mosjid Chan barir math Mosque          Pucca                     Own
                                    Poschim        Squatter
       2+600-   Righ   Md. A Haque manikdi,     still
                                                   s               Semi
 7     2+700    t      khan         bridge         Business        Pucca      Saw mill       Own
                                                   Residen
                                                   ce cum-
                                                   business
       0+400-          Md. Mamun                   (squatte        Tin-       Constructi
 8     0+400    Left   Islam     Chan barir math r)                made       on             Own
                                                   Squatter
                                 Poschim           s
       2+600-   Righ             manikdi,    still residenc        Tin-
 9     2+700    t      Ridoy     bridge            e               made                      Own
                                                   Squatter
                                                   s
    0+500-             Anayet                      residenc        Tin-
 10 0+600       Left   Hossain   Ruposi Bangla     e               made                      Own
                                                   Residen
    0+800-                                         ce cum-         Tin-
 11 0+900       Left   Bappy     Ruposi housing business           made       Cattle Firm    Own




Final ESSA                                         59                                      January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         (squatte
                                                         r)
                                 Poschim                 Squatter
    2+600-     Righ   Md. Azizul manikdi,          still s           Tin-
 12 2+700      t      Islam      bridge                  Business    made     Tea stall      Own
                                                         Residen
                                                         ce cum-
                      The       Civil                    business
    0+500-            engineers       Mirpur Housing (squatte                 Constructi
 13 0+600      Left   ltd.            State              r)          Pucca    on             Own
                                                         Squatter
    1+100-            Md.      Rana Mirpur          13 s             Tin-
 14 1+200      Left   Mirza           Culvert            Business    made     Tea stall      Own
                      Artical         Poschim
    2+800-            structure       manikdi,     still Boundar
 15 2+900      Left   limited         bridge             y wall      Pucca                   Own
                      DNCC                               DNCC
    1+100-            dumping         Mirpur        13 dumpin        Semi
 16 1+200      Left   Yard            Culvert            g Yard      Pucca                   Own
                                      Mirpur       -15 Squatter
    1+100-            Masum           ,Notun     Bazar s                      Rickshaw
 17 1+200      Left   Billah          Kalvat             Business    Kutcha   garage         Own
                                                         Squatter
    3+300-     Righ                   Beguntola          s           Semi
 18 3+400      t      Tarik Hossain Bridge               Business    Pucca    Work Shop      Tenant
                                                         Squatter
                                                         s
    4+600-     Righ                   Sagupta            residenc    Semi
 19 4+700      t      Poresh Gong Housing project e                  Pucca                   Own
                      Flower City , Poschim              Residen
                      Prop.Md.        vasantek,          ce     on
    1+500-     Righ   Muklesh         Dhaka              private
 20 1+600      t      Hossain         cantonment         land        Pucca                   Own
                                                         Squatter
                                                         s
    4+700-     Righ                   Sagupta            residenc    Tin-
 21 4+800      t      DS Ltd.         Housing project e              made                    Own
                                      Kalshi    Notun
                                      Rasta, Near foot
                                      over
                      DNCC            bridge,bawniab DNCC
    2+600-            Garbage         ad,      pollobi, dumpin       Semi
 22 2+700      Left   Station         Mirpur, Dhaka. g Yard          Pucca                   Own
    4+900-            AI              Sagupta            Boundar
 23 5+000      Left   International Housing project y wall           Pucca                   Own



Final ESSA                                        60                                       January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                         Saleh  MD.
    3+300-       Righ    Zillur     Beguntola        Boundar
 24 3+400        t       Rahman     Bridge           y wall         Pucca                       Own
                                                     Squatter
                         MD.Anisur                   s
    3+500-               Rahman      Sagupta         residenc       Semi
 25 3+600        Left    Howlader    Housing project e              Pucca                       Own
                                                     Residen
                                                     ce cum-
                                                     business
    7+400-       Righ    Md. Mijanur Uttara 8 no (squatte           Tin-
 26 7+500        t       Rahman      bridge          r)             made        Tea stall       Own
                                                     Squatter
                                                     s
    4+600-               Mst.Monow                   residenc       Tin-
 27 4+700        Left    ara Begum   Uttor Kalshi    e              made                        Own


Kajla Canal - List of Stakeholders Met During Rapid Social Assessment Survey (in August 2025)

                          Name of
       Chainag            Head    of
 Sl.   e          side    HH/Busine               Use of Type            of      Nature of Ownershi
 No    Number     ?       ss         Moholla      structure Structures           business p Status
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                   Dakkhin                  business on the
       3+400 -            Md. Chan Kutubkha                 ground/desk/         Fuska
 1     3+600   Left       Mia      li             Vendors table/van=7            Shop           Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
       3+850 -                         Dholaipa             ground/desk/         Vegetabl
 2     4+000   Left       Kamal        r          Vendors table/van=7            e shop         Own
       3+800 -                         Dholaipa
 3     4+000   Left       party office r          Party       Tin-made                          Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                      Dakkhin                 business on the
       0+600 - Righ                   Kutubkha                ground/desk/
 4     0+800   t          Md. Babu    li          Vendors     table/van=7     Cobbler           Own




Final ESSA                                        61                                        January 2026
                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                    Green        Squatter                     Cycle/Va
      0+000 - Righ     Md.          Model        s                            n
 5    0+200   t        Hasmot       Town         Business   Tin-made          Servicing    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+200 -                                               ground/desk/    Fruit
 6    2+400   Left     Md. Sakil    Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7     shop           Own
                                                 Squatter
      1+600 -                                    s
 7    1+800   Left     Sohag        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+000 -                                               ground/desk/
 8    2+200   Left     Hanif        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Halim        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 9    2+600   Left     Hayder       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Pitha        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -          Mohiuddin                            ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 10   2+600   Left     Ahmed        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      0+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Fuska
 11   0+400   Left     Alomgir      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+600 -          Md. Ruhul                 s          ground/desk/      Fuska
 12   2+800   Left     Amin      Kajlar Par      Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                       Md.          Dakkhin                 al No structure
      3+400 -          Mehedi       Kutubkha                but     running   Fuska
 13   3+600   Left     Hasan        li           Vendors    business on the   Shop         Own



Final ESSA                                       62                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                           ground/desk/
                                                           table/van=7


                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
      3+850 -                       Dholaipa               ground/desk/      Cloth
 14   4+000   Left     Khadmul      r            Vendors   table/van=7       Shop       Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
      3+800 -          Md.          Dholaipa               ground/desk/      Juice
 15   4+000   Left     Jakariya     r            Vendors   table/van=7       shop       Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
      3+850 -          Md. Umor Dholaipa                   ground/desk/      Fruit
 16   4+000   Left     Faruk    r                Vendors   table/van=7       shop       Own
                                                 Residenc
                                    Green        e      on
      0+200 - Righ                  Model        private
 17   0+400   t        Md. Awlad    Town         land      Pucca                        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
      2+200 -          Md.                                 ground/desk/
 18   2+400   Left     Burhan       Kajlar Par   Vendors table/van=7         Cobbler    Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                 Squatter business on the
      1+600 -          Suma                      s         ground/desk/      Fuska
 19   1+800   Left     khatun       Kajlar Par   Business table/van=7        Shop       Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
      2+400 -                                              ground/desk/
 20   2+600   Left     Sowkat Ali   Kajlar Par   Vendors table/van=7         Fish       Own




Final ESSA                                       63                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Chicken
 21   2+200   Left     Vutto        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 22   2+600   Left     Asrat        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 23   2+400   Left     Md. Amin     Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+600 -          Md. Sohel                 s          ground/desk/      Juice
 24   2+800   Left     Mia       Kajlar Par      Business   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                 Dakkhin                    business on the
      3+400 -          Md. Ansar Kutubkha                   ground/desk/
 25   3+600   Left     Ali       li              Vendors    table/van=7       Cobbler      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Cloth
 26   4+000   Left     Jalal        r            Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+800 -          Abdur        Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 27   4+000   Left     Rashid       r            Vendors    table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
      3+850 -          Md. Abu Dholaipa                     but     running   Fruit
 28   4+000   Left     Sayed   r                 Vendors    business on the   shop         Own



Final ESSA                                       64                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                 Squatter
      1+600 -                                    s
 29   1+800   Left     Fahim        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Grocery      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+200 -          Md.                                  ground/desk/      Fuska
 30   2+400   Left     Subhan       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                       Squatter   business on the
      2+600 - Righ     Motaleb                   s          ground/desk/
 31   2+800   t        Mollah       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -          Abdur                     s          ground/desk/
 32   2+200   Left     Rashid       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Fruit
 33   2+600   Left     Jolil        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+200 -          Md. Abdul                 s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 34   2+400   Left     Malek     Kajlar Par      Business   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 35   2+600   Left     Mamun        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                 Dakkhin                    al No structure
      3+600 -          Md. Amzad Kutubkha                   but     running   Fruit
 36   3+700   Left     Hossain   li              Vendors    business on the   shop         Own


Final ESSA                                       65                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fuska
 37   4+000   Left     Md. Kholil   r            Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Shekh                                business on the
      3+850 -          Athiar       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 38   4+000   Left     Rahamn       r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+200 -          Md.                                  ground/desk/
 39   2+400   Left     Mahfuz       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                 Squatter
      2+600 -          Md. Abdul                 s                            Fuska
 40   2+800   Left     Aziz      Kajlar Par      Business   Semi Pucca        Shop         Own
                                                 Squatter
                                                 s
      1+600 -                                    residenc
 41   1+800   Left     Tamim        Kajlar Par   e          Tin-made                       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/    Fruit
 42   2+600   Left     Kuddus       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7     shop           Own
                                                 Squatter
      2+000 -          Md. Abdul                 s
 43   2+200   Left     Kuddus    Kajlar Par      Business   Tin-made        Tea stall      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/    Vegetabl
 44   2+200   Left     Nurjahan     Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     e shop         Own




Final ESSA                                       66                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Cloth
 45   2+400   Left     Mithu        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -          Uttam                                ground/desk/
 46   2+600   Left     Kumar        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Cobbler     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+800 -          Md.          Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 47   4+000   Left     Mamun        r            Vendors    table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                                  business on the
      3+700 -          Majibur      Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 48   0+800   Left     Mollah       r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+850 -          Nd           Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 49   4+000   Left     Junayed      r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                                  business on the
      2+200 -          Mahmud                               ground/desk/
 50   2+400   Left     Hasan       Kajlar Par    Vendors    table/van=7       Pitha       Own
                       Md. Manik
                       (Secretary)
      1+600 -          BNP party
 51   1+800   Left     office      Kajlar Par    Party      Tin-made                      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/    Cloth
 52   2+600   Left     Kholil       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7     Shop          Own



Final ESSA                                       67                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 53   2+200   Left     Pearali      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 54   2+200   Left     Rafiq uddin Kajlar Par    Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+200 -          Mst. Feroja               s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 55   2+400   Left     Begum       Kajlar Par    Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 56   2+600   Left     Md. Suyel    Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+600 - Righ     Md.                                  ground/desk/
 57   2+800   t        Mostofa      Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Halim       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 58   4+000   Left     Mosarrof     r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                 Squatter
      3+700 -          Md. Saiful Dholaipa       s                          Meat
 59   0+800   Left     Islam      r              Business   Tin-made        shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+850 -          Mst.         Dholaipa                ground/desk/    Pan-
 60   4+000   Left     Sabina       r            Vendors    table/van=7     supari        Own




Final ESSA                                       68                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                 Squatter
      1+600 -                                    s                            Vangari
 61   1+800   Left     Asmot        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+200 -                                               ground/desk/      Cloth
 62   2+400   Left     Md. Fahim    Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+600 - Righ     Md. Liton                            ground/desk/      Juice
 63   2+800   t        Mia       Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Fuska
 64   2+600   Left     Joynal       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                 Squatter
      2+000 -          Md.                       s
 65   2+200   Left     Alomgir      Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 66   2+200   Left     Salam        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Cloth
 67   2+400   Left     Md. Tala     Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 68   2+600   Left     Jasimuddi    Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Hotel        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
      3+800 -                       Dholaipa                but     running   Shoe
 69   4+000   Left     Shopon       r            Vendors    business on the   Shop         Own



Final ESSA                                       69                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      3+700 -          Md. Ruhul Dholaipa        s          ground/desk/      Chicken
 70   0+800   Left     Amin      r               Business   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 71   4+000   Left     Ayub Ali     r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -          Abul                      s          ground/desk/      Fruit
 72   2+200   Left     kashem       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+200 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 73   2+400   Left     Md. Hasib    Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+600 -          Md. Abul                             ground/desk/      Fruit
 74   2+800   Left     Kalam    Kajlar Par       Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                 Squatter
      1+600 -                                    s                            Vegetabl
 75   1+800   Left     Md. Nabi     Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 76   2+200   Left     Amena        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     Pitha         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
      2+400 -                                               but     running Meat
 77   2+600   Left     Halim        Kajlar Par   Vendors    business on the shop          Own


Final ESSA                                       70                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 78   2+400   Left     Mst. Putol   Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 79   2+600   Left     Jafor Ali    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                 Squatter
      3+700 -          Md.          Dholaipa     s                          Meat
 80   0+800   Left     Jahangir     r            Business   Tin-made        shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/    Fruit
 81   4+000   Left     Asad         r            Vendors    table/van=7     shop          Own
                                                 Squatter
      1+600 -                                    s                          Meat
 82   1+800   Left     Akram        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made        shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+200 -                                               ground/desk/    Vegetabl
 83   2+400   Left     Md. Raju     Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7     e shop        Own
                                                 Squatter
      2+600 -          Md. Selim                 s
 84   2+800   Left     Hossain   Kajlar Par      Business   Tin-made        Tea stall     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/    Cloth
 85   2+200   Left     Md. payel    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     Shop          Own
                                                 Squatter
      2+000 -                                    s
 86   2+200   Left     Sobuj        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Hotel       Own



Final ESSA                                       71                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 87   2+600   Left     Salam        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
      2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 88   2+400   Left     Siam         Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 89   2+600   Left     Abu Musha Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 90   4+000   Left     Haidar Ali   r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Pan-
 91   4+000   Left     Rakib        r            Vendors    table/van=7       supari      Own
                                                 Squatter
      3+700 -          Md. Suman Dholaipa        s                            Meat
 92   0+800   Left     Mia       r               Business   Tin-made          shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      3+850 -          Karim        Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 93   4+000   Left     Molla        r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+200 -          Md. Abdul                            ground/desk/      Fuska
 94   2+400   Left     Kadir     Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own




Final ESSA                                       72                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                       Md.                       Squatter
      2+600 -          Sorrowar                  s
 95   2+800   Left     Hossain      Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                 Squatter                     Cycle/Va
      1+600 -                                    s                            n
 96   1+800   Left     Sobuj     Kajlar Par      Business   Tin-made          Servicing    Own
      2+000 -          BNP party
 97   2+200   Left     office    Kajlar Par      Party      Tin-made                       Own
                                                 Squatter
      2+000 -                                    s                            Pan-
 98   2+200   Left     Korim        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          supari       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
      2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 99   2+600   Left     Kundu        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Cobbler      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 10   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 0    2+400   Left     Romjan       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 10   2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    2+600   Left     Ruhul Amin Kajlar Par     Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 10   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 2    4+000   Left     Khoka        r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                       Md.                       Squatter
 10   3+700 -          Shahjahan    Dholaipa     s                            Meat
 3    0+800   Left     Mia          r            Business   Tin-made          shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 10   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/    Fruit
 4    4+000   Left     Asif Khan    r            Vendors    table/van=7     shop           Own




Final ESSA                                       73                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                 Squatter
 10   1+600 -                                    s                            Fuska
 5    1+800   Left     Ajmir        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 10   2+200 -          Md.                                  ground/desk/      Pan-
 6    2+400   Left     Mostafa      Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       supari       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                                  business on the
 10   2+600 -          Delowat                              ground/desk/      Fruit
 7    2+800   Left     Hossain      Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                 Squatter
 10   2+000 -                                    s                            Pan-
 8    2+200   Left     Khokon       Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          supari       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 10   2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 9    2+200   Left     Shahid       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 11   3+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Juice
 0    2+400   Left     Chunu        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 11   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Cloth
 1    2+400   Left     Sohidul      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 11   2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Fuska
 2    2+600   Left     Md. Hanif    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
 11   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                but     running   Vegetabl
 3    4+000   Left     Alomgir      r            Vendors    business on the   e shop       Own



Final ESSA                                       74                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                 Squatter
 11   3+700 -          Md.          Dholaipa     s
 4    0+800   Left     Showpan      r            Business   Tin-made          Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 11   3+850 -          Ahssn        Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 5    4+000   Left     Habib        r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 11   2+200 -          Md. Azad                             ground/desk/      Fruit
 6    2+400   Left     Kobir    Kajlar Par       Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                                  business on the
 11   2+600 -          Alamgir                              ground/desk/      Fruit
 7    2+800   Left     Hossain      Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                 Squatter
 11   1+600 -                                    s                            Sports
 8    1+800   Left     Robiul       Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 11   2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Pan-
 9    2+600   Left     Korim        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       supari       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 12   2+000 -          Md. Mojid                 s          ground/desk/
 0    2+200   Left     Mia       Kajlar Par      Business   table/van=7       Jhal Muri    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 12   2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 1    2+200   Left     Sehab        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own



Final ESSA                                       75                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                 Squatter
 12   2+200 -                                    s                            Meat
 2    2+400   Left     Md. Nasu     Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 12   2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 3    2+600   Left     Rased        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 12   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 4    4+000   Left     Mst. Renu    r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                 Squatter
 12   3+700 -          Md.          Dholaipa     s
 5    0+800   Left     Mostafa      r            Business   Tin-made          Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 12   3+850 -          Abdul        Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 6    4+000   Left     Malek        r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 12   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 7    4+000   Left     Ahad Islam   r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 12   2+200 -          Md. Rubel                            ground/desk/
 8    2+400   Left     Hossain   Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       Grocery     Own
                                                 Squatter
 12   1+600 -                                    s
 9    1+800   Left     Md. Harun    Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made        Hotel         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 13   2+600 -          Md. Manik                            ground/desk/
 0    2+800   Left     Mia       Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7     Medicine      Own




Final ESSA                                       76                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 13   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 1    2+400   Left     Misir ali    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Pitha       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 13   2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 2    2+600   Left     Bablu        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Grocery     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 13   2+000 -                                               ground/desk/      Fuska
 3    2+200   Left     Khokon       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 13   2+000 -          Mofij                     s          ground/desk/
 4    2+200   Left     Vandari      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Pitha       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 13   2+200 -          Md.                       s          ground/desk/
 5    2+400   Left     Solamain     Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Dry fish    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 13   2+400 -          Abdul                                ground/desk/
 6    2+600   Left     Hossen       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 13   3+800 -          Md.          Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 7    4+000   Left     Ataullah     r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                 Squatter   al No structure
 13   3+700 -          Md.          Dholaipa     s          but     running
 8    0+800   Left     Masum        r            Business   business on the   Fish        Own



Final ESSA                                       77                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 13   2+200 -                                               ground/desk/
 9    2+400   Left     Jobbar       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7     Fish           Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 14   2+200 -                                               ground/desk/    Shoe
 0    2+400   Left     Md. Akkas    Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7     Shop           Own
                                                 Squatter
 14   1+600 -                                    s
 1    1+800   Left     Sumon        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                       Squatter   business on the
 14   2+600 -          Anowar                    s          ground/desk/
 2    2+800   Left     Hossain      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 14   2+000 -                                               ground/desk/      Fuska
 3    2+200   Left     Eyasin       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 14   2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Cloth
 4    2+600   Left     Shoodul      Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 14   2+000 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 5    2+200   Left     Tuhin        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                 Squatter   al No structure
 14   2+200 -          Mst.                      s          but     running   Cloth
 6    2+400   Left     Amena        Kajlar Par   Business   business on the   Shop         Own


Final ESSA                                       78                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 14   2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 7    2+600   Left     Mijan mia    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 14   3+800 -                    Dholaipa                   ground/desk/      Fuska
 8    4+000   Left     Md. Sumon r               Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                 Squatter
 14   3+700 -          Md. Rubel Dholaipa        s
 9    0+800   Left     Hossain   r               Business   Tin-made          Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 15   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 0    4+000   Left     Abdullah     r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 15   2+200 -          Md. Kobir                            ground/desk/
 1    2+400   Left     Hossain   Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       Grocery     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 15   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Fruit
 2    2+400   Left     Rokeya       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                 Squatter
 15   1+600 -                                    s                            Meat
 3    1+800   Left     Sujon        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          shop        Own
                                                 Squatter
 15   2+600 -          Md. Ismail                s
 4    2+800   Left     Hossain    Kajlar Par     Business   Tin-made          Hotel       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
 15   2+400 -                                               al No structure Vegetabl
 5    2+600   Left     Faruk        Kajlar Par   Vendors    but     running e shop        Own


Final ESSA                                       79                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 15   2+200 -          Munir                     s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 6    2+400   Left     Hossain      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 15   2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Fuska
 7    2+200   Left     Shahin       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 15   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Chicken
 8    2+400   Left     Md. Ali      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 15   2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 9    2+600   Left     Nur Alam     Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 16   3+000 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 0    4+000   Left     Jamal        r            Vendors    table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                 Squatter
 16   3+700 -          Md. Jamal Dholaipa        s
 1    0+800   Left     Hossain   r               Business   Tin-made        Fish           Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 16   3+850 -          Amir         Dholaipa                ground/desk/    Fruit
 2    4+000   Left     Hossain      r            Vendors    table/van=7     shop           Own
                                                 Squatter
 16   1+600 -                                    s                            Flexi
 3    1+800   Left     Jony         Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Load         Own



Final ESSA                                       80                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 16   2+200 -          Md. Sumon                            ground/desk/      Fruit
 4    2+400   Left     Hossain   Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 16   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Meat
 5    2+400   Left     Saddam       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 16   2+600 -          Md. Babu                  s          ground/desk/      Vangari
 6    2+800   Left     Islam    Kajlar Par       Business   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 16   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 7    2+400   Left     Jamal        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 16   2+000 -          Samsun                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 8    2+200   Left     Nahar        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 16   2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 9    2+600   Left     Zakir        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 17   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 0    2+400   Left     Liton        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                 Squatter   al No structure
 17   2+400 -                                    s          but     running   Vegetabl
 1    2+600   Left     Shopon       Kajlar Par   Business   business on the   e shop      Own



Final ESSA                                       81                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 17   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Shoe
 2    4+000   Left     Md. Jakir    r            Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 17   3+700 -          Md. Rahim Dholaipa        s          ground/desk/
 3    0+800   Left     Mollah    r               Business   table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 17   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 4    4+000   Left     Alomgir      r            Vendors    table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 17   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 5    4+000   Left     Juel Rana    r            Vendors    table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 17   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Chicken
 6    2+400   Left     Sufian       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 17   2+600 -          Md. Ismail                s          ground/desk/
 7    2+800   Left     Hossen     Kajlar Par     Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                 Squatter
 17   2+000 -          Md. Jalaj                 s
 8    2+200   Left     Uddin     Kajlar Par      Business   Tin-made        Tea stall      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                 Squatter   al No structure
 17   2+200 -                                    s          but     running
 9    2+400   Left     Md. Bino     Kajlar Par   Business   business on the Fish           Own


Final ESSA                                       82                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 18   2+400 -                                               ground/desk/      Fuska
 0    2+600   Left     Rezaul       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 18   2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Fruit
 1    2+600   Left     Usuf Ali     Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 18   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Cloth
 2    4+000   Left     Md. Babul    r            Vendors    table/van=7       Shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 18   3+700 -          Md. Raju Dholaipa         s          ground/desk/
 3    0+800   Left     Ahmed    r                Business   table/van=7       Fish       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 18   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 4    2+400   Left     Rahad        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Grocery    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 18   2+600 -          Md.                       s          ground/desk/
 5    2+800   Left     Mamun        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Flower     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 18   2+200 -          Md.                       s          ground/desk/
 6    2+400   Left     Moinuddin    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Fish       Own



Final ESSA                                       83                                     January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                               Polyethene/Trip
                                                               al No structure
                                                               but     running
                                                               business on the
 18   3+800 -                          Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 7    4+000   Left     Md. Tomal       r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                               Polyethene/Trip
                                                               al No structure
                                                               but     running
                       Md.                          Squatter   business on the
 18   3+700 -          Alamgir         Dholaipa     s          ground/desk/
 8    0+800   Left     Hossain         r            Business   table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                               Polyethene/Trip
                                                               al No structure
                                                               but     running
                                                               business on the
 18   3+850 -          Sagor           Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 9    4+000   Left     Hossain         r            Vendors    table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                    Squatter
 19   2+200 -                                       s                          Chicken
 0    2+400   Left     Selim           Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made        Shop          Own
                                                               Polyethene/Trip
                                                               al No structure
                                                               but     running
                                                    Squatter   business on the
 19   2+600 -          Md.        Al                s          ground/desk/    Pan-
 1    2+800   Left     Amin            Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     supari        Own
                                                    Squatter
 19   2+000 -          Golam                        s                            Cloth
 2    2+200   Left     Azam            Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Shop        Own
                                                               Polyethene/Trip
                                                               al No structure
                                                               but     running
                                                    Squatter   business on the
 19   2+200 -                                       s          ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Md. Aziz        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                               Polyethene/Trip
                                                               al No structure
                                                               but     running
                                                               business on the
 19   2+400 -                                                  ground/desk/      Fuska
 4    2+600   Left     Md. Sumon Kajlar Par         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                               Polyethene/Trip
                                                               al No structure
 19   3+800 -                          Dholaipa                but     running   Fuska
 5    4+000   Left     Md. Sohel       r            Vendors    business on the   Shop        Own



Final ESSA                                          84                                      January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 19   3+700 -          Md. Jahid Dholaipa        s          ground/desk/    Chicken
 6    0+800   Left     Hasan     r               Business   table/van=7     Shop           Own
                                                 Squatter
 19   2+200 -                                    s                            Shoe
 7    2+400   Left     Hasan        Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 19   2+600 -          Bongkim                   s          ground/desk/
 8    2+800   Left     Chandra      Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     Cobbler        Own
                                                 Squatter
 19   2+000 -                                    s
 9    2+200   Left     Sowkot       Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 20   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 0    2+400   Left     Kawser       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 20   2+400 -                                               ground/desk/
 1    2+600   Left     Akash        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Cobbler      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 20   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 2    4+000   Left     Md. Monir    r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 20   3+700 -          Md. Limon Dholaipa        s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 3    0+800   Left     Hasan     r               Business   table/van=7       e shop       Own



Final ESSA                                       85                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 20   3+850 -          Masbah       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 4    4+000   Left     Uddin        r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 20   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Chicken
 5    4+000   Left     Md. Azad     r            Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 20   2+600 -          Md. Harun                            ground/desk/      Fruit
 6    2+800   Left     Or Rashid Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                 Squatter
 20   2+000 -          Md.                       s
 7    2+200   Left     Badsha       Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made        Tea stall     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 20   2+200 -          Mst.                      s          ground/desk/
 8    2+400   Left     Rahela    Kajlar Par      Business   table/van=7     Pitha         Own
 20   2+400 -          BNP Party
 9    2+600   Left     Office    Kajlar Par      Party      Tin-made                      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 21   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Fruit
 0    2+400   Left     Nasir        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 21   3+800 -          Mst.         Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    4+000   Left     Halima       r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
 21   3+700 -                       Dholaipa
 2    0+800   Left     DSCC         r            Dustbin    Pucca                         Own




Final ESSA                                       86                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 21   3+850 -          Md. Yousf Dholaipa                   ground/desk/      Chicken
 3    4+000   Left     Ali       r               Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 21   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 4    2+400   Left     Rasel        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 21   2+600 -          Md. Babur                            ground/desk/      Biscuit
 5    2+800   Left     Ali       Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       business     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 21   2+000 -                                               ground/desk/
 6    2+200   Left     Monir        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Jhal Muri    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 21   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 7    2+400   Left     Md. Sumon Kajlar Par      Business   table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                 Squatter
 21   2+400 -                                    s                            Cloth
 8    2+600   Left     Nasima       Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 21   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/    Vegetabl
 9    4+000   Left     Md. Aziz     r            Vendors    table/van=7     e shop         Own
                                                 Residenc
                                                 e      on
 22   3+700 -          Md. Japani Dholaipa       private
 0    0+800   Left     Mia        r              land      Tin-made                        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
 22   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                al No structure Vegetabl
 1    4+000   Left     Md. Jabed    r            Vendors    but     running e shop         Own


Final ESSA                                       87                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 22   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 2    2+400   Left     Sabbir       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Grocery      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                                  business on the
 22   2+600 -          Chunno                               ground/desk/
 3    2+800   Left     Mia          Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Cosmetic     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 22   2+000 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 4    2+200   Left     Md. Ismail   Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 22   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 5    2+400   Left     Md. Santo    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 22   2+400 -          Rojina                    s          ground/desk/      Pan-
 6    2+600   Left     Akter        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       supari       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 22   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 7    4+000   Left     Abdul Bari   r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 22   3+700 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 8    0+800   Left     Md. Selim    r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own



Final ESSA                                       88                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 22   3+850 -                        Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 9    4+000   Left     Md. Naim      r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                  Squatter   business on the
 23   2+200 -                                     s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 0    2+400   Left     Muazzem       Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 23   2+600 -          Md. Akkas                             ground/desk/      Cloth
 1    2+800   Left     Ali       Kajlar Par       Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 23   2+000 -                                                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 2    2+200   Left     Nazma         Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                  Squatter   business on the
 23   2+200 -                                     s          ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Gopal         Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 23   3+800 -                        Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 4    4+000   Left     Rabeya        r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 23   3+700 -          Md.     Idris Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 5    0+800   Left     Ali           r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
 23   3+850 -          Md.           Dholaipa                but     running   Vegetabl
 6    4+000   Left     Mukbul        r            Vendors    business on the   e shop      Own



Final ESSA                                        89                                      January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 23   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 7    2+400   Left     Akter        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 23   2+600 -          Md. Samad                            ground/desk/      Cloth
 8    2+800   Left     Mia       Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 23   2+000 -          Md. Abul                             ground/desk/
 9    2+200   Left     Basar    Kajlar Par       Vendors    table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Tofazzal                  Squatter   business on the
 24   2+200 -          Hossan                    s          ground/desk/
 0    2+400   Left     Mulla        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 24   2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 1    2+600   Left     Rakib        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Tailor       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 24   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 2    4+000   Left     Lotif        r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 24   3+700 -          Md. Rafiq Dholaipa                   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 3    0+800   Left     Mia       r               Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own



Final ESSA                                       90                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 24   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 4    4+000   Left     Md. Haris    r            Vendors    table/van=7     Dry fish      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 24   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/
 5    2+400   Left     Aziz         Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     Pitha         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 24   2+600 -                                               ground/desk/
 6    2+800   Left     Md. Hasan    Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7     Fish          Own
                                                 Squatter
 24   2+200 -                                    s
 7    2+400   Left     Md. Arif     Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Cosmetic    Own
                                                 Squatter
 24   2+200 -                                    s                            Vegetabl
 8    2+400   Left     Md. Jalal    Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 24   2+400 -          Sahabuddi                 s          ground/desk/      Cloth
 9    2+600   Left     n            Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 25   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fuska
 0    4+000   Left     Md. Abbas    r            Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                                  business on the
 25   3+700 -          Aminul       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    0+800   Left     Islam        r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
 25   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                but     running   Meat
 2    4+000   Left     Md. Lotfur   r            Vendors    business on the   shop        Own



Final ESSA                                       91                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 25   2+200 -                                               ground/desk/      Fruit
 3    2+400   Left     Motin        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.       Kajlar Par                 business on the
 25   1+800 -          Shahin    Uttar                      ground/desk/      Fuska
 4    2+000   Left     Alam      Para       Vendors         table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                            Squatter
 25   2+200 -          Md. Yeyad            s                                 Vegetabl
 5    2+400   Left     Ali       Kajlar Par Business        Tin-made          e shop      Own
                                            Squatter
 25   2+200 - Righ                          s                                 Chicken
 6    2+400   t        Md. Sohid Kajlar Par Business        Tin-made          Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 25   2+400 -          Omar                      s          ground/desk/      Fuska
 7    2+600   Left     Faruk        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                                  business on the
 25   3+800 -          Motahar      Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 8    4+000   Left     Ali          r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.   Ali                            business on the
 25   3+700 -          Mohamma Dholaipa                     ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 9    0+800   Left     d         r               Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 26   3+850 -          Abdur        Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Meat
 0    4+000   Left     Rahamn       r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own



Final ESSA                                       92                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 26   2+200 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    2+400   Left     Habib        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                  Kajlar Par                business on the
 26   1+800 -          Md.   Popi Uttar                     ground/desk/      Fuska
 2    2+000   Left     Mia        Para       Vendors        table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                             Squatter
 26   2+200 -                                s                                Vegetabl
 3    2+400   Left     Md. Yasin  Kajlar Par Business       Tin-made          e shop       Own
                                             Squatter
 26   2+200 - Righ                           s
 4    2+400   t        Md. Masud Kajlar Par Business        Tin-made          Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 26   2+400 -          Md. Jewel                 s          ground/desk/      Fuska
 5    2+600   Left     Hossain   Kajlar Par      Business   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 26   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 6    4+000   Left     Robin        r            Vendors    table/van=7       Jhal Muri    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 26   3+700 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Old
 7    0+800   Left     Md. Nuru     r            Vendors    table/van=7       Furniture    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 26   3+850 -                    Dholaipa                   ground/desk/      Meat
 8    4+000   Left     Md. Sumon r               Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                 Squatter   al No structure
 26   2+200 -                                    s          but     running   Vegetabl
 9    2+400   Left     Mojid        Kajlar Par   Business   business on the   e shop       Own



Final ESSA                                       93                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                  Kajlar Par Squatter
 27   1+800 -          Md. Nazrul Uttar      s
 0    2+000   Left     Islam      Para       Business       Tin-made          Hotel       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 27   2+400 -                                    s          ground/desk/      Cloth
 1    2+600   Left     Md. Ripon    Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 27   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 2    4+000   Left     Tuhin        r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 27   3+700 -          Md. Hanif Dholaipa                   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 3    0+800   Left     Ali       r               Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 27   3+850 -          Abdul        Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 4    4+000   Left     Monnan       r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 27   2+200 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 5    2+400   Left     Monir     Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                 Kajlar Par      Squatter
 27   1+800 -          Md. Kabir Uttar           s                          Cloth
 6    2+000   Left     Ahammad Para              Business   Tin-made        Shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 27   2+400 -          Md. Belel                            ground/desk/
 7    2+600   Left     Hossain   Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7     Tailor        Own



Final ESSA                                       94                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 27   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 8    4+000   Left     Md. Arif     r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.                       Squatter   business on the
 27   3+700 -          Badasha      Dholaipa     s          ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 9    0+800   Left     Mia          r            Business   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 28   3+850 -          Md.          Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 0    4+000   Left     Muslim       r            Vendors    table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 28   2+200 -                                               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    2+400   Left     Roton        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                       Md.          Kajlar Par   Squatter
 28   1+800 -          Delowar      Uttar        s
 2    2+000   Left     Hossain      Para         Business   Tin-made          Hotel       Own
                                                 Squatter
 28   2+400 -                                    s                            Fuska
 3    2+600   Left     Julhas       Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 28   3+200 - Righ     Md.          Dakkhin                 ground/desk/      Juice
 4    2+400   t        Morsalin     Jatrabari    Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 28   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 5    4+000   Left     Milon        r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
 28   3+850 -          Amzad        Dholaipa                but     running   Fruit
 6    4+000   Left     Hossain      r            Vendors    business on the   shop        Own



Final ESSA                                       95                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 28   2+200 -                                    s          ground/desk/    Pan-
 7    2+400   Left     Rohim        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     supari         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                       Md.          Kajlar Par Squatter     business on the
 28   1+800 -          Mobarok      Uttar      s            ground/desk/
 8    2+000   Left     Mia          Para       Business     table/van=7     Fish           Own
                                               Squatter
 28   2+400 -                                  s                              Fuska
 9    2+600   Left     Dipu         Kajlar Par Business     Tin-made          Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 29   3+200 - Righ     Md.          Dakkhin                 ground/desk/      Work
 0    2+400   t        Shakhu       Jatrabari    Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 29   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    4+000   Left     Alim         r            Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 29   3+850 -                     Dholaipa                  ground/desk/      Fruit
 2    4+000   Left     Md. Tusher r              Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                            Squatter        business on the
 29   2+200 -                               s               ground/desk/      Pan-
 3    2+400   Left     Md. Jahed Kajlar Par Business        table/van=7       supari       Own
                                 Kajlar Par Squatter
 29   1+800 -          Md. Faruk Uttar      s
 4    2+000   Left     Mia       Para       Business        Tin-made          Tea stall    Own



Final ESSA                                       96                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                 Squatter
 29   2+400 -          Md. Helal                 s
 5    2+600   Left     Uddin     Kajlar Par      Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                    Dakkhin                 business on the
 29   3+200 -          Md.          Kutubkha                ground/desk/
 6    2+400   Left     Mamun        li           Vendors    table/van=7       Jhal Muri    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 29   3+800 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/
 7    4+000   Left     Md. Siyam    r            Vendors    table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 29   3+850 -                       Dholaipa                ground/desk/      Fruit
 8    4+000   Left     Md. Aksh     r            Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                    Kajlar Par   Squatter
 29   1+400 - Righ                  Uttar        s
 9    1+600   t        Sukkur Ali   Para         Business   Tin-made          Hotel        Own
                                                 Squatter
 30   2+200 -                                    s                            Meat
 0    2+400   Left     Al Amin      Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          shop    Own
                                                                              Lock &
                                 Kajlar Par Squatter                          Key
 30   1+800 -          Md. Abdul Uttar      s                                 Mechani
 1    2+000   Left     Latif     Para       Business        Tin-made          cs      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                 Squatter   business on the
 30   2+400 -          Shohidul                  s          ground/desk/
 2    2+600   Left     Islam        Kajlar Par   Business   table/van=7     Halim          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 30   3+200 -          Md. Abdur Dakkhin                    ground/desk/    Cloth
 3    2+400   Left     Rahman    Jatrabari       Vendors    table/van=7     Shop           Own




Final ESSA                                       97                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 30   3+850 -          Md.          Dholaipa                ground/desk/    Fruit
 4    4+000   Left     Romjan       r            Vendors    table/van=7     shop           Own
                                                 Squatter
 30   2+200 -                                    s                            Vegetabl
 5    2+400   Left     Rahima       Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          e shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 30   2+200 -          Mamun                                ground/desk/
 6    2+400   Left     shek      Kajlar Par      Vendors    table/van=7     Fish           Own
                                 Kajlar Par      Squatter
 30   1+800 -          Md. Jasim Uttar           s                          Vangari
 7    2+000   Left     Ahmed     Para            Business   Tin-made        Shop           Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                 Dakkhin                    business on the
 30   3+200 -          Md. Masud Kutubkha                   ground/desk/    Juice
 8    2+400   Left     Mia       li         Vendors         table/van=7     shop           Own
                                            Squatter
 30   2+200 -                               s                                 Vegetabl
 9    2+400   Left     Rasida    Kajlar Par Business        Tin-made          e shop       Own
                                 Kajlar Par Squatter
 31   1+800 -          Md. Dulal Uttar      s
 0    2+000   Left     Mia       Para       Business        Tin-made          Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 31   2+200 -          Abdul                                ground/desk/
 1    2+400   Left     Malek        Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                 Dakkhin                    business on the
 31   3+200 -          Md. Jowel Kutubkha                   ground/desk/      Fruit
 2    2+400   Left     Rana      li              Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                 Squatter
 31   2+200 -                                    s                            Meat
 3    2+400   Left     Nur Alam     Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          shop         Own




Final ESSA                                       98                                       January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                 Kajlar Par Squatter
 31   1+800 -          BNP Parti Uttar      s
 4    2+000   Left     Office    Para       Business       Tin-made          Hotel       Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 31   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 5    2+400   Left     Sujad        Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                  Dakkhin                  business on the
 31   3+200 -          Md. Akther Kutubkha                 ground/desk/      Fuska
 6    2+400   Left     Hossain    li           Vendors     table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                               Squatter
 31   2+200 -                                  s                             Vegetabl
 7    2+400   Left     Abbas        Kajlar Par Business    Tin-made          e shop      Own
                                    Kajlar Par Squatter
 31   1+800 -                       Uttar      s                             Work
 8    2+000   Left     Md. Sani     Para       Business    Tin-made          Shop        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 31   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/
 9    2+400   Left     Mofiz khan   Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                    Dakkhin                business on the
 32   3+200 -                       Kutubkha               ground/desk/      Fuska
 0    2+400   Left     Md. Joynal   li      Vendors        table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                            Squatter
 32   2+200 -                               s                                Pan-
 1    2+400   Left     Lokman    Kajlar Par Business       Tin-made          supari      Own
                                 Kajlar Par Squatter
 32   1+800 -          Md. Nirob Uttar      s
 2    2+000   Left     Mia       Para       Business       Tin-made        Tea stall     Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 32   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Raihan       Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7     Fish          Own




Final ESSA                                       99                                     January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                     Dakkhin                 business on the
 32   3+200 -          Md.           Kutubkha                ground/desk/
 4    2+400   Left     Soharab Ali   li    Vendors           table/van=7     Pitha          Own
                                           Squatter
 32   2+200 -                              s
 5    2+400   Left     Sohel    Kajlar Par Business          Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                Kajlar Par Squatter
 32   1+800 -          Md. Aziz Uttar      s
 6    2+000   Left     Mia      Para       Business          Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 32   2+200 -          Abul                                  ground/desk/      Fruit
 7    2+400   Left     Hossain       Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                     Dakkhin                 business on the
 32   3+200 -          Mohamma       Kutubkha                ground/desk/      Fruit
 8    2+400   Left     d Ali         li    Vendors           table/van=7       shop         Own
                                           Squatter
 32   2+200 -          Atikur              s                                   Meat
 9    2+400   Left     Rahman   Kajlar Par Business          Tin-made          shop         Own
                                Kajlar Par Squatter
 33   1+800 -          Md. Babu Uttar      s                                   Vegetabl
 0    2+000   Left     Mia      Para       Business          Tin-made          e shop       Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 33   2+200 -                                                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    2+400   Left     Halim         Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                             Polyethene/Trip
                                                             al No structure
                                                             but     running
                                                             business on the
 33   3+200 - Righ     Md.           Dakkhin                 ground/desk/      Cloth
 2    2+400   t        Maksud        Jatrabari    Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                  Squatter
 33   2+200 - Righ                                s
 3    2+400   t        Rifat         Kajlar Par   Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own




Final ESSA                                        100                                      January 2026
                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                      Kajlar Par              business on the
 33   1+800 -          Md.      Sajib Uttar                   ground/desk/
 4    2+000   Left     Mia            Para       Vendors      table/van=7       Jhal Muri    Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 33   2+200 -                                                 ground/desk/      Fuska
 5    2+400   Left     Rahat Ali      Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                       Md.                                    business on the
 33   3+200 -          Minhajur  Dakkhin                      ground/desk/      Cloth
 6    2+400   Left     Rahman    Jatrabari         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                 Kajlar Par        Squatter
 33   1+800 -          Md. Jasim Uttar             s
 7    2+000   Left     Sarkar    Para              Business   Tin-made          Tea stall    Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 33   2+200 -                                                 ground/desk/      Juice
 8    2+400   Left     Raisul         Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 33   3+200 - Righ     Md. Sala Dakkhin                       ground/desk/      Cloth
 9    2+400   t        uddin    Jatrabari          Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                      Kajlar Par              business on the
 34   1+800 -                         Uttar                   ground/desk/
 0    2+000   Left     Md. Anisur     Para       Vendors      table/van=7       Dry fish     Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 34   2+200 -                                                 ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    2+400   Left     Robin          Kajlar Par   Vendors    table/van=7       e shop       Own




Final ESSA                                         101                                      January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 34   3+200 - Righ     Md. Sujon Dakkhin                   ground/desk/      Juice
 2    2+400   t        Mia       Jatrabari       Vendors   table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 34   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Fuska
 3    2+400   Left     Rabbi        Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                  Dakkhin                  business on the
 34   3+200 -          Md. Lahu Kutubkha                   ground/desk/      Meat
 4    2+400   Left     Udfin Khan li             Vendors   table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 34   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Fruit
 5    2+400   Left     Sobuj        Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 34   3+200 -          Nitai        Dakkhin                ground/desk/      Eit, balu,
 6    2+400   Left     Chandra      Jatrabari    Vendors   table/van=7       khoya      Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 34   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Fuska
 7    2+400   Left     Arup das     Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 34   3+200 - Righ                  Dakkhin                ground/desk/      Cloth
 8    2+400   t        Md. Hasan    Jatrabari    Vendors   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
 34   2+200 -                                              but     running
 9    2+400   Left     Amran        Kajlar Par   Vendors   business on the   Dry fish    Own



Final ESSA                                       102                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                           ground/desk/
                                                           table/van=7


                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 35   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 0    2+400   Left     Samiul       Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       e shop      Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 35   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/
 1    2+400   Left     Md. Rstul    Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Cobbler     Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                       Md.                                 business on the
 35   2+200 -          Mizanur                             ground/desk/
 2    2+400   Left     Rahman       Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 35   2+200 -          Md. Sojib                           ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Hossain   Kajlar Par      Vendors   table/van=7       Dry fish    Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 35   2+200 -          Md. Abdul                           ground/desk/      Pan-
 4    2+400   Left     Karim     Kajlar Par      Vendors   table/van=7       supari      Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 35   2+200 -          Md. Altab                           ground/desk/
 5    2+400   Left     Ali       Kajlar Par      Vendors   table/van=7       Pitha       Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                       Md.                                 business on the
 35   2+200 -          Khorshed                            ground/desk/
 6    2+400   Left     Alam         Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Dry fish    Own



Final ESSA                                       103                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 35   2+200 -          Md.      Joni                          ground/desk/      Fruit
 7    2+400   Left     Mia             Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 35   2+200 -          Nitai                                  ground/desk/
 8    2+400   Left     Chandra         Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 35   2+200 -          Md. Jabed                              ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 9    2+400   Left     Ali       Kajlar Par         Vendors   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 36   2+200 -          Md.   Latif                            ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 0    2+400   Left     Mia             Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       e shop       Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 36   2+200 -          Md.                                    ground/desk/      Cloth
 1    2+400   Left     Douhid          Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 36   2+200 -          Md. Jowel                              ground/desk/      Cloth
 2    2+400   Left     Rana      Kajlar Par         Vendors   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
                                                              but     running
                                                              business on the
 36   2+200 -          Md. Moni                               ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Mia      Kajlar Par          Vendors   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                              Polyethene/Trip
                                                              al No structure
 36   2+200 -          Md. Majed                              but     running   Fuska
 4    2+400   Left     Ali       Kajlar Par         Vendors   business on the   Shop         Own



Final ESSA                                          104                                     January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                           ground/desk/
                                                           table/van=7


                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 36   3+200 -          Abdul        Kutubkha               ground/desk/
 5    2+400   Left     Karim        li           Vendors   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 36   3+200 -          Mamun        Kutubkha               ground/desk/      Fuska
 6    2+400   Left     Ahmed        li           Vendors   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 36   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Fruit
 7    2+400   Left     Md. Jaman    Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 36   3+200 -                       Kutubkha               ground/desk/      Fuska
 8    2+400   Left     Sohel Rana   li           Vendors   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 36   3+200 -          Mizanur      Kutubkha               ground/desk/
 9    2+400   Left     Rahman       li           Vendors   table/van=7       Tailor       Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 37   3+200 -          Masuk        Kutubkha               ground/desk/      Juice
 0    2+400   Left     Ahmed        li           Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 37   3+200 -          Md. Robin Kutubkha                  ground/desk/      Fruit
 1    2+400   Left     Ahmed     li              Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own



Final ESSA                                       105                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 37   3+200 -          Aktar        Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fuska
 2    2+400   Left     Hossain      li         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 37   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Shohag Ali   li         Vendors    table/van=7       Toy Shop    Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 37   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 4    2+400   Left     Owaz Mia     li         Vendors    table/van=7       Bag Shop    Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 37   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fuska
 5    2+400   Left     Abdullah     li         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 37   3+200 -          Al   Amin Kutubkha                 ground/desk/      Fuska
 6    2+400   Left     Hossain   li            Vendors    table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 37   3+200 -          Abbas        Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 7    2+400   Left     Uddin        li         Vendors    table/van=7       Hotel       Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 37   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fruit
 8    2+400   Left     Abdul Alim   li         Vendors    table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
 37   3+200 -          Halima       Kutubkha              but     running
 9    2+400   Left     Khatun       li         Vendors    business on the   Pitha       Own



Final ESSA                                     106                                     January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          ground/desk/
                                                          table/van=7


                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fuska
 0    2+400   Left     Roton Ali    li         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -          Nasima       Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 1    2+400   Left     Khatun       li         Vendors    table/van=7       Pitha        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -          Jibon        Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fuska
 2    2+400   Left     Ahmed        li         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -          Sipon        Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Ahmed        li         Vendors    table/van=7       Halim        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -          Abdul        Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 4    2+400   Left     Korim        li         Vendors    table/van=7       Halim        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -          Kobir        Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fuska
 5    2+400   Left     Hossain      li         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -                     Kutubkha                ground/desk/
 6    2+400   Left     Md. Shohid li           Vendors    table/van=7       Jhal Muri    Own



Final ESSA                                     107                                      January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -          Romiz        Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fuska
 7    2+400   Left     Uddin        li         Vendors    table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 8    2+400   Left     Shahin       li         Vendors    table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 38   3+200 -          Sharwer      Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Pan-
 9    2+400   Left     Hossain      li         Vendors    table/van=7       supari       Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 39   3+200 -                      Kutubkha               ground/desk/      Pan-
 0    2+400   Left     Farid Uddin li          Vendors    table/van=7       supari       Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 39   3+200 -          Mizanur      Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 1    2+400   Left     Rahman       li         Vendors    table/van=7       Hotel        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 39   3+200 -          Abdul        Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 2    2+400   Left     Malek        li         Vendors    table/van=7       Hotel        Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 39   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              ground/desk/      Fruit
 3    2+400   Left     Sujon Mia    li         Vendors    table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
 39   3+200 -                       Kutubkha              but     running   Fruit
 4    2+400   Left     Selim        li         Vendors    business on the   shop         Own



Final ESSA                                     108                                      January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 39   3+200 -                        Kutubkha               ground/desk/      Fruit
 5    2+400   Left     Abdul Jalil   li           Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 39   3+200 -                        Kutubkha               ground/desk/
 6    2+400   Left     Solimuddin    li           Vendors   table/van=7       Hotel        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 39   3+200 -                        Kutubkha               ground/desk/
 7    2+400   Left     Al Amin       li           Vendors   table/van=7       Hotel        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 39   3+200 -                        Kutubkha               ground/desk/      Fruit
 8    2+400   Left     Tarek         li           Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 39   3+200 -                        Kutubkha               ground/desk/
 9    2+400   Left     Shopon        li           Vendors   table/van=7       Fish         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 40   2+200 -                                               ground/desk/
 0    2+400   Left     Imran Ali     Jalnerpar    Vendors   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                            Polyethene/Trip
                                                            al No structure
                                                            but     running
                                                            business on the
 40   2+200 - Righ     Abldul                               ground/desk/      Juice
 1    2+400   t        Hamid         Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own



Final ESSA                                        109                                     January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 40   2+200 - Righ     Abdul                               ground/desk/      Fuska
 2    2+400   t        Kader        Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 40   2+200 -          Jakirul                             ground/desk/
 3    2+400   Left     Islam        Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Tea stall    Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 40   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Cloth
 4    2+400   Left     Sumon        Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 40   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/      Fruit
 5    2+400   Left     Kajlerpar    Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 40   2+200 -          Tuser                               ground/desk/      Fruit
 6    2+400   Left     Ahmed        Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 40   2+200 -                                              ground/desk/
 7    2+400   Left     Provakor     Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       Cobbler      Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
                                                           but     running
                                                           business on the
 40   2+200 -          Kamal                               ground/desk/      Meat
 8    2+400   Left     Hossain      Kajlar Par   Vendors   table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                           Polyethene/Trip
                                                           al No structure
 40   2+200 -          Milon                               but     running   Vegetabl
 9    2+400   Left     Hossain      Kajlar Par   Vendors   business on the   e shop       Own



Final ESSA                                       110                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          ground/desk/
                                                          table/van=7


                                                          Polyethene/Trip
                                                          al No structure
                                                          but     running
                                                          business on the
 41   3+200 -          Nasir        Kutubkha              ground/desk/
 0    2+400   Left     Uddin        li         Vendors    table/van=7     Egg Shop    Own




Final ESSA                                     111                                   January 2026
                                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


Mridhabari Canal - List of Stakeholders Met During Rapid Social Assessment Survey (in August 2025)

       Chainag          Name of
       e                Head    of                  Use of                       Nature
 Sl.   Numbe     side   HH/Busine                   structur Type          of    of            Ownershi
 No    r         ?      ss         Moholla          e        Structures          business      p Status
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                    Squatte running
                                                    rs       business on the
       0+200 -          Asad                        Busines ground/desk/         Meat
 1     0+400   Left     Shohid       Mridhabari     s        table/van=7         shop          Tenant
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                                             business on the
       0+400 -          Mahmudul     Poschim                 ground/desk/
 2     0+600   Left     Hasan        Matuail        Vendors table/van=7          Tea stall     Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                    Squatte running
                                  Uttar             rs       business on the
       0+600 -          Md. Abbul Ghobindhap        Busines ground/desk/
 3     0+800   Left     Kashem    ur                s        table/van=7         Cobbler       Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                    Squatte running
                                                    rs       business on the
       0+800 -          Md. Abu                     Busines ground/desk/         Biscuit
 4     0+1000 Left      Sayed   Gobindopur          s        table/van=7         business      Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                    Squatte running
                                     Uttar          rs       business on the
       0+800 -                       Ghobindhap     Busines ground/desk/         Vegetabl
 5     0+1000 Left      Hazrat Ali   ur             s        table/van=7         e shop   Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
       1+000 -                       Gobindopur              running             Pan-
 6     1+100   Left     khokon       bazar          Vendors business on the      supari        Own



Final ESSA                                        112                                        January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                      Md.                                   business on the
      1+000 -         Anower       Gobindopur               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 7    1+100   Left    Hossain      bazar          Vendors   table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                 Uttar            rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Md. Shakil Ghobindhap       Busines   ground/desk/      Cloth
 8    0+800   Left    Ahmed      ur               s         table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 9    0+1000 Left     Alom         Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Habibur                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 10   1+000   Left    Rahman       Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                      Md.                                   business on the
      1+000 -         Mozamma      Gobindopur               ground/desk/
 11   1+100   Left    l Hossain    bazar          Vendors   table/van=7       Grocery     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
      1+000 -                      Gobindopur               ground/desk/      Chicken
 12   1+100   Left    Mehedi       bazar          Vendors   table/van=7       Shop        Own



Final ESSA                                      113                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                  Squatte
                                Uttar             rs
      0+600 -         Md. Milon Ghobindhap        Busines                     Chicken
 13   0+800   Left    Sarkar    ur                s         Tin-made          Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 14   0+1000 Left     Md. Harun    Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 15   0+1000 Left     Chan Mia     bazar          s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Abdul                   Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 16   1+000   Left    Kuddus    Gobindopur        s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur               ground/desk/
 17   1+000   Left    Md. Rasel    bazar          Vendors   table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                  Squatte
                      Md.          Uttar          rs
      0+600 -         Masum        Ghobindhap     Busines                     Meat
 18   0+800   Left    Billah       ur             s         Tin-made          shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md.                         Busines   ground/desk/    Chicken
 19   0+1000 Left     Shopon       Gobindopur     s         table/van=7     Shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Squatte   pal         No Vegetabl
 20   0+1000 Left     Monir        bazar          rs        structure but e shop    Own


Final ESSA                                      114                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                  Busines   running
                                                  s         business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/
 21   1+000   Left    Ali Alber    Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Spice       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur               ground/desk/      Shoe
 22   1+000   Left    Md. Gazi     bazar          Vendors   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                Uttar             rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Md. Sajol Ghobindhap        Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 23   0+800   Left    Ahmed     ur                s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md.                         Busines   ground/desk/
 24   0+1000 Left     Junayed      Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Pitha       Own
                                                  Squatte
                                                  rs
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Busines                     Coconut
 25   0+1000 Left     Md. Rasel    bazar          s         Tin-made          selling     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Sakib                       Busines   ground/desk/    Coconut
 26   1+000   Left    Hasan        Gobindopur     s         table/van=7     selling       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
      0+800 -         Md. shiraj Gobindopur                 pal         No Jhal
 27   1+000   Left    Gazi       bazar            Vendors   structure but Muri            Own


Final ESSA                                      115                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            running
                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                  Squatte
                      Md.          Uttar          rs
      0+600 -         Bachhu       Ghobindhap     Busines                   Vegetabl
 28   0+800   Left    Bepari       ur             s         Tin-made        e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Abdur                   Busines   ground/desk/    Chicken
 29   0+1000 Left     Rohim     Gobindopur        s         table/van=7     Shop     Own
                                                  Squatte
                                                  rs
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Busines                     Meat
 30   0+1000 Left     Babul        bazar          s         Tin-made          shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Abu                     Busines   ground/desk/
 31   1+000   Left    Jafor   Gobindopur          s         table/van=7       Fish          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Abul Gobindopur         Busines   ground/desk/      Chicken
 32   1+000   Left    Kashem   bazar              s         table/van=7       Shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                Uttar             rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Md. Sohel Ghobindhap        Busines   ground/desk/
 33   0+800   Left    Ahmed     ur                s         table/van=7       Tea stall     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                  Squatte   pal          No
                                                  rs        structure but
      0+800 -         Md. Ismail                  Busines   running           Vegetabl
 34   0+1000 Left     Hossain    Gobindopur       s         business on the   e shop   Own




Final ESSA                                      116                                       January 2026
                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7


                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Busines   ground/desk/      Chicken
 35   0+1000 Left     Manik        bazar          s         table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 36   1+000   Left    Alamgir      Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                  Squatte
                                                  rs
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Busines                     Meat
 37   1+000   Left    Md. Babul    bazar          s         Tin-made          shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                   Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Md.       Al Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 38   0+800   Left    Amin         ur             s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Abdul                   Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 39   0+1000 Left     khalek    Gobindopur        s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Abdur        Gobindopur     Busines   ground/desk/      Fruit
 40   0+1000 Left     Rahim        bazar          s         table/van=7       shop        Own
                                                  Squatte   Polyethene/Tri
                                                  rs        pal          No
      0+800 -         Abdus                       Busines   structure but     Vegetabl
 41   1+000   Left    Salam        Gobindopur     s         running           e shop   Own


Final ESSA                                      117                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.                         rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Mosaraf      Gobindopur     Busines   ground/desk/
 42   1+000   Left    Shek         bazar          s         table/van=7       Dry fish     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.          Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Anowar       Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Pan-
 43   0+800   Left    Hossain      ur             s         table/van=7       supari       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 44   0+1000 Left     Joynal       Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 45   0+1000 Left     Younus       bazar          s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Chicken
 46   1+000   Left    Abu Hasan    Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Salim Gobindopur        Busines   ground/desk/
 47   1+000   Left    Shekh     bazar             s         table/van=7       Grocery      Own



Final ESSA                                      118                                      January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                      Mst.         Uttar                    business on the
      0+600 -         Joshna       Ghobindhap               ground/desk/
 48   0+800   Left    Begum        ur             Vendors   table/van=7       Dry fish     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Nasir                   Busines   ground/desk/
 49   0+1000 Left     Uddin     Gobindopur        s         table/van=7       Dry fish     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Bina                        Busines   ground/desk/      Chicken
 50   1+000   Left    Khatun       Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Akter Gobindopur        Busines   ground/desk/      Egg
 51   1+000   Left    Hossain   bazar             s         table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.          Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Masum        Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 52   0+800   Left    Ahmed        ur             s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 53   0+1000 Left     Idrish Ali   Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                  Squatte
                                                  rs
      0+800 -         Abdus                       Busines                     Fruit
 54   1+000   Left    Samad        Gobindopur     s         Tin-made          shop         Own



Final ESSA                                      119                                      January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                  Squatte
                                                  rs
      0+800 -                      Gobindopur     Busines                     Chicken
 55   1+000   Left    Md. Amir     bazar          s         Tin-made          Shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.                         rs        business on the
      0+200 -         Jumman                      Busines   ground/desk/    Meat
 56   0+400   Left    Ali          Mridhabari     s         table/van=7     shop          Tenant
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
      0+400 -                      Poschim                  ground/desk/
 57   0+600   Left    Ismail       Matuail        Vendors   table/van=7     Tea stall     Own
                                                  Squatte
                                   Uttar          rs
      0+600 -                      Ghobindhap     Busines                     Meat
 58   0+800   Left    Md. Babu     ur             s         Tin-made          shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 59   0+1000 Left     DSCC         Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                   Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Assad        Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Pan-
 60   0+1000 Left     Mollah       ur             s         table/van=7       supari      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
      1+000 -         Md. Abdul Gobindopur                  ground/desk/
 61   1+100   Left    Kader     bazar             Vendors   table/van=7       Grocery     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
      1+000 -                      Gobindopur               pal         No
 62   1+100   Left    md. ratan    bazar          Vendors   structure but Dry fish        Own


Final ESSA                                      120                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                             running
                                                             business on the
                                                             ground/desk/
                                                             table/van=7
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                      Sree                         Squatte   running
                      Noresh        Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Chandra       Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/
 63   0+800   Left    Das           ur             s         table/van=7       Fish        Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. jakir                    Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 64   0+1000 Left     Hossain   Gobindopur         s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
      0+800 -                       Gobindopur     Busines   ground/desk/      Chicken
 65   1+000   Left    Sopan Das     bazar          s         table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                Uttar                        business on the
      0+600 -         Md. Jaman Ghobindhap                   ground/desk/      Fuska
 66   0+800   Left    Sheikh    ur                 Vendors   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md.                          Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 67   0+1000 Left     Amanullah     Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                   Squatte
                                                   rs
      0+800 -                       Gobindopur     Busines                     Meat
 68   1+000   Left    Md. Sohel     bazar          s         Tin-made          shop        Own
                                    Uttar                    Polyethene/Tri
      0+600 -         Md.       Ali Ghobindhap               pal         No
 69   0+800   Left    Akbor         ur             Vendors   structure but Dry fish        Own


Final ESSA                                       121                                     January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            running
                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.                         rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Mojibor                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 70   0+1000 Left     Rahman       Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                      Md.          Uttar                    business on the
      0+600 -         Mehedi       Ghobindhap               ground/desk/      Fruit
 71   0+800   Left    Hasan        ur             Vendors   table/van=7       shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Fruit
 72   0+1000 Left     Md. Kalam    Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                   Uttar                    business on the
      0+600 -         Md.    Jalal Ghobindhap               ground/desk/      Fruit
 73   0+800   Left    Mia          ur             Vendors   table/van=7       shop      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/
 74   0+1000 Left     Sagor Das    Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Fish      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.          Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+600 -         Shahid       Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 75   0+800   Left    Hossain      ur             s         table/van=7       e shop   Own



Final ESSA                                      122                                   January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/
 76   0+1000 Left     Sukumar      Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Fish       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/
 77   0+1000 Left     Md. Abbas    Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Fish       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                 Uttar            rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Khalil Ghobindhap       Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 78   0+1000 Left     Ahmed      ur               s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.          Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Masud        Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 79   0+1000 Left     Hossain      ur             s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                               Uttar              rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Saju Ghobindhap         Busines   ground/desk/      Pan-
 80   0+1000 Left     Ahmed    ur                 s         table/van=7       supari     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                Uttar             rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Abdur Ghobindhap        Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 81   0+1000 Left     Rahman    ur                s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                  Squatte   Polyethene/Tri
                                                  rs        pal          No
      0+200 -         Md. Ismail                  Busines   structure but     Fruit
 82   0+400   Left    Hossain    Mridhabari       s         running           shop       Tenant



Final ESSA                                      123                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
      0+400 -                      Poschim                  ground/desk/
 83   0+600   Left    Sobuj        Matuail        Vendors   table/van=7     Tea stall     Own
                                                  Squatte
                                Uttar             rs
      0+600 -         Md. Akbor Ghobindhap        Busines                     Fruit
 84   0+800   Left    Ali       ur                s         Tin-made          shop        Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      0+800 -                                     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 85   0+1000 Left     Md. Badol    Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
      1+000 -         Md. Salim Gobindopur        Busines   ground/desk/
 86   1+100   Left    Bepary    bazar             s         table/van=7       Pitha       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
      1+000 -                      Gobindopur               ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 87   1+100   Left    Ramjan       bazar          Vendors   table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                Uttar             rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Monir Ghobindhap        Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 88   0+1000 Left     Hossain   ur                s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                  Squatte   Polyethene/Tri
                                   Uttar          rs        pal          No
      0+800 -                      Ghobindhap     Busines   structure but     Vegetabl
 89   0+1000 Left     Md. Monir    ur             s         running           e shop   Own


Final ESSA                                      124                                     January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                   Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md.          Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Pan-
 90   0+1000 Left     Shafique     ur             s         table/van=7       supari     Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                   Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md.          Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Work
 91   0+1000 Left     Khokon       ur             s         table/van=7       Shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                 Uttar            rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Sabbir Ghobindhap       Busines   ground/desk/      Fruit
 92   0+1000 Left     Ahmed      ur               s         table/van=7       shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                Uttar             rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Monir Ghobindhap        Busines   ground/desk/      Cloth
 93   0+1000 Left     Khan      ur                s         table/van=7       Shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                      Md.          Uttar          rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Shahadat     Ghobindhap     Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 94   0+1000 Left     Hossain      ur             s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                               Uttar              rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md. Babu Ghobindhap         Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 95   0+1000 Left     Ahmed    ur                 s         table/van=7       e shop   Own



Final ESSA                                      125                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                   Squatte
                      Md.          Uttar           rs
      0+600 -         Shahin       Ghobindhap      Busines
 96   0+800   Left    Alam         ur              s         Tin-made          Hotel       Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
      0+800 -         Md.                          Busines   ground/desk/
 97   0+1000 Left     Shajhan      Gobindopur      s         table/van=7       Spice       Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
      1+000 -         Md. Ziaur                    Busines   ground/desk/
 98   1+100   Left    Rahman    Gobindopur         s         table/van=7       Grocery     Tenant
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                                             business on the
      1+000 -                      Gobindopur                ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 99   1+100   Left    Babul        bazar           Vendors   table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                                             business on the
 10   1+000 -         Md.          Gobindopur                ground/desk/      Chicken
 0    1+100   Left    Usman        bazar           Vendors   table/van=7       Shop        Own
                                                   Squatte
                      Md.          Uttar           rs
 10   0+600 -         Kamrul       Ghobindhap      Busines
 1    0+800   Left    Mia          ur              s         Tin-made        Tea stall     Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
 10   0+800 -         Md. Abu                      Busines   ground/desk/
 2    0+1000 Left     Kalam   Gobindopur           s         table/van=7     Tea stall     Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
 10   1+000 -         Abir                         Squatte   pal         No Cloth
 3    1+100   Left    Hossain      Sonir Akhra     rs        structure but Shop            Own


Final ESSA                                       126                                     January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                   Busines   running
                                                   s         business on the
                                                             ground/desk/
                                                             table/van=7
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                                             business on the
 10   1+000 -                      Gobindopur                ground/desk/      Chicken
 4    1+100   Left    Al Amin      bazar           Vendors   table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                                             business on the
 10   1+000 -                      Gobindopur                ground/desk/      Biscuit
 5    1+100   Left    Md. Sagor    bazar           Vendors   table/van=7       business     Own
                                                   Squatte
                               Uttar               rs                          Old
 10   0+600 -         Md. Saif Ghobindhap          Busines                     Furnitur
 6    0+800   Left    Hossain  ur                  s         Tin-made          e            Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
 10   0+800 -                                      Busines   ground/desk/      Light
 7    0+1000 Left     Masum        Gobindopur      s         table/van=7       Shop         Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
 10   1+000 -                                      Busines   ground/desk/      Meat
 8    1+100   Left    Amir Ali     Sonir Akhra     s         table/van=7       shop         Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                                             business on the
 10   1+000 -         Md. Iman Gobindopur                    ground/desk/
 9    1+100   Left    Ali      bazar               Vendors   table/van=7       Grocery      Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
 11   1+000 -                      Gobindopur                pal         No Milk
 0    1+100   Left    Tarek        bazar           Vendors   structure but shop             Own


Final ESSA                                       127                                      January 2026
                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            running
                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                Uttar             rs        business on the
 11   0+600 -         Md. Abdur Ghobindhap        Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 1    0+800   Left    Rouf      ur                s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
 11   0+800 -         Joynal                      Busines   ground/desk/
 2    0+1000 Left     Abedin       Gobindopur     s         table/van=7       Dry fish      Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                      Md.                                   business on the
 11   1+000 -         Rofiqul      Gobindopur               ground/desk/
 3    1+100   Left    Islam        bazar          Vendors   table/van=7       Egg shop Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
 11   1+000 -         Mohamma Gobindopur          Busines   ground/desk/      Coconut
 4    1+100   Left    d Ali Jinnah bazar          s         table/van=7       selling       Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                                  rs        business on the
 11   1+000 -                      Gobindopur     Busines   ground/desk/      Meat
 5    1+100   Left    Melon        bazar          s         table/van=7       shop          Own
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                  Squatte   running
                                Uttar             rs        business on the
 11   0+600 -         Md. Nahid Ghobindhap        Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+800   Left    Sarkar    ur                s         table/van=7       Tea stall     Own



Final ESSA                                      128                                       January 2026
                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
 11   0+800 -         Abul                         Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+1000 Left     hasem        Gobindopur      s         table/van=7       Tea stall     Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                      Md.                          rs        business on the
 11   1+000 -         Mukhtar                      Busines   ground/desk/      Meat
 8    1+100   Left    Hossain      Sonir Akhra     s         table/van=7       shop          Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                             running
                                                             business on the
 11   1+000 -                      Gobindopur                ground/desk/
 9    1+100   Left    Md. Sohel    bazar           Vendors   table/van=7       key Shop Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
 12   1+000 -                      Gobindopur      Busines   ground/desk/      Meat
 0    1+100   Left    Sojib        bazar           s         table/van=7       shop          Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                Uttar              rs        business on the
 12   0+600 -         Md. Rubel Ghobindhap         Busines   ground/desk/      Fruit
 1    0+800   Left    Mia       ur                 s         table/van=7       shop          Own
                                                             Polyethene/Tri
                                                             pal          No
                                                             structure but
                                                   Squatte   running
                                                   rs        business on the
 12   0+800 -         Abdul                        Busines   ground/desk/      Vegetabl
 2    0+1000 Left     Mannan       Gobindopur      s         table/van=7       e shop   Own
                                                   Squatte   Polyethene/Tri
                                                   rs        pal          No
 12   1+000 -                                      Busines   structure but     Pan-
 3    1+100   Left    Md. Harez    Sonir Akhra     s         running           supari        Own



Final ESSA                                       129                                       January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            business on the
                                                            ground/desk/
                                                            table/van=7
                                                            Polyethene/Tri
                                                            pal          No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on the
 12   1+000 -                      Gobindopur               ground/desk/    Pan-
 4    1+100   Left    Md. Raju     bazar          Vendors   table/van=7     supari     Own
                                                  Squatte
                                                  rs
 12   1+000 -                      Gobindopur     Busines                     Egg
 5    1+100   Left    Mintu        bazar          s         Tin-made          Shop     Own




Final ESSA                                      130                                  January 2026
                                                                                             Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


Rupnagar Canal - List of Stakeholders Met During Rapid Social Assessment Survey (in August 2025)


        Chain
        age            Name       of                                      Nature
 Sl.    Numb    side   Head       of             Use       of Type     of of                   Ownersh
 No     er      ?      HH/Business Moholla       structure    Structures business              ip Status
        4+000                        Goran chot
        -       Righ   Baitul Islam bari, switch
 1      4+100   t      Jame Mosjid gate          Mosque       Tin-made
        1+300
        -       Righ   Nasrin         Rupnagar          Squatters
 2      1+400   t      Begum          Abasik            residence   Tin-made                   Own
        0+700                         Sial     Bari,
        -       Righ   Rozina         Rupnogor          Squatters
 3      0+800   t      Begum          R/A, Mirpur-2     Business    Thatched     Tea stall     Own
        4+500
        -              Khorshed       Rupnagar, L       Squatters
 4      4+600   Left   Alam           block             residence   Tin-made                   Own
                                      Rupnogor
        1+200                         R/A, Road Mo
        -     Righ                    -20, Mirpur-      Squatters
 5      1+300 t        Md. Mahim      2, Dhaka          Business    Tin-made     Tea stall     Own
                                      Rupnogor
        1+300                         R/A,    Road
        -       Righ   Amena          No-23,            Squatters
 6      1+400   t      Begum          Mirpur-2          Business    Tin-made     Tea stall     Own
        4+500
        -                             Rupnagar,    L Squatters
 7      4+600   Left   Md. Jalil      block          residence      Tin-made                   Own
        4+500
        -              Md. Rashed Rupnagar, L           Squatters
 8      4+600   Left   Ali         block                residence   Tin-made                   Own
                                   Rupnogor
        1+300                      R/A,    Road
        -              Md. Akkas No-23,                 Squatters
 9      1+400 Left     Ali         Mirpur-2             Business    Tin-made     Tea stall     Own
                                   Rupnogor
        1+300                      R/A,    Road
        -     Righ     Md.   Sakil No-23,               Squatters
 10     1+400 t        Mia         Mirpur-2             Business    Tin-made     Tea stall     Own
                                   Rupnogor
        1+300                      R/A,    Road
        -     Righ     Md.   Afaz No-23,                Squatters
 11     1+400 t        Uddin       Mirpur-2             Business    Tin-made     Tea stall     Own




Final ESSA                                        131                                        January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                    Rupnogor
        1+400                       R/A,     Road
        -     Righ     Md. Shahin   No-27,           Squatters
 12     1+500 t        Sheikh       Mirpur-2         Business    Tin-made   Tea stall     Own
                                    Rupnogor
        1+400                       R/A,     Road
        -              Md. Akter    No-27,           Squatters
 13     1+500 Left     Hossain      Mirpur-2         Business    Tin-made   Hotel         Own
                                    Block -B, plot
        1+600                       No-1,Estran
        -              Md. Babu     Housing,pollo    Squatters
 14     1+700 Left     Hossain      bi , Mirpur- 2   residence   Pucca                    Own
        1+800                       Eastern
        -              Mst.Airin    housing,         Squatters
 15     1+900 Left     Begum        pollobi 2nd      residence   Tin-made                 Own
                                    Balur Math,
        2+600                       Estran
        -       Righ   Md. Aminul   Housing,         Boundary
 16     2+700   t      islam        pollobi-2nd      wall        Pucca                    Own
        2+600
        -       Righ   Sahi jame Balur Math,         Squatters
 17     2+700   t      Mosjid      Road no-10        residence   Tin-made                 Own
                                   Balur Math,
        2+700                      Estran
        -     Righ                 Housing,          Squatters
 18     2+800 t        Abdul Alim  pollobi-2nd       residence   Pucca                    Own
                                   Balur Math,
        2+700          Amir        Estran
        -     Righ     Hossain     Housing,          Squatters              Store
 19     2+800 t        Mollah      pollobi-2nd       Business    Pucca      House         Own
                                   Balur Math,
        2+700                      Estran
        -              Motaleb     Housing,          Squatters
 20     2+800 Left     Hossain     pollobi-2nd       residence   Tin-made                 Own
        2+900          Baitul      Eastern
        -              Ebadha jame housing,
 21     3+000 Left     Mosjid      pollobi 2nd       Mosque      Pucca                    Own
        2+900                      Eastern
        -                          housing,          Ansar       Semi
 22     3+000 Left     Ansar Camp pollobi 2nd        Camp        Pucca                    Own
                                   Kazipara,
        3+000          Ahmad       Estran
        -     Righ     Hossain     Housing,          Squatters   Semi       Vegetab
 23     3+100 t        gong        pollobi 2nd       Business    Pucca      le shop       Own




Final ESSA                                     132                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                     Road No -5,
        3+600                        Eastern
        -             Mominul        housing,    Squatters
 24     3+700 Left    islam          pollobi 2nd residence       Tin-made     Own
        3+500         Md.      Nur
        -             islam          Pollobi-2nd,    Squatters
 25     3+600 Left    Mondol         water Pam -4    residence   Tin-made     Own
                      WASA-
                      Eastern
        3+400         housing-
        -             4(Block-L)     Pollobi-2nd,    WASA
 26     3+500 Left    Water Pam      water Pam -4    Pumps       Pucca        Own




Final ESSA                                     133                          January 2026
                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



Titas Canal - List of Stakeholders Met During Rapid Social Assessment Survey (in August 2025)

                   Name       of                                             Nature
 Sl. Chainage      Head       of                        Use     of Type of of         Ownership
 No Number side? HH/Business Moholla                    structure Structures business Status
                                 Dakkhin
     0+200-                      donia, Pater           Squatters
 1   0+400    Left Md. Khalil    bag                    Business    Tin-made     Grocery    Own
                   Pater bag
                   kendrio
                   jame mosjid Dakkhin
     0+200-        (Water        donia, Pater
 2   0+400    Left supply)       bag                    Ozukhana    Pucca                   Own
                                 Muradpur
     1+000-                      High School                                     Pan-
 3   1+100    Left Md. Firoj     Road                   Vendors     Vendors      supari     Own




Final ESSA                                        134                                      January 2026
                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


Zia Sarani Canal - List of Stakeholders Met During Rapid Social Assessment Survey (in August 2025)

     Chaina            Name of
     ge                Head of                    Use of                                     Owners
 Sl. Numb       sid    HH/Busin                   structu Type        of    Nature        of hip
 No er          e?     ess      Moholla           re      Structures        business         Status
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal      No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                       Md.                                the
      0+500-           Sultan      Chapra         Vendor ground/desk/
 1    0+600     Left   Molla       Masjid         s       table/van=7       Vegetable shop    Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal      No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                   Zia                    the
      0+600-                       Saroni,kodo    Vendor ground/desk/
 2    0+700     Left   Md. Zakir   mtoli          s       table/van=7       Fast food         Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal      No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+000            Md.                                the
      -                Aslam                      Vendor ground/desk/
 3    0+200     Left   Mia         Sonir Akhra    s       table/van=7       Cloth Shop        Own
                                                  Squatte
      0+700            Md.                        rs
      -                Mokhles                    Busines
 4    0+900     Left   Uddin       Srity Dhara    s       Tin-made          Hotel             Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal      No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                                               the
      -                Sala                       Vendor ground/desk/
 5    0+400     Left   Uddin       Polashpur      s       table/van=7       Cloth Shop        Own




Final ESSA                                        135                                      January 2026
                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                             Squatte     business on
                                             rs          the
      0+900-          Solaiman   Md.   Ziaur Busines     ground/desk/
 6    1+100    Left   Ahmmed     Rahman      s           table/van=7   Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Zia                     the
      0+600-          Md.        Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 7    0+700    Left   Manik      mtoli         s         table/van=7   Fish
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                      Md.                                the
      0+500-          Mijanur    Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+600    Left   Rahman     Masjid        s         table/van=7   Vegetable shop   Own
                                               Squatte
      0+700           Md.                      rs
      -               Alamgir                  Busines
 9    0+900    Left   Hossain    Srity Dhara   s         Tin-made      Fuska Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+000           Md.                                the
      -               Ekram                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 10   0+200    Left   Hossain    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7   Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
      -               Md. Gias                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 11   0+400    Left   Uddin    Polashpur       s         table/van=7   Cloth Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                     136                                  January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -               Tutul                   Busines   ground/desk/
 12   0+200    Left   Ahmed     2             s         table/van=7     Fish             Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -               Abdul                   Busines   ground/desk/
 13   0+200    Left   Qaium     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish             Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
      0+500-          Kalam     Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 14   0+600    Left   Molla     Masjid        s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
      0+600-          Md. Zakir Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 15   0+700    Left   Hossain   mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
      -               Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 16   0+400    Left   Hasan     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
      0+000                                             running
      -               Md. Iqbal               Vendor    business on
 17   0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra   s         the             Fruit shop       Own



Final ESSA                                    137                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                               Squatte
      0+700           Md.                      rs
      -               Jahangir                 Busines
 18   0+900    Left   Alam       Srity Dhara   s         Tin-made        Fuska Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+700                                              the
      -               Md. Abu                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 19   0+900    Left   Zafor   Srity Dhara      s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+000           Md.                                the
      -               Sharif                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 20   0+200    Left   Hossain    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
      -               Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 21   0+400    Left   Sumon      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -                                        Busines   ground/desk/
 22   0+200    Left   Mohsin     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                 Zia                     structure but
      0+600-                     Saroni,kodo   Vendor    running
 23   0+700    Left   Narayan    mtoli         s         business on     Egg Shop        Own



Final ESSA                                     138                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        the
                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
      0+500-          Md.       Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 24   0+600    Left   Lutfor    Masjid        s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                Zia           rs        the
      0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 25   0+700    Left   Siddek    mtoli         s         table/van=7     Meat shop        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+000           Md.                               the
      -               Jubayer                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 26   0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
      -               Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 27   0+400    Left   Noyon     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+700           Md.                     rs        the
      -               Sattar                  Busines   ground/desk/
 28   0+900    Left   Mia       Srity Dhara   s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                    139                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000                                     rs        the
      -                                         Busines   ground/desk/
 29   0+200    Left   Oliullah    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7   Fish
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                                          the
      0+500-          Abdur       Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 30   0+600    Left   Rahman      Masjid        s         table/van=7   Vegetable shop   Own
      0+700
      -                                         (DSCC)
 31   0+900    Left   DSCC        Srity Dhara   Dustbin   Pucca                          Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                  Zia                     the
      0+600-          Md.     Lal Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 32   0+700    Left   Mia         mtoli         s         table/van=7   Vegetable shop   Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                                               the
      -               Md.                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 33   0+400    Left   Harun       Polashpur     s         table/van=7   Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300           Md.                                 the
      -               Mehedi                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 34   0+400    Left   Hasan       Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7   Cloth Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                      140                                  January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
      -               Rimon                    Busines   ground/desk/
 35   0+200    Left   Hossain    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -               Saiful                   Busines   ground/desk/
 36   0+200    Left   Islam      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish             Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -                                        Busines   ground/desk/
 37   0+200    Left   Abdullah   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Grocery          Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
      0+500-          Md. Ali Chapra           Vendor    ground/desk/
 38   0+600    Left   Hossen  Masjid           s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Zia                     the
      0+600-          Md.        Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 39   0+700    Left   Delower    mtoli         s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
      0+500-          Md.        Chapra        Vendor    business on
 40   0+600    Left   Karim      Masjid        s         the             Vegetable shop   Own



Final ESSA                                     141                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+000           Md.                                the
      -               Azhar                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 41   0+200    Left   Mia        Zia Saroni    s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
      -                                        Vendor    ground/desk/
 42   0+400    Left   Md. Joni   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -               Md.                      Busines   ground/desk/
 43   0+200    Left   Khalil Mia Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                      Md.        Zia           rs        the
      0+600-          Imam       Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 44   0+700    Left   Hossain    mtoli         s         table/van=7     Grocery          Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
      0+500-          Md.        Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 45   0+600    Left   Shahadat   Masjid        s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own




Final ESSA                                     142                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+000           Md. Abu                             the
      -               Taher                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 46   0+200    Left   Ripon   Zia Saroni        s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                       rs        the
      -               Ashraful                  Busines   ground/desk/
 47   0+200    Left   Islam       Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                                               the
      -               Md.                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 48   0+400    Left   Saiful      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000                                     rs        the
      -                                         Busines   ground/desk/
 49   0+200    Left   Riyaz       Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Grocery         Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                                          the
      0+500-          Md.         Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 50   0+600    Left   Hasan Ali   Masjid        s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                Squatte   structure but
                      Md.         Zia           rs        running
      0+600-          Kamrul      Saroni,kodo   Busines   business on
 51   0+700    Left   Islam       mtoli         s         the             Grocery         Own



Final ESSA                                      143                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000          Md.                      rs        the
      -              Sakibur                  Busines   ground/desk/
 52   0+200   Left   Islam      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+000                                             the
      -              Md. Shah                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 53   0+200   Left   Alam     Zia Saroni      s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
      -              Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 54   0+400   Left   Sohel      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -                                       Busines   ground/desk/
 55   0+200   Left   Md. Usuf   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -              Abdul                    Busines   ground/desk/
 56   0+200   Left   Kader      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Meat shop       Own




Final ESSA                                    144                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
      0+500-          Md.       Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 57   0+600    Left   Ismail    Masjid        s         table/van=7     Grocery         Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+000           Md.                               the
      -               Burhan                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 58   0+200    Left   Uddin     Zia Saroni    s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
      -               Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 59   0+400    Left   Jasim     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -               Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 60   0+200    Left   Muhar Ali Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                               Zia            rs        the
      0+600-          Mst Lila Saroni,kodo    Busines   ground/desk/
 61   0+700    Left   Begum    mtoli          s         table/van=7     Grocery         Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
      0+300                                             running
      -                                       Vendor    business on
 62   0+400    Left   Sawon     Sonir Akhra   s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                    145                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                               Zia            rs        the
      0+600-          Md. Span Saroni,kodo    Busines   ground/desk/
 63   0+700    Left   Mia      mtoli          s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Md.                               the
      -               Bedana                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 64   0+400    Left   Begum     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
      -               Lukman                  Busines   ground/desk/
 65   0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                      Mukter                            the
      0+500-          Hossen    Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 66   0+600    Left   Pappu     Masjid        s         table/van=7     Egg Shop         Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -                                       Busines   ground/desk/
 67   0+200    Left   Noyon     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own




Final ESSA                                    146                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
      -               Kamal                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 68   0+400    Left   Uddin     Polashpur     s         table/van=7   Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                Zia           rs        the
      0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 69   0+700    Left   Anower    mtoli         s         table/van=7   Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
      0+500-          Md.       Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 70   0+600    Left   Ashraf    Masjid        s         table/van=7   Grocery          Own
                                              Squatte
      0+000           Md.                     rs
      -               Masum                   Busines
 71   0+200    Left   Ahmed     Sonir Akhra   s         Tin-made      Meat shop        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -               S Alam                  Busines   ground/desk/
 72   0+200    Left   Gazi   Sonir Akhra      s         table/van=7   Fish             Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
      -               Abul                    Busines   ground/desk/
 73   0+200    Left   Kalam     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7   Vegetable shop   Own




Final ESSA                                    147                                  January 2026
                                                                                             Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                            Polyethene/T
                                                            ripal     No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on
                               Zia                          the
      0+600-          Md.      Saroni,kodo        Vendor    ground/desk/
 74   0+700    Left   Bahadhur mtoli              s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                            Polyethene/T
                                                            ripal     No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on
                                                            the
      0+500-                    Chapra            Vendor    ground/desk/
 75   0+600    Left   Md. Rafiq Masjid            s         table/van=7     Grocery          Own
                                                            Polyethene/T
                                                            ripal     No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                  Squatte   business on
      0+000                                       rs        the
      -               Md.      Al                 Busines   ground/desk/
 76   0+200    Left   Amin          Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/T
                                                            ripal     No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on
      0+300           Md.                                   the
      -               Shahin                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 77   0+400    Left   Alam          Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/T
                                                            ripal     No
                                                            structure but
                                                            running
                                                            business on
      0+300                                                 the
      -               Mst.                        Vendor    ground/desk/
 78   0+400    Left   Nazmin        Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                            Polyethene/T
                                                            ripal     No
                                                  Squatte   structure but
      0+000                                       rs        running
      -               Gazi                        Busines   business on
 79   0+200    Left   Golam         Sonir Akhra   s         the             Grocery          Own



Final ESSA                                        148                                    January 2026
                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
      0+500-          Md.       Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 80   0+600    Left   Manik     Masjid        s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
      0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 81   0+700    Left   Robin     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Tea stall        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
      -               Mostafa                 Busines   ground/desk/
 82   0+200    Left   Zaman     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Md.                               the
      -               Mostaki                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 83   0+400    Left   m         Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                Zia           rs        the
      0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 84   0+700    Left   Namzul    mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fish             Own




Final ESSA                                    149                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                                          the
      0+500-          Md.         Chapra        Vendor    ground/desk/
 85   0+600    Left   Sahjahan    Masjid        s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                       rs        the
      -               Abdul                     Busines   ground/desk/
 86   0+200    Left   Khaleque    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                                               the
      -               Md.                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 87   0+400    Left   Shahariar   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
                                  Zia           rs        the
      0+600-          Md.         Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 88   0+700    Left   Rafiqul     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fish             Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                                               the
      -                                         Vendor    ground/desk/
 89   0+400    Left   Md. Raju    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                Squatte   structure but
      0+000                                     rs        running
      -               Md. Zakir                 Busines   business on
 90   0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra     s         the             Fruit shop       Own



Final ESSA                                      150                                    January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -                                        Busines   ground/desk/
 91   0+200    Left   Ruman      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Pitha           Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Zia                     the
      0+600-          Md.     Al Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 92   0+700    Left   Amin       mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
      -               Hasan                    Busines   ground/desk/
 93   0+200    Left   Mahmud     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
      -               Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 94   0+400    Left   Reyad      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -               Salauddi                 Busines   ground/desk/
 95   0+200    Left   n          Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Meat shop       Own




Final ESSA                                     151                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                 Zia           rs        the
      0+600-          Md.        Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 96   0+700    Left   Awoal      mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fish             Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
      -                                        Vendor    ground/desk/
 97   0+400    Left   Md. Asif   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -               Md. Tuta                 Busines   ground/desk/
 98   0+200    Left   Mia      Sonir Akhra     s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
      -                                        Busines   ground/desk/
 99   0+200    Left   Selim      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                 pnp    bazar, rs        the
 10   0+400-                     zia    sarani Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+500    Left   Uzzal      road          s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                               Squatte   structure but
                                 Pmp    bazar, rs        running
 10   0+400-                     zia    sarani Busines   business on
 1    0+500    Left   jhorna     raod          s         the             Vegetable shop   Own



Final ESSA                                     152                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Zia                     the
 10   0+600-          Md.        Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+700    Left   Parvej     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 10   -               Jahangir                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+400    Left   Alam       Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
 10   -               Jasim                    Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+200    Left   Uddin      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 10   -               Shahjaha                 Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+200    Left   n          Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Meat shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 10   -               Abul                     Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+200    Left   Fayez      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish             Own




Final ESSA                                     153                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                Zia            rs        the
 10   0+600-                    Saroni,kodo    Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+700    Left   Md. Rafiq mtoli          s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop    Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 10   -               Abidur                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Rahman     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 10   -               Md. Babu                 Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+200    Left   Mia      Sonir Akhra     s         table/van=7     Fruit shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Pmp    bazar,           the
 11   0+400-                     zia    sarani Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+500    Left   Mehedi     raod          s         table/van=7     Fruit shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Zia                     the
 11   0+600-                     Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+700    Left   Md. Tipu   mtoli         s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
      0+300                                              running
 11   -               Md.                      Vendor    business on
 2    0+400    Left   Faruk      Polashpur     s         the             Cloth Shop        Own



Final ESSA                                     154                                      January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+000           Md.                               the
 11   -               Jaman                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+200    Left   Sheikh    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 11   -               Moham                   Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+200    Left   mad Ali   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop    Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                            Squatte     business on
                                Pnp Bazar, rs           the
 11   0+400-                    Zia  Sarani Busines     ground/desk/
 5    0+500    Left   Ruhul     Road        s           table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
 11   0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+700    Left   Akter     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fish              Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
 11   -               Amzad                   Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop        Own




Final ESSA                                    155                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 11   -               Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Sujon Das Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 11   -               Mokbul                  Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Dry Fish          Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                            Squatte     business on
                                Pnp Bazar, rs           the
 12   0+400-                    Zia  Sarani Busines     ground/desk/
 0    0+500    Left   younus    Road        s           table/van=7     Grocery           Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 12   -               Alamgir                 Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                              Squatte
                                Pnp Bazar, rs
 12   0+400-                    Zia    Sarani Busines
 2    0+500    Left   Billal    Road          s         Tin-made      Grocery             Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
 12   0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+700    Left   Badol     mtoli         s         table/van=7   Fish                Own




Final ESSA                                    156                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
 12   -               Shamim                   Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+200    Left   Ahmed      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 12   -               Azaher                   Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+200    Left   Ali        Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Meat shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                             Squatte     business on
                                 Pnp Bazar, rs           the
 12   0+400-                     Zia  Sarani Busines     ground/desk/
 6    0+500    Left   Joshim     Road        s           table/van=7     Meat shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 12   -               Liton                    Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+200    Left   Ahmed      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                               Squatte
                                 Zia           rs
 12   0+600-          Md.        Saroni,kodo   Busines
 8    0+700    Left   Alomgir    mtoli         s         Tin-made      Meat shop         Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                               Reside    ripal     No
                                               nce       structure but
                                               cum-      running
                                               busines   business on
      0+000                                    s         the
 12   -                                        (squatt   ground/desk/
 9    0+200    Left   Md. Jala   Sonir Akhra   er)       table/van=7   Fuska Shop        Own




Final ESSA                                     157                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                              Squatte
                                  Pnp Bazar, rs
 13   0+400-                      Zia  Sarani Busines
 0    0+500    Left   Al Amin     Road        s           Tin-made        Vegetable shop    Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
                                  Zia           rs        the
 13   0+600-          Md.         Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+700    Left   Sumon       mtoli         s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                       rs        the
 13   -               Khorshed                  Busines   ground/desk/
 2    0+200    Left   Alam        Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Juice shop        Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000                                     rs        the
 13   -                                         Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+200    Left   Rubel       Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000                                     rs        the
 13   -                                         Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+200    Left   Aktar Ali   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish              Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                  Zia                     the
 13   0+600-          Md.         Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+700    Left   Sohag       mtoli         s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own




Final ESSA                                      158                                      January 2026
                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
 13   -               Shanto                   Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+200    Left   Mia        Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Pnp Bazar,              the
 13   0+400-                     Zia  Sarani Vendor      ground/desk/
 7    0+500    Left   Sumon      Road        s           table/van=7     Cosmetics Shop Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 13   -                                        Busines   ground/desk/
 8    0+200    Left   Al Amin    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                             Squatte     business on
                                 Pnp Bazar, rs           the
 13   0+400-                     Zia  Sarani Busines     ground/desk/
 9    0+500    Left   Jalal      Road        s           table/van=7     Tea stall       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                 Zia           rs        the
 14   0+600-          Md.        Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+700    Left   Mosharaf   mtoli         s         table/van=7     Grocery         Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                               Squatte   structure but
      0+000           Md.                      rs        running
 14   -               Faruk                    Busines   business on
 1    0+200    Left   Hasan      Sonir Akhra   s         the             Fruit shop      Own



Final ESSA                                     159                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 14   0+200-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+300    Left   Md. Rasel Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                Zia           rs        the
 14   0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+700    Left   Sumon     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
 14   -               Shamsul                 Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+200    Left   Alam      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 14   0+200-          nuru                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+300    Left   Shek      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 14   -                                       Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+200    Left   Samsul    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish             Own




Final ESSA                                    160                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Pnp Bazar,              the
 14   0+400-                    Zia  Sarani Vendor      ground/desk/
 7    0+500    Left   Sujon     Road        s           table/van=7     Cosmetics Shop Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 14   -               Abdul                   Busines   ground/desk/
 8    0+200    Left   Hannan    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fish             Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
 14   0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 9    0+700    Left   Malek     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Pitha            Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+000                                             the
 15   -               Md. Nasir               Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+200    Left   Uddin     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Pnp Bazar,              the
 15   0+400-                    Zia  Sarani Vendor      ground/desk/
 1    0+500    Left   Melon     Road        s           table/van=7     Fast food        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                              Squatte   structure but
                                              rs        running
 15   0+200-          Tuhin                   Busines   business on
 2    0+300    Left   Shek      Polashpur     s         the             Flower Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                    161                                     January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                              Squatte
                                Zia           rs
 15   0+600-          Md.       Saroni,kodo   Busines
 3    0+700    Left   shopn     mtoli         s         Tin-made        Pitha            Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
 15   -               Mostafa                 Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+200    Left   Kamal     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Tea stall        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                      Md.                     rs        the
 15   0+200-          Shahin                  Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+300    Left   Shek      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Flower Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 15   -               Nilu                    Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+200    Left   Akter     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Pnp Bazar,              the
 15   0+400-                    Zia  Sarani Vendor      ground/desk/
 7    0+500    Left   Rejaul    Road        s           table/van=7     Fast food        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                Pnp Bazar,              structure but
 15   0+400-                    Zia  Sarani Vendor      running
 8    0+500    Left   Amin      Road        s           business on     Fast food        Own



Final ESSA                                    162                                     January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        the
                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 15   0+200-          Johurul                 Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+300    Left   Islam     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Flower Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                Zia           rs        the
 16   0+600-                    Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+700    Left   Md. Ali   mtoli         s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
 16   -               Hasan                   Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+200    Left   Mia       Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop    Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+000                                             the
 16   -               Mojibur                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+200    Left   Rahman    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop    Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 16   -               Abdur                   Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+200    Left   Rasid     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop    Own




Final ESSA                                    163                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                              Squatte
                                 Zia   Sarani rs
 16   0+400-                     Road,        Busines
 4    0+500    Left   Mahbub     Nurpur       s          Tin-made        Meat shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                 Zia                     the
 16   0+600-          Md.        Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+700    Left   Kaswer     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fish             Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
 16   -               Shahidul                 Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+200    Left   Islam      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Pan-supari       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 16   0+200-          md.                      Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+300    Left   yunus      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 16   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 8    0+300    Left   Azad       Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Bag Shop         Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 16   -                                        Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+200    Left   Hasan      Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own




Final ESSA                                     164                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 17   -               Md. Sha                 Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+200    Left   Alam    Sonir Akhra     s         table/van=7   Vegetable shop     Own
                                              Squatte
                                Zia           rs
 17   1+300-          Mst       Saroni,kodo   Busines
 1    1+500    Left   Nargis    mtoli         s         Tin-made        Tea stall        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                             Squatte    business on
                                Zia   Sarani rs         the
 17   0+400-                    Road,        Busines    ground/desk/
 2    0+500    Left   Sumon     Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                             Squatte    business on
                                Zia   Sarani rs         the
 17   0+400-          Abudl     Road,        Busines    ground/desk/
 3    0+500    Left   Jalil     Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 17   0+400-          Al                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+500    Left   Mamun     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 17   0+200-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+300    Left   Alom      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Shoe Shop        Own




Final ESSA                                    165                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
 17   -               Shahid                  Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+200    Left   Mia       Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7   Vegetable shop    Own
                                              Squatte
                                Zia           rs
 17   1+300-          Mst       Saroni,kodo   Busines
 7    1+500    Left   Munni     mtoli         s         Tin-made        Tea stall       Own
                                              Squatte
                                              rs
 17   1+300-          Md.                     Busines
 8    1+500    Left   Harun     Rosulbag      s         Tin-made        Tea stall       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                 Zia   Sarani rs        the
 17   0+400-          Md. Billal Road,        Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+500    Left   Mia        Nurpur       s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 18   0+400-          Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+500    Left   Kanchan   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
 18   -               Sumon                   Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+200    Left   Hossain   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Pan-supari      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                              Squatte   structure but
                                              rs        running
 18   0+200-          Taslima                 Busines   business on
 2    0+300    Left   akter     Polashpur     s         the             crockeries Shop Own



Final ESSA                                    166                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          ground/desk/
                                                          table/van=7



                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
                                                rs        the
 18   0+200-          Abu                       Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+300    Left   Taher       Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                               Squatte    business on
                                  Zia   Sarani rs         the
 18   0+400-                      Road,        Busines    ground/desk/
 4    0+500    Left   Hasan       Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Fuska Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                                          the
 18   0+400-          Md.                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+500    Left   Kamal       Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                       rs        the
 18   -               Siyam                     Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+200    Left   Hossain     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                      South
                      City
 18   1+300-          Corporati                 (DSCC)
 7    1+500    Left   on          Rosulbag      Dustbin   Pucca                            Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                               Squatte    ripal     No
                                  Zia   Sarani rs         structure but
 18   0+400-                      Road,        Busines    running
 8    0+500    Left   Alauddin    Nurpur       s          business on Pitha                Own



Final ESSA                                      167                                    January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         the
                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 18   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+300    Left   Manik      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
 19   -               Sobahan                  Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+200    Left   Mia        Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 19   0+400-                                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+500    Left   Shahadat   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 19   0+400-          Kamal                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+500    Left   Hossain    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
 19   -               Imran                    Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+200    Left   Hossain    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own




Final ESSA                                     168                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                               Squatte    business on
                                  Zia   Sarani rs         the
 19   0+400-                      Road,        Busines    ground/desk/
 4    0+500    Left   Md. Liton   Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Jhal Muri        Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
                                                rs        the
 19   0+200-                                    Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+300    Left   Rony        Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
                                                rs        the
 19   0+200-          Johir                     Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+300    Left   Hossain     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                       rs        the
 19   -               Ekram                     Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+200    Left   Kazi        Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                                          the
 19   0+400-          Ruhul                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+500    Left   Amin        Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                               Squatte    structure but
                                  Zia   Sarani rs         running
 19   0+400-                      Road,        Busines    business on
 9    0+500    Left   Saiful      Nurpur       s          the             Cosmetics Shop Own



Final ESSA                                      169                                    January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                     rs        the
 20   -               Joynal                  Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+200    Left   Abedin    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop    Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 20   0+200-                                  Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+300    Left   Tutul     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                             Squatte    business on
                                Zia   Sarani rs         the
 20   0+400-                    Road,        Busines    ground/desk/
 2    0+500    Left   Zafor     Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Cosmetics Shop Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 20   0+200-                                  Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+300    Left   Alamin    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                             Squatte    business on
                                Zia   Sarani rs         the
 20   0+400-                    Road,        Busines    ground/desk/
 4    0+500    Left   Ali       Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop        Own




Final ESSA                                    170                                      January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 20   0+400-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+500    Left   Hasan     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 20   -               Yeamin                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+400    Left   Hasan     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                             Squatte    business on
                                Zia   Sarani rs         the
 20   0+400-          Abul      Road,        Busines    ground/desk/
 7    0+500    Left   kalam     Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 20   -               Md. Abu                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Taher   Sonir Akhra     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 20   0+200-          Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 9    0+300    Left   Jashim    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
 21   0+400-                                  Vendor    business on
 0    0+500    Left   Sujon     Sonir Akhra   s         the             Cloth Shop       Own



Final ESSA                                    171                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                 Zia   Sarani           the
 21   0+400-                     Road,        Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+500    Left   Jahangir   Nurpur       s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 21   -               Md. Apon                 Vendor   ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Ahmed    Sonir Akhra     s        table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                      Md.                               the
 21   0+200-          Monir                    Vendor   ground/desk/
 3    0+300    Left   Hossain    Polashpur     s        table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 21   0+400-                                   Vendor   ground/desk/
 4    0+500    Left   Rasel      Sonir Akhra   s        table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                 Zia   Sarani rs        the
 21   0+400-          Chunnu     Road,        Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+500    Left   Mia        Nurpur       s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                     172                                   January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 21   0+200-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+300    Left   Joynal    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 21   -               Md. Ala                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 7    0+400    Left   Uddin   Sonir Akhra     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 21   0+400-          Salina                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+500    Left   Khatun    Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani            the
 21   -                         Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 9    0+400    Left   Asik      Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 22   0+200-          Billal                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+300    Left   Hossain   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
 22   0+400-                                  Vendor    business on
 1    0+500    Left   Liton     Sonir Akhra   s         the             Cloth Shop       Own



Final ESSA                                    173                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 22   -               Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Zakaria   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 22   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+400    Left   Helena                  s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 22   0+200-          Md. Kobir               Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+300    Left   Hossain   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani            the
 22   -                         Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 5    0+400    Left   Riad      Polashpur    s          table/van=7     crockeries Shop Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 22   0+200-          Hasmot                  Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+300    Left   Ali       Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own




Final ESSA                                    174                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 22   0+400-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 7    0+500    Left   Imdadul   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Md.                               the
 22   -               Abdul                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Bakir     Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani            the
 22   -                         Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 9    0+400    Left   Rina      Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 23   0+200-                                  Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+300    Left   Lal Mia   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     crockeries Shop Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Md.                               the
 23   -               Khairul                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+400    Left   Islam     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani            running
 23   -                         Road,        Vendor     business on
 2    0+400    Left   Nargis    Polashpur    s          the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                    175                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          ground/desk/
                                                          table/van=7



                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
                                                rs        the
 23   0+200-          Md.                       Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+300    Left   Milon       Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cosmetics Shop Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300           Md.                                 the
 23   -               Rayhan                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+400    Left   Nasif       Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
                                                rs        the
 23   0+400-                                    Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+500    Left   Md. Sisir   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                       Zia   Sarani            the
 23   -                           Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 6    0+400    Left   Mrs. Rina   Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                                               the
 23   -               Md.                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 7    0+400    Left   Mehedi      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own




Final ESSA                                      176                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 23   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 8    0+300    Left   Rajon      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Pan-supari      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                      Zia   Sarani            the
 23   -                          Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 9    0+400    Left   Ramjan     Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 24   0+400-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+500    Left   Toffazle   Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                      Zia   Sarani            the
 24   -                          Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 1    0+400    Left   Ibrahim    Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Grocery         Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
 24   -               Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Masud      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                               Squatte   structure but
                                               rs        running
 24   0+200-          Md.                      Busines   business on
 3    0+300    Left   Sumon      Polashpur     s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                     177                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 24   0+900-          Saleha                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    1+100    Left   Khatun    Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Tea stall       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 24   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+300    Left   Hossen    Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Shoe Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 24   -               Masum                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+400    Left   Reza      Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 24   0+900-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 7    1+100    Left   Shamim    Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 24   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Sohel     Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Shoe Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                     178                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 24   -               Mosharra                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 9    0+400    Left   f Hossain Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 25   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 0    0+400    Left   Rasel     Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 25   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+300    Left   Romjan    Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 25   0+900-          Ruhul                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    1+100    Left   Amin      Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 25   -               Yeakub                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+400    Left   Ali       Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
 25   0+200-                                   Vendor    business on
 4    0+300    Left   Md. Alom Polashpur       s         the             Fuska Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                     179                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 25   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 5    0+400    Left   Ovi       Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 25   0+900-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 6    1+100    Left   Polash    Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 25   0+900-          Abdus                    Busines   ground/desk/    Cycle/Van/Rick
 7    1+100    Left   Sobhan    Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     shaw Servicing   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 25   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 8    0+300    Left   Hasan     Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 25   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 9    0+400    Left   Kabir     Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                     180                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 26   -               Siyam                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+400    Left   Hossain   Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                      Md.                      rs        the
 26   0+200-          Omor                     Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+300    Left   Faruk     Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
 26   -               Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Rabbi     Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                      Md.                                the
 26   0+900-          Sohel                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    1+100    Left   Rana      Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 26   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 4    0+400    Left   Sabit     Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                               Squatte   structure but
                                               rs        running
 26   0+200-          Md.                      Busines   business on
 5    0+300    Left   Jamal     Polashpur      s         the             Cloth Shop



Final ESSA                                     181                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 26   -               Qaiyum                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+400    Left   Mia       Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                      rs        the
 26   -               Serajul                  Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+200    Left   Islam     Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Chicken Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 26   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Sawon     Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Cloth Shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 26   0+200-          Md.                      Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+300    Left   Imran     Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 27   -               Jesmin                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+400    Left   Akhter    Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop        Own




Final ESSA                                     182                                      January 2026
                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                      Md.                      rs        the
 27   0+900-          Ramiz                    Busines   ground/desk/
 1    1+100    Left   Uddin     Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 27   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Samin     Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 27   0+900-          Abdul                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    1+100    Left   Razzaq    Japani Bazar   s         table/van=7     Fruit shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani             the
 27   -                         Road,        Vendor      ground/desk/
 4    0+400    Left   Al Amin   Polashpur    s           table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 27   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+300    Left   Mahabur   Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
      0+300                                              running
 27   -               Md.                      Vendor    business on
 6    0+400    Left   Motaleb   Polashpur      s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                     183                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 27   0+900-          Md.                       Vendor   ground/desk/    Cycle/Van/Rick
 7    1+100    Left   Razib      Japani Bazar   s        table/van=7     shaw Servicing   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 27   0+200-          Md.                       Vendor   ground/desk/
 8    0+300    Left   Sohag      Polashpur      s        table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 27   -               Sultan                    Vendor   ground/desk/
 9    0+400    Left   Khan       Polashpur      s        table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                      Zia   Sarani            the
 28   -                          Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 0    0+400    Left   Roni       Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 28   0+200-                                    Vendor   ground/desk/
 1    0+300    Left   Md. Labu   Polashpur      s        table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own




Final ESSA                                      184                                   January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani            the
 28   -                         Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Rana      Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Bag Shop         Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                     Zia   Sarani            the
 28   -                         Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 3    0+400    Left   Hridoy    Polashpur    s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Md.                               the
 28   -               Faruk                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+400    Left   Hossain   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 28   0+200-   Rig    Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+300    ht     Ismail    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia   Sarani            the
 28   0+400-                    Road,        Vendor     ground/desk/
 6    0+500    Left   Aminul    Nurpur       s          table/van=7     Cosmetics Shop Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                              Squatte   structure but
                                              rs        running
 28   0+200-          Md.                     Busines   business on
 7    0+300    Left   Based     Polashpur     s         the             Vegetable shop   Own



Final ESSA                                    185                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Mst.                              the
 28   -               Hazera                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Khatun     Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 28   0+400-                     Zia    Sarani Vendor   ground/desk/
 9    0+500    Left   Jahangir   Road, nurpur s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 29   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+400    Left   Md. Alam Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                      Md.                     rs        the
 29   0+200-          Aynal                   Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+300    Left   Haque      Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Md.                               the
 29   -               Jabed                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Alam       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                    186                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                Squatte   business on
      0+000           Md.                       rs        the
 29   -               Joynal                    Busines   ground/desk/
 3    0+200    Left   Abedin       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
      0+300                                               the
 29   -               Md.                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+400    Left   Yeasin Ali   Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                                          the
 29   0+400-                       Zia  Sarani Vendor     ground/desk/
 5    0+500    Left   sahida       Road        s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                                                          business on
                                                          the
 29   0+400-                       Zia  Sarani Vendor     ground/desk/
 6    0+500    Left   Firoz        Road        s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
                      Md.                       Squatte   business on
      0+000           Shamim                    rs        the
 29   -               Hossain                   Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+200    Left   Mollah       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Fish
                                                          Polyethene/T
                                                          ripal     No
                                                          structure but
                                                          running
 29   0+400-                       Zia    Sarani Vendor   business on
 8    0+500    Left   Fazlul       Road, nurpur s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                      187                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 29   -               Md. Anik                Vendor    ground/desk/
 9    0+400    Left   Hasan    Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 30   -               Md. Rofiq               Busines   ground/desk/
 0    0+200    Left   Mollah    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 30   0+400-                    Zia    Sarani Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+500    Left   Jhuma     Road, nurpur s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
      0+000                                   rs        the
 30   -               Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 2    0+200    Left   Rubel     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Fish            Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Md.                               the
 30   -               Sihab                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+400    Left   Sarkar    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own




Final ESSA                                    188                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 30   0+400-                     Zia    Sarani Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+500    Left   Belayet    Road, nurpur s          table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 30   -               Kanon                    Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+200    Left   Sorkar     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Fish
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
 30   -               Md. Rifat                Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+400    Left   Hossain   Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 30   -               Md.                      Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+200    Left   Nurjamal   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 30   -               Safiya                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+400    Left   Akhter     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                               Squatte
                                 Zia           rs
 30   1+100-                     Saroni,kodo   Busines
 9    1+300    Left   Nazrul     mtoli         s         Tin-made        Tea stall        Own




Final ESSA                                     189                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                 Zia
 31   1+100-                     Saroni,kodo   (DSCC)
 0    1+300    Left   DSCC       mtoli         Dustbin   Pucca                            Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 31   -               Bakhar                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+400    Left   Ali        Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
      0+000                                    rs        the
 31   -               Md.                      Busines   ground/desk/
 2    0+200    Left   Mukul      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300           Md.                                the
 31   -               Masud                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+400    Left   Mia        Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                      Md.                      rs        the
 31   0+200-          Salauddi                 Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+300    Left   n          Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Meat shop        Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                 Zia           rs        the
 31   1+100-                     Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/    Cycle/Van/Rick
 5    1+300    Left   Sumon      mtoli         s         table/van=7     shaw Servicing   Own




Final ESSA                                     190                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300           Mst.                              the
 31   -               Rumana                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+400    Left   Akter     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 31   0+200-                                  Busines   ground/desk/
 7    0+300    Left   Shofiq    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                Zia           rs        the
 31   1+100-                    Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 8    1+300    Left   Sorif     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Fuska Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 31   0+200-                                  Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+300    Left   Mahabub   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
 32   1+100-                    Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    1+300    Left   Sobuj     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Juice shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                              Squatte   structure but
                                              rs        running
 32   0+200-                                  Busines   business on
 1    0+300    Left   Imran     Polashpur     s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                    191                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
 32   1+100-                    Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    1+300    Left   Kroim     mtoli         s         table/van=7     Cobbler          Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                Zia                     the
 32   1+100-                    Saroni,kodo   Vendor    ground/desk/    Cycle/Van/Rick
 3    1+300    Left   babul     mtoli         s         table/van=7     shaw Servicing   Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 32   0+200-          Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 4    0+300    Left   Jamal     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 32   0+200-          Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 5    0+300    Left   Hasib     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Shoe Shop        Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                Zia           rs        the
 32   1+100-                    Saroni,kodo   Busines   ground/desk/
 6    1+300    Left   Suklal    mtoli         s         table/van=7     Cobbler          Own




Final ESSA                                    192                                    January 2026
                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                 Zia
 32   1+100-                     Saroni,kodo   (DSCC)
 7    1+300    Left   DSCC       mtoli         Dustbin   Pucca                            Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 32   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 8    0+300    Left   Rasel      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                               Squatte   business on
                                               rs        the
 32   0+200-                                   Busines   ground/desk/
 9    0+300    Left   Md. Raju   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 33   0+200-          Imtiyaz                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+300    Left   Uddin      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Vegetable shop   Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
 33   -               Md. Belal                Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+400    Left   Hossen    Polashpur      s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+300                                              the
 33   -               Md. Abul                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+400    Left   Hasem    Polashpur       s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop       Own




Final ESSA                                     193                                    January 2026
                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 33   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+400   Left   Shaharia   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 33   -              Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+400   Left   Alomgir    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300          Md.                                the
 33   -              Rubel                    Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+400   Left   Hossen     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300          Md.                                the
 33   -              Alomgir                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+400   Left   Hossen     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 33   -              Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 7    0+400   Left   Manik      Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
      0+300                                             running
 33   -                                       Vendor    business on
 8    0+400   Left   Noyon      Polashpur     s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                    194                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 33   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 9    0+400   Left   Arif        Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+400   Left   Nahid       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+400   Left   Md. Siraj   Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -              Masuda                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 2    0+400   Left   Begum       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+400   Left   Habib       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own




Final ESSA                                    195                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -                                       Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+400   Left   Md. Jafor   Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -              Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+400   Left   Akash       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cosmetics Shop Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -              Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 6    0+400   Left   Sabbir3     Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -              Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 7    0+400   Left   Mamun       Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 34   -              Md. Amir                 Vendor    ground/desk/
 8    0+400   Left   Hossen   Polashpur       s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
      0+300          Md.                                running
 34   -              Jahangir                 Vendor    business on
 9    0+400   Left   Alom        Polashpur    s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                    196                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        ground/desk/
                                                        table/van=7



                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
      0+300                                             the
 35   -               Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 0    0+400    Left   Milon      Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 35   0+400-          Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 1    0+500    Left   Babul      Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Aluminium       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 35   0+400-          Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 2    0+500    Left   Mosarrof   Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cosmetics Shop Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 35   0+400-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 3    0+500    Left   Hasan      Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 35   0+400-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+500    Left   Rajib      Polashpur    s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own




Final ESSA                                    197                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 35   0+400-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 5    0+500    Left   Raiyan    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Shoe Shop       Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 35   0+400-                                  Busines   ground/desk/
 6    0+500    Left   Joshim    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 35   0+400-          Md.                     Vendor    ground/desk/
 7    0+500    Left   Ibrahim   Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                              Squatte   business on
                                              rs        the
 35   0+400-          Md.                     Busines   ground/desk/
 8    0+500    Left   Shamim    Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
                                                        business on
                                                        the
 35   0+400-                                  Vendor    ground/desk/
 9    0+500    Left   Jahid     Polashpur     s         table/van=7     Cloth Shop      Own
                                                        Polyethene/T
                                                        ripal     No
                                                        structure but
                                                        running
 36   0+400-                                  Vendor    business on
 0    0+500    Left   Samsu     Polashpur     s         the             Cloth Shop      Own



Final ESSA                                    198                                    January 2026
                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


                                                         ground/desk/
                                                         table/van=7



                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
                                                         the
 36   0+400-          Md.                      Vendor    ground/desk/
 1    0+500    Left   Hanif      Polashpur     s         table/van=7   Cloth Shop      Own
                                               Squatte
                                               rs
 36   1+500-          Md.                      Busines
 2    1+654    Left   Munna      Rosulbag      s         Tin-made       Tea stall      Own
 36   1+500-          DSCC                     (DSCC)
 3    1+654    Left   dustbine   Rosulbag      Dustbin   Pucca                         Own
                                                         Polyethene/T
                                                         ripal     No
                                                         structure but
                                                         running
                                                         business on
      0+000                                              the
 36   -               Monsur                   Vendor    ground/desk/
 4    0+200    Left   Ali        Sonir Akhra   s         table/van=7   Fish            Own




Final ESSA                                     199                                  January 2026
                                                                                             Official Use Only
