Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 09/04/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04429




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 18, 2024                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P506340                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     MRDP                         2025

                     Operation Name            Maharashtra Resilience Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     India                     India                                  SOUTH ASIA                   Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                   Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Government of India       Sangli, Miraj and Kupwad Municipal     06-Feb-2025                  29-May-2025
                                               Corporation, Kolhapur Municipal
                                               Corporation, Maharashtra Institution
                                               for Transformation (MITRA), Relief &
                                               Rehabilitation Department (R&R),



Public Disclosure
                                               Maharashtra Krishna Valley
                                               Development Corporation (MKVDC),
                                               Department of Finance, Ichalkaranji
                                               Municipal Corporation

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     25-Jul-2024               400,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To strengthen multi-hazard climate and disaster risk management and institutional capacity for Maharashtra's resilient
                     development.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities

                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                  Page 2 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     The proposed project shall strengthen multi-hazard climate and disaster risk management and institutional capacity for
                     Maharashtra's resilient development. The identified components include the following: i) Climate-informed Flood Risk
                     Management, ii) Multi-Hazard Resilience Building in Districts and Cities, iii) Upgrading Emergency Management
                     Capacities, iv) Private Capital Mobilization for Risk Financing, and v) Implementation Support and Knowledge
                     Management.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Maharashtra is one of India’s economic growth engines aiming for a US$1 trillion economy by 2027–28, while also facing
                     increased frequency of extreme weather events and climate change impact. It is the second most populous, third
                     largest in terms of area, third most urbanized state and contributes 14 percent to the national Gross Domestic Product.

                     The project seeks to enhance resilient development in Maharashtra by demonstrating an integrated climate and
                     disaster risk management approach in the upper Krishna River sub-basin, including the cities of Kolhapur, Sangli, and
                     Ichalkaranji, using a strategic mix of state, district, and city-level actions. The sub-basin faced unprecedented flooding in
                     2019 and is likely to experience increased frequency and intensity of extreme hydro-meteorological events in the
                     coming years as well. There have been flooding events in the state almost every year since 2019 with 1,246 lives lost
                     during 2019–2022. This period has also witnessed landslides, unseasonal rainfall, dry spells, droughts, heatwaves,
                     lightning strikes, and rising frequency of cyclones from Arabian Sea impacting the state.

                     Apart from this, urban flooding is emerging as a frequent and damaging climate change-related hazard, disrupting lives



Public Disclosure
                     and economic activity. Many cities increasingly face flood events due to unplanned and unregulated urban
                     development, inadequate river management, insufficient or lack of storm water drainage, and encroachments on water
                     bodies/flood zones. Smaller cities like Kolhapur, Sangli, and Ichalkaranji are increasingly impacted.

                     Both Sangli and Kolhapur districts are relatively well-developed compared to other parts of the state but lack adequate
                     risk management capacity. The districts rank low in poverty and high in human development indicators, compared to
                     other regions in Maharashtra. Sangli and Kolhapur districts do not have significant Scheduled Tribe populations or
                     Scheduled Areas under the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Govt. of Maharashtra has prior and substantial experience with safeguard requirements of the World Bank through
                     various national and state level projects covering sectors like Urban Transport, Technical Education, Vocational
                     Education, Skills Development, Disaster Management, Water Supply and Agriculture. However, this is the first operation
                     to use ESF along with MahaSTRIDE (P181463) that is concurrently under preparation.

                     The proposed implementation set-up for MRDP involves establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) and six
                     Project Implementation Units (PIUs). The PMU will be set-up at Maharashtra Institute of Transformation (MITRA) and
                     PIUs will be set-up within a) Maharashtra Krishna Valley Development Corporation (KVDC) under Water Resources
                     Department (WRD); b) the State Relief and Rehabilitation Department (R&R); c) Dept. of Finance for risk finance and, d)
                     one each at Municipal Corporations of Sangli, Kolhapur and Ichalkaranji. A high-level Steering Committee for regular
                     monitoring and coordination will also be created for the operation.


                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     Both WRD and R&R have experience of externally aided projects, including those financed by the Bank. However, the
                     capacity to assess and mitigate E&S risks, consistent with the requirements of the ESF is inadequate as a bulk of
                     previous experience pertains to application and implementation of Bank policies under the Safeguards regime.

                     Currently, the PMU as well as the PIUs don't have required Environment and Social expertise, necessitating early
                     deployment and training of specialists to support project preparation and implementation. The PMU will be hiring E&S
                     experts to prepare the required project level documents with guidance from Bank’s E&S team. The PIUs will be
                     preparing sub-project-level E&S instruments through consultancy firms appointed for DPR preparation. The project level
                     documents will include a robust institutional strategy to strengthen expertise on E&S risk management in the PMU and
                     PIUs.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The environmental risks are rated 'substantial'. These emanate from interventions associated with (i) flood risk
                     management, including reservoir operations, possible improvement of river cross-sections and nallah restoration
                     (Component 1), (ii) landslide risk mitigation (Component 2.1), (iii) storm water drainage works (Component 2.2) and,
                     (iii) upgrade of Emergency Operation Centers (EOCs) (Component 3). Likely adverse impacts due to works under
                     Component 1 include: i) impacts on ecology and habitats - both aquatic and riparian; ii) impact on vegetation,



Public Disclosure
                     plantations and forest areas due to site clearance, tree felling and diversion of forest land; iii) impact on flows, water
                     quality and river morphology affecting hydrological/ecological cycles; iv) pressure on natural resources (large quantity
                     of stone required for protection works); v) delays in obtaining regulatory permits and slippages in compliance to
                     conditions therein; vi) disruption to services due to utility shifting; vii) OHS issues, particularly those associated with
                     work in/around water and construction vehicles/machinery movement, viii) direct or indirect impacts on cultural
                     heritage, ix) issues with management of dredged materials and; x) contextual and/or legacy issues. Potential
                     risks/impacts associated with works under Component 2 include: i) loss of trees/vegetation; ii) OHS risks for workers;
                     iii) community health and safety risks (specifically around sensitive receptors); iv) improper disposal of construction
                     wastes/debris; v) increase in air/dust, soil, water and noise pollution during construction; vi) impact on
                     cultural/common property resources and; vii) disruption of services due to utility shifting. For construction and
                     operation of EOCs, primary issues/risks are associated with e-waste management, energy footprint and, life & fire
                     safety risks. The risk rating will be revisited once more granular/specific information on the location and scale of
                     interventions is available.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating for MRDP is 'substantial'. Flood risk mitigation works are likely to involve acquisition of small
                     parcels of private agriculture lands along the river banks, including government and private structures and field crops.
                     The urban storm water and drainage works could create minor impacts on private structures and livelihoods (like
                     staircases, ramps, shops etc.) over the existing drains/roads, Land may be accrued for the pumping stations. Potential
                     for significant and complex resettlement and social conflict is not expected. Collective impacts on tribal people are
                     not expected to be significant, given their low presence in the project area (less than 1%). Given the scope of


                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     construction work in the rural areas and the towns, establishment of construction sites and labor camps will lead to
                     risks associated with labor influx, labor camp management and OHS/CHS. Managing expectations, entitlements, and
                     concerns of primary project stakeholders, including project beneficiaries, adversely impacted groups, local
                     governments and community groups/leaders will be critical for effective stakeholder management. Gram Panchayats
                     along the river sites as well as Urban Local Bodies in urban settlements will need to be engaged in design and
                     implementation phase. SEA/SH risk is assessed to be moderate. Lack of adequate technical and operational expertise
                     in PMU and PIUs in assessing, mitigating and managing E&S risks and impacts consistent with applicable ESSs is an
                     additional risk factor, in addition to weak coordination. While the exact nature of social risks and impacts of the
                     project interventions will only be known during the assessments, necessary provisions would be required in the
                     project's ESMF and RPF to address the social impacts. The substantial rating for social risks will be reviewed based on
                     site-specific E&S screening and social impact assessments. The rating will be revisited with the availability of more
                     granular information.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      As the project involves multiple implementation agencies and different typology of interventions (not all will be
                      known by appraisal), an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. It will: (a) identify
                      key E&S risks from project activities, (b) lay-out procedures and guidance for E&S screening, E&S Impact Assessments



Public Disclosure
                      (ESIAs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), SEAs/CIAs
                      (watershed level) and other required instruments, as required, (d) monitoring and reporting (e) use of Borrower's
                      Framework, coordination and E&S capacity building measures and f) stakeholder engagement. ESMF will include
                      guidance on Technical Assistance studies and exclusion list. For priority investments, sub-project level ESIA, ESMP and
                      RAP will be prepared, as required. These instruments along with over-arching documents for the project (ESMF, RPF,
                      SEP, LMP and ESCP) will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed by project's appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      Project will engage with Project Affected Persons (PAPs), disadvantaged/vulnerable groups, community leaders, civil
                      society, Gram Panchayats (along Krishna river and its tributaries) and Urban Local Bodies (for stormwater drainage
                      works) in the planning, design and implementation phases. Project preparation will involve analysis of, and
                      consultations with, these stakeholders to better understand their interests, expectations, needs and concerns with
                      respect to proposed project interventions, as well as E&S impacts. Stakeholder feedback will inform design and
                      implementation strategy of the project. This will inform the preparation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP),
                      which will document the engagement process, consultations and feedback, and present a plan and methodology for
                      further consultations, communication, information disclosure, grievance redressal and capacity building during
                      various stages of project/sub-project cycle.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant




                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      The project will involve: (1) Direct Workers employed by PMU and PIUs, (2) Contracted Workers engaged for
                      construction work and consultancy services and, (3) Primary Suppliers of construction materials. Involvement of
                      community workers is not envisaged given the technical nature of the project. Construction work may require
                      migrant workers from both within and outside Maharashtra, depending on contractor's strategy and skill set
                      requirements. Risks related to child/forced labor employed by contractors/primary suppliers will need to be screened
                      and prevented. Conforming with ESS 2 requirements, Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared and
                      disclosed. Implementation Agencies will be required to follow the relevant requirements (including OHS) set under
                      national/state laws and ESS 2 when hiring direct and contracted workers. A functional GRM will be established
                      accessible to all direct, contracted and migrant workers to raise workplace related concerns.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      On resource efficiency, MRDP will consider: a) improving water management, b) enhancing energy efficiency, c)
                      utilization of construction debris/dredged materials from river widening/desilting works; d) use of alternative/local
                      materials and; e) use of native plants. For pollution management, focus will be on: a) construction waste
                      management; b) silt control; c) preventing contamination of water sources, including from construction activities; d)
                      measures for dust and noise pollution control; e) management of hazardous wastes and, fi) storage and management
                      of construction materials to prevent ground/soil contamination. Resource efficiency and pollution management
                      measures will apply both to grey and green/nature-based solutions. Moreover, institutional capacity of MKVDC and
                      ULBs on resource efficient, green and resilient construction methods will be created by integrating appropriate
                      approaches into designs and work procedures in addition to promoting use of nature based solutions.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Project interventions in remote rural areas as well as in more dense urban areas have the potential to create
                      Community Health and Safety issues. The project will require skilled and semi-skilled workers which will lead to
                      labour influx in the project area, exposing local communities, including children, to communicable diseases, sexually
                      transmitted diseases, as well as SEA/SH risks. Other risks associated with civil works may arise with increase in
                      construction traffic/machinery movement leading to road safety issues, disruption in movement, dust and
                      noise/vibration. Health and safety risks from Green/Nature based Solutions, flood mitigation as well as geophysical
                      structures will need careful mitigation. The ESMF and sub-project ESIAs will evaluate the risks and impacts of the
                      project on health and safety of the communities during project's life cycle. The proposed management measures in
                      accordance with mitigation hierarchy will be integrated in the ESMPs and bidding documents.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      Flood risk management and mitigation works are likely to impact private lands, The urban flood management and
                      drainage works are likely to impact informal settlers, squatters as well as private structures (like staircases, ramps,
                      shops etc.). For pumping stations, land acquisition will be required in case the Municipal Corporations are not able to
                      identify government land. Changes in flood management practices could impact livelihoods downstream. The extent
                      of land acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation impacts as well as downstream livelihood impacts are yet to be
                      determined. The ESMF will include an RPF which will provide the entitlements matrix (covering all relevant categories
                      of potential PAPs, including informal settlers and squatters) as well as guidance to prepare RAPs for relevant sub-




                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      projects. All project induced impacts on private lands, structures and crops will be compensated as per the
                      requirements of ESS 5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      Krishna River Basin is home to rich diversity of flora and fauna, including some endemic and endangered species. It is
                      a major perennial river of northern Western Ghats, originating at Mahabaleshwar in Maharashtra, and traverses 290
                      km through Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts of the state, before flowing into Karnataka. Project interventions
                      under Component 1 may have impacts on different types of habitats. If any sub-project is identified in or close to
                      natural habitats after technical technical feasibility studies are completed and environment screening exercises are
                      conducted (which will be undertaken early-on in the project cycle), country's regulatory framework as well as the
                      principles and requirements of ESS 6 will be applied. This will include application of mitigation hierarchy and
                      consultations with subject experts before further course of action is decided. At this stage, the sub-project locations
                      are not known as feasibility studies are yet to commence.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Even though both Sangli and Kolhapur have less than 1 percent tribal population, their collective presence in project
                      area can't be ruled out. During preparation and while conducting ESIA, the project will assess the specific risks and
                      impacts (both positive and negative) of project interventions on different tribal populations, including the




Public Disclosure
                      requirement for FPIC. Based on this assessment, a short Indigenous People’s Planning Framework (IPPF) will be
                      prepared. The IPPF will outline the principles and processes of mitigating the risks and negative impacts of the
                      project/sub-project on tribal population and will be aligned with the requirements of ESS 7. The IPPF will provide
                      guidance on preparing Indigenous People’s Development Plans (IPDPs), when required.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      Krishna River basin is endowed with rich history, built and natural heritage. One sub-project with known heritage
                      value under discussion at the concept stage is Radhanagari Dam. Such sub-projects will be identified early-on in the
                      preparation cycle using: a) environment and social screening and, b) consultations with stakeholders to identify any
                      sensitive issues related to tangible and intangible cultural resources. PMU, PIUs and Consultants will be sensitized on
                      requirements of ESS 8 in design, DPRs and ESIAs, including chance finds during site surveys and construction. This will
                      include the process to notify relevant authorities, fencing off the site and hiring experts for advice. Sub-project level
                      ESIAs will confirm existence of Cultural Heritage elements (such as ghats and weirs) for which management measures
                      will be required. Required procedures will be included in the ESMF and clauses will be integrated in Bidding
                      Documents. These requirements will be reflected in the ESCP.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS 9 is not relevant as the program does not involve Financial Intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        In Part
                       In the light of (a) long experience of Govt. of Maharashtra on several Bank financed operations; and (b) findings from
                       the India Overview Assessment, conducted by E&S teams for each of the 10 ESSs as part of India ESF Client Capacity
                       Development and Support Plan (FY 21-24), Borrower’s Frameworks related to labour management, involuntary
                       resettlement, pollution management, forests, biodiversity conservation and cultural heritage will be considered for
                       use, as applicable in the context of a sub-project, under MRDP.




                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Not Applicable

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or



Public Disclosure
                     required by Appraisal?
                     By Appraisal

                     A. At the project level, the following instruments will be prepared (commensurate with
                        issues/risks identified during project preparation) and disclosed in-country and on Bank's portal:

                     1. An Environment and Social Management Framework to guide screening, assessment and mitigation of E&S risks and
                     process/procedures for preparation of required ESMPs/ESS specific plans. Will include capacity assessment of the
                     Borrower/Implementation Agencies on E&S risk management. The ESMF will include an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                     Framework (IPPF) as well as GBV Risk Prevention/mitigation Plan (commensurate with the identified GBV risks).

                     2. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the approach to mitigating involuntary resettlement impacts on
                     title and non-title holders, including procedures and arrangements for preparation of Resettlement Actions Plans
                     (RAPs).

                     3. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

                     4. Labour Management Procedures (LMP)

                     5. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which will cover requirements pertaining to:
                        a) Organizational structure and staffing to manage EHS and social risks/impacts.


                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                        b) Preparation of sub-project specific screening reports, ESIAs, ESMPs, RAPs, and other plans
                        c) Evidence-based reporting requirements, to facilitate real time tracking of ESHS management.
                        d) Worksite safety and labor management, including OHS aspects
                        e) Biodiversity Conservation
                        f) Cultural Heritage Preservation
                        g) Implementation of SEP, GBV/SEA/SH risk prevention/mitigation plans, LMP and other instruments
                        h) Establishment and operationalization of GRMs.

                     B. For the sub-projects that will be prepared to meet DEA, Govt. of India's Readiness requirements for negotiations,
                     the following actions will be taken:

                      1.     An Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be carried out to identify and assess the E&S risks and
                     impacts based on sub-project's Feasibility Report and/or design/Detailed Project Report. This will include environment
                     and social baseline, assessment of applicable laws and regulations, analysis of alternatives, impact assessment and
                     recommended mitigation measures.

                     2. Preparation of specific Environment and Social Management Plans, which will cover management/mitigation
                     measures for identified impacts, implementation arrangements, monitoring and reporting requirements, cost
                     estimates/budget and detailed guidelines (as required to detail out specific E&S aspects).

                     3. Obtaining of requisite various regulatory clearances/statutory permissions.




Public Disclosure
                     C. Project Documents where E&S requirements will be Integrated, will include:

                     1) Integration of E&S requirements in the Terms of Reference for consultancies
                     2) Integration of ESHS aspects into relevant outputs/deliverables/studies carried out under the project
                     3) Bidding Documents
                     4) Operations Manual
                     5) Cumulative effects assessed as part of the Integrated River Basin Master Plan.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Jolanta Kryspin-Watson                Title:             Lead Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                 jkryspin@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Satya Priya LNU                       Job Title:         Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                      Specialist




                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      Email:                  spriya1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Anup Karanth                       Job Title:     Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                Specialist

                      Email:                  akaranth@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                       Jolanta Kryspin-Watson, Satya Priya LNU, Anup Karanth

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:              Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra

                     ADM Social Specialist:                     Varun Singh



Public Disclosure




                    Oct 18, 2024                                                                                            Page 10 of 10
