Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Green Urban Development Project (P506807)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                         Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                   (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 05/30/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04295




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 31, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P506807                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         GUD                          2025

                     Operation Name            Green Urban Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     China                     China                                     EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC         Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                       Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     People’s Republic of      Guiyang Municipal Government              30-Apr-2025                   27-Jun-2025
                     China

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     19-Mar-2025               343,400,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance nature-positive urban development in Guiyang.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project is premised on the dual agenda of low-carbon and nature-positive urban development which are essential,
                     interconnected strategies for building livable cities. Low-carbon cities focus on planning, implementing, monitoring, and
                     accounting for low-carbon investments and climate change mitigation. Nature-positive cities prioritize urban
                     development that enhances resilience and livability by integrating nature. A joint approach applied in strategic areas
                     that integrates multi-sectoral interventions, offers solutions to the intertwined challenges of climate change and nature
                     loss, and creates mutually reinforcing benefits essential for long-term economic transformation and building
                     sustainable, livable cities. The project intervention area focuses on the Aha Lake area, strategically located in the core of
                     Guiyang city. It is designated as a national wetland park in 2015, serves as a critical urban green lung with important

                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     flood control and biodiversity functions. It is recognized that a single project cannot achieve all nature-positive goals or
                     resolve all climate-related issues in Guiyang. Instead, the project targets Aha Lake, which embodies key urban
                     development challenges and high potential, to demonstrate an integrated approach to these goals. These efforts are
                     further supported by city-wide interventions and innovations on low-carbon platforms, nature-positive planning, and
                     enhanced collaboration. The project will include the following three components: Component 1 (Low-carbon Urban
                     Mobility for Enhanced Livability): This component will finance improvements and constructions around the Aha Lake,
                     focusing on: (i) NMT network and connections to city-wide green network; (ii) public transit connections, including road
                     upgrades for last mile bus connections to metro stations, facilities (bus interchanges, integrated visitor and transit
                     facilities) and services (intelligent transport systems, improved bus coverage, frequency and service); (iii) road
                     connections to and between key city thoroughfares; (iv) integrated visitor/parking facilities and amenities including EV
                     charging stations and bicycle stands; and (v) traffic and transport management. Component 2 (Conserve and Enhance
                     Urban Ecosystems and Biodiversity): This component will finance interventions to improve water quality, enhance flood
                     control, and conserve urban ecosystems and biodiversity. It will reduce GHG emissions by decreasing water pollutants
                     and untreated wastewater, thus reducing methane and nitrous oxide , and enhance the lake's carbon sequestration.
                     Activities under subcomponent 2.2 will restore terrestrial and aquatic habitats and conserve biodiversity. In the long
                     term, this component will improve resilience through better flood management and cooling effects, enhance livability,
                     and create jobs and innovation in environmental conservation, water management, and eco-tourism. Component 3
                     (City-Wide Institutional Strengthening for Low-Carbon and Nature-Positive Urban Development): This component will
                     finance city-wide initiatives to support the project’s sustainability, including: (i) technical analysis and development of
                     low-carbon and nature positive urban spatial plans; (ii) research and technical assistance for policies, regulations, and
                     plans on carbon sequestration, carbon market mechanisms, low-carbon transport for vulnerable groups, and behavioral




Public Disclosure
                     change towards low-carbon lifestyles; and (iii) project management, capacity building, coordination, M&E, and
                     knowledge sharing activities. This component aims to position Guiyang as a front-runner in integrating low-carbon and
                     nature-positive thinking into urban systems, policies and communities.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Guiyang is the capital of Guizhou Province with an area of 8,034km2, 72% covered by forests and grasslands. The built-
                     up area accounts for only 11 percent of Guiyang. The city's permanent population was 6.4 million by end 2023, with a
                     population density of 773.35 people/km2. Guiyang has a minority population of 1.2 million (21% of total population),
                     including 11 ethnic minorities namely Miao, Buyi, Tujia, Yi, Dong, Gelao, Bai, Hui, Manchu, Zhuang, and Shui. Ethnic
                     minorities are mainly concentrated in 18 ethnic minority-concentrated townships, 279 ethnic minority-concentrated
                     village and 228 ethnic minority natural villages where ethnic minority living together. Geospatial analytics show
                     significant urban heat island (UHI) effects in the city core, and about 18 percent of Guiyang’s built-up area is exposed to
                     pluvial or fluvial floods.

                     The project aims to improve Guiyang’s capacity on GHG management and nature-positive urban development. It will
                     support Technical Assistance at the municipal-level to enhance carbon monitoring, related policy framework and spatial
                     planning (Component 3), as well as investments around Aha Lake on low-carbon urban mobility development
                     (Component 1) and nature-positive urban solutions to improve water quality, enhance flood control, and conserve
                     urban ecosystems and biodiversity (Component 2). The physical investments under the project will focus on Aha Lake
                     and its surroundings 100km2, including (both construction and upgrading): i) Green urban mobility (Component 1):
                     cycling and walking path around the lake and for further connection (18.2km+33.2km), public transit infrastructure

                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     (small connecting roads, a new transit hub and 6 bus charging stations), and one critical interchange and 4.2km 30m-
                     wide connecting roads south of the lake; ii) water quality management and flood control (Component 2.1): sewers
                     (84km), drainage works (10km open channels and 9 wastewater pumping stations), and 8 small-scale wastewater
                     treatment plants (8-60m3/d) together with associated sewage pipelines (27.6km); and (iii) urban ecosystem
                     enhancement and biodiversity conservation (Component 2.2): five-year monitoring of biodiversity and invasive species,
                     restoration of selected patches of terrestrial and aquatic habitats through site clearing and grading, vegetation
                     rehabilitation and plantation, riverbank rehabilitation and erosion control (2km). The design and implementation of
                     these infrastructure and activities will be further informed and enhanced by the municipal-level TA activities (e.g.,
                     special plans, studies and targeted trainings) included under Component 3.

                     Aha lake lies in the south west of Guiyang with a total area of 1,024 ha, including 473ha wetland (comprised of
                     reservoir, permanent rivers, karst caves and herbaceous swamps). It was formed in 1960 with the completion of Aha
                     Dam (37.5m high), and it now plays a key role in flood control and ecological regulation for the city. The people living
                     around Aha Lake were originally relocated from the flooded area when the Aha Reservoir was built in the 1950s. The
                     area now lies at the urban-rural junction. Due to the absence of village planning, many residents have constructed
                     houses independently, resulting in limited public roads. Consequently, the living environment is poor, and
                     transportation is inconvenient. Additionally, a high influx of migrants from other areas has led to frequent population
                     movement. Aha Lake became the first national wetland park of Guiyang in 2013, a Tier 3 natural park in China’s existing
                     three-level natural areas protection system (ranked after Tier 1-National Parks and Tier 2-natural reserve). The park is
                     planned for ecological protection, public science education and recreation. In 2023, it was also listed as one of the
                     important habitats for terrestrial wildlife in China, targeting at the bird protection incl. Plegadis falcinellus,




Public Disclosure
                     Hydrophasianus chirurgus, Dendrocygna javanica and Chrysolophus pictus. With population increase and rapid
                     development in the basin, Aha Lake are facing multiple threats, including water contamination from point and non-
                     point sources, vegetation declination, aquatic ecosystem and biodiversity degradation. For example, only 39 bird
                     species with a small population were observed during the biodiversity baseline investigation in the lake basin in Nov.
                     2024. Accordingly, the project has been designed to address these challenges and to achieve ecological net gains. The
                     proposed interventions include green mobility system, sewage interception, habitat restoration (river, wetland and
                     vegetation), energy efficient lighting, and enhanced biodiversity monitoring. All these activities involve no core reserve,
                     and those interventions within the scope of ecological redline and wetland park (i.e., greenway, part of the connecting
                     road (4.5m wide) for rehabilitation, and part of the sewers) will be designed and implemented in compliance with
                     national and local regulatory and policy framework (including redline strategy and wetland law).

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     A Project Steering Committee has been established, which is chaired by the Executive Deputy Mayor of Guiyang city and
                     comprises directors from relevant government agencies, including the Municipal Development and Reform Commission
                     (MDRC), Municipal Financial Bureau, Municipal Natural Resources and Planning Bureau, Municipal Water Resource
                     Bureau, Municipal Forestry Bureau, Municipal Ecology and Environment Bureau, Municipal Transport Bureau, Municipal
                     Housing and Urban-Rural Construction Bureau, and the Aha Lake Wetland Park Management Agency, etc. The PSC will
                     provide overall policy and strategic guidance to project implementation, monitor progress, and ensure inter-agency
                     coordination. Further, the PSC will be responsible for oversight of the project’s compliance with the legal and regulatory
                     framework, as well as relevant policy and planning documents for Guizhou Province and Guiyang and the Aha Lake area.




                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     A Project Management Office (PMO) has been established and jointly managed by the Guiyang DRC and the Guiyang
                     Infrastructure Construction & Investment Group (GICIG), a state-owned enterprise. The PMO is housed and staffed by
                     GICIG, responsible for the day-to-day implementation of the Project, including Environmental and Social (E&S)
                     management, and overall coordination across sectors and institutions at the technical level. In discussion with Guiyang
                     city, a new management committee for the 100km2 Aha Lake District will be set-up early in the project implementation
                     process to provide overall operation, maintenance and management for the district, and beyond the project timeframe.
                     Assets generated under the GGUD will be owned and managed by this new management committee. In addition, this
                     management committee will chart the future development for the entire district, ensuring coordinated management
                     across sectors, current jurisdictional boundaries and long-term sustainability.

                     Guiyang Municipality has previous experience in implementing projects financed by the World Bank and other MDBs
                     but is new to ESF. During project preparation, the E&S capacity of GICIG has been assessed as part of the Environmental
                     Impact Assessment and a project-tailored E&S capacity building plan has been developed to support project
                     implementation based on the assessment findings, covering both construction and operation phases. The PMO will
                     assign a dedicated environmental and social staff to coordinate the environmental and social issues throughout the
                     project cycle. Technical assistance (hiring of external E&S monitoring consulting teams) and training programs will be
                     provided to support both the PMO and other project stakeholders on E&S management during project implementation,
                     as specified in the EMP, SMP and ESCP.

                     Based on the characteristics of current relevant Aha Dam, China has reasonable track records with operation and
                     maintenance of the dams similar to project under preparation. Dam safety management practice including operation,




Public Disclosure
                     maintenance, surveillance, and emergency preparedness etc. is satisfactory; China also has a set of dam safety
                     management regulations and guidelines to guide the dam safety management.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The project is designed for ecological net gains, targeting at the reduction of GHG emissions and enhanced
                     biodiversity conservation/sustainable management around Aha Lake in Guiyang. The project-supported physical
                     investments (both construction and upgrading) are scattered in the Aha Lake basin (100km2), with a few located
                     within the scope of delineated ecological redlines (0.33km2) and the national wetland park (0.2km2) but without
                     disturbing and negatively affecting any core reserve for the park. Based on desk review, stakeholder consultation and
                     a preliminary biodiversity investigation conducted during project preparation, the preliminary EIA concluded that the
                     nature and scale of these activities are in principle in line with China’s existing regulations on the protection of
                     ecological redline, wetland and wildlife habitat. Detailed ecological studies are being conducted by local consultants
                     to assess the project’s site-specific ecological impacts to support domestic approval for woodland use, ecological
                     redline and wildlife habitat permissions. The completion of these detailed studies and their final approval are
                     anticipated in early May 2025 and will be shared with the Bank prior to project negotiation along with the detailed
                     EIA and EMP, as specified in the ESCP. At this stage, no associated facilities and negative cumulative impacts are
                     identified. Potential negative impacts anticipated from the implementation of above activities include: i) the


                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     generation of potential dust, noise nuisance, solid waste, soil and water loss, traffic risks and OHS hazard during
                     construction; ii) the potential use of pesticides, soil and water loss, invasive alien species, forest fire, disturbance to
                     wildlife, management of organic waste (waste plants) and OHS issues generated from the ecosystem restoration and
                     management activities; iii) the potential domestic wastewater, domestic waste, as well as OHS risks generated during
                     the operation of constructed wastewater and drainage facilities. These potential impacts are all anticipated to be site-
                     specific, low magnitude, reversible and readily managed by following mitigation hierarchy. All the project-supported
                     infrastructure and activities have been designed with ecological considerations in the FSR to minimize impacts on
                     local ecosystems and biodiversity, and their detailed design and future operation will be further informed and
                     enhanced by the municipal-level TA activities (e.g., special plans, studies and targeted trainings) included under
                     Component 3 during implementation. In addition, the TA activities will support the enhancement of carbon
                     monitoring, policy development and spatial planning and contribute to the city’s GHG emission reduction and
                     biodiversity conservation in the long run, while their downstream E&S implications (for example, temporary
                     environmental impacts during land use change based on the delivered spatial plans) will be considered and addressed
                     through ToR review and QA process. On Aha dam, a dam safety assessment has been completed, which confirmed
                     that: a small section of proposed greenway will be along the existing Aha dam, but without negative impact on it. Aha
                     Reservoir is well operated with no safety risk identified. Institutionally, Guiyang has previous WB experience but new
                     to ESF, and this project will further build their capacity on ESF. A PMO has been established and fully staffed for the
                     project, and capacity building activities has been planned in the preliminary EIA for the PMO and other stakeholders
                     covering the whole project cycle. The environmental risk is rated as substantial considering the ecological importance
                     of Aha Lake for Guiyang and some of the project activities will be implemented within protected areas (ecological
                     redlines) but pending the site-specific recommendations from the detailed EIA and biodiversity impact assessment to




Public Disclosure
                     be completed prior to project negotiation.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The overall social risk rating is considered substantial. The project involves habitat restoration (river, wetland and
                     vegetation), and enhanced biodiversity monitoring within the existing wetland park, as well as the construction of
                     connection roads and greenways around Aha Lake to improve the better access to this area. The habitat restoration
                     activities will not alter the existing forest land use or impose access restrictions on forest land. However, the
                     construction of the connection road and greenways will require land acquisition and house demolitions in 11 villages
                     surrounding Aha Lake, potentially disrupting residents’ daily lives and livelihoods during the construction stage. These
                     villages are located at the urban-rural junction and fall under urban planning regulations. The land acquisition (LA) will
                     affect total 1,697 households and 6,387 people, including 59 families and 245 individuals whose houses will be
                     demolished. Although the total number of affected individuals is significant, the project's linear nature minimizes the
                     impact on each village and household. Most of the acquired land consists of forest land and unused land that is not
                     intended for farming, with the overall impact on livelihoods remaining below 10%. The LA impact will not harm the
                     natural resources or environment on which residents depend for their livelihoods and development. The project will
                     employ a number of temporary labor for construction, including both migrant and local workers. Gaps in labor rights
                     awareness and deficiencies in managing working conditions may pose potential risks to workers’ health and safety.
                     Among the 11 affected villages, four are ethnic minority villages, primarily inhabited by Buyi and Miao people, with
                     4,728 ethnic minority individuals impacted, accounting for 74.03% of the total affected population. The ethnic
                     minority communities within the project area fall under urban administration and are not attached to ancestral lands.
                     These communities are multi-ethnic, with frequent interactions and intermarriage among different ethnic groups,
                     including Buyi, Miao, Tujia, Yi, Dong, Gelao, Bai, Zhuang etc. They use a common language in daily life, and their


                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     lifestyles and production methods are largely similar to those of the Han group. The impact of LA on the livelihoods of
                     ethnic minorities is also minimal. In conclusion, given the complexity of land acquisition, labor management
                     challenges for temporary workers, and the significant presence of ethnic minorities in the project area, the overall
                     social risk remains substantial but manageable with the appropriate social instruments in place.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project is designed for E&S benefits through municipal-level TA activities and low-carbon & Nature-based-
                      Solution (NbS) infrastructure around Aha Lake, targeting at the: 1) increase of landscapes under enhanced
                      conservation and/or sustainable management (terrestrial and inland water areas) by 10,000 Ha by project closing;
                      and 2) reduction of GHG emission by approximately 92,800 tons CO2e by project closing and 2,784,000 tons CO2e for
                      a 30-year operation period of project-supported infrastructure. Given the lake’s ecological importance for Guiyang
                      and tight timelines of project preparation, a 2-step approach has been adopted for the Environmental Impact
                      Assessment (EIA) to support the project delivery and implementation. At this stage, a preliminary EIA has been
                      developed based on the FSR design and a preliminary biodiversity survey, which also integrates the dam safety
                      assessment, a preliminary Environmental Management Plan (EMP), a preliminary biodiversity management plan and
                      a E&S capacity building plan. This preliminary EIA concluded that, all project activities would not disturb or negatively
                      affect any core reserve of the park, and those activities planned within the ecological redline (scattering around the



Public Disclosure
                      lake accounting for only 0.33% of the 100km2 project area) had been designed in line with China’s existing
                      regulations for the protection of ecological redline, wetland park and wildlife habitat, i.e., designed as the
                      infrastructure/facilities to support ecotourism development of Aha Lake. Since the protected species for Aha Wetland
                      Park are all birds, the proposed small-scaled and scattered activities will not bring any significant changes to the lake
                      and their habitats. Instead, alternatives analysis has been conducted in the FSR to minimize the Project’s potential
                      environmental footprints, and the conducted preliminary biodiversity survey has been used to inform the Project
                      design and preliminary EIA with its recommendations on indicator species, vegetation and wetland restoration
                      priorities, basin-wide pollution control strategy and environmental mitigation measures. The preliminary EIA
                      identified the construction nuisance (e.g., the generation of domestic waste, wastewater, air emission, noise, traffic
                      disturbance on communities, etc.) and the management of organic waste and potential pesticide use during
                      operation as the major sources of environmental risks for project activities, particularly those within the delineated
                      ecological redlines in/around Aha wetland park; however, since the proposed infrastructure and landscape
                      restoration activities are largely small-scaled and scattered in the basin, the negative environmental impacts resulting
                      from the Project are generally site-specific, temporary and readily manageable with the application of good
                      construction practices, waste management measures, integrated pest management, and other mitigation measures
                      listed in the preliminary EMP. For next step, as specified in the ESCP, prior to negotiation, a detailed EIA and EMP will
                      be developed, consulted and disclosed in compliance with both domestic regulations and the World Bank’s ESF, ESH
                      Guidelines and Good International Industry Practice (GIIP). The detailed EIA and EMP will be built on the site-specific
                      impact assessment being conducted by local consultants, including the detailed ecological impact assessment
                      expected to provide more detailed analysis on the Project’s potential impacts on woodland use, wetland park and
                      wildlife habitat and accordingly propose site-specific mitigation measures to minimize and mitigate the identified


                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      negative impacts to an acceptable level. During the project preparation, a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and Social
                      Management Plan (SMP) have been prepared based on the FSR design, for which the the SIA team conducted site
                      visits, socio-economic surveys, consultations with local communities and interviews with stakeholders. The SIA
                      identified social impacts and risks related to land acquisition (LA) and house demolition (HD) on communities and
                      ethnic minority groups in the project area, the use of temporary workers for construction, and disruptions to
                      residents’ daily lives and livelihoods during the construction phase. To address these potential social impacts, a
                      Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) have been prepared to restore
                      livelihoods, mitigate relocation impacts for affected people, and ensure the participation of ethnic minorities while
                      promoting the preservation and inheritance of their culture. Additionally, a Social Management Plan (SMP) and Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP), including an Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) plan, have been developed as
                      part of the SIA report to establish mitigation measures for managing working conditions and potential health and
                      safety risks during implementation. The preliminary EIA and SIA also cover the mitigation strategy for project-
                      supported Technical Assistance (TA) activities, which require the incorporation of relevant assessment to ensure that
                      activities and outputs are consistent with the requirements of ESF. TA TORs will be cleared by the World Bank prior to
                      activities commencement. Along with the above-mentioned social documents, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                      and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), the preliminary EIA and EMP were developed, consulted
                      and disclosed (both locally and on the Bank's external website) during preparation and will be updated into a detailed
                      EIA and EMP prior to project effectiveness. The Chinese version of all E&S documents available for project appraisal
                      were disclosed on March 14, 2025 and their English version was disclosed at the Bank’s external website in late May,
                      2025. The detailed EIA and EMP will also be consulted and disclosed per the ESF requirements once available .

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      This project involves a wide range of stakeholders citywide in Guiyang, including all parties and individuals
                      participating in or having an interest in the project. During the preparation stage, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                      (SEP) was developed to document actions related to stakeholder engagement with different groups, information
                      disclosure, and the functioning of grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs) throughout the project cycle. The
                      stakeholder analysis identified affected parties, including local communities and individuals impacted by land
                      acquisition and resettlement, particularly vulnerable groups such as low-income households and ethnic minorities
                      living in the project area. Other interested parties include the general public, relevant governmental departments
                      responsible for participation and authorization, construction contractors, and other stakeholders. Initial consultation
                      activities, including socio-economic surveys, interviews, and community consultations—particularly with ethnic
                      minority groups—have been conducted and documented in the SEP. Additionally, the SEP has guided a culturally
                      appropriate approach for informed consultation with ethnic minority groups for the project activities. During project
                      implementation, the PMO will assign dedicated staff to ensure the implementation of stakeholder engagement
                      actions, information disclosure, and the GRM. The SEP will also be updated as a living document to reflect major
                      changes and guide effective engagement activities throughout the project.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      Based on the definition in ESS2 and with reference to the project overview, interviews with key company personnel,
                      and a review of relevant documents, the types of workers involved in the project include direct workers and
                      contracted workers. The project primarily relies on contractors for construction, consulting services, and equipment
                      supply, with no primary suppliers identified. A Labor Management Procedure (LMP) has been prepared to address


                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      potential labor management risks under the project. According to the FSR report, the labor force will involve
                      approximately 2,200 workers at peak construction, particularly for connection road and greenway construction. Since
                      many rental properties are available locally, contractors typically do not build their own construction camps, resulting
                      in relatively low health and environmental risks related to camp management. The majority of these workers are
                      temporary, including migrant laborers and local workers, who have limited awareness of their rights and insufficient
                      capacity to protect their interests. Although the government has established a system to ensure the regular payment
                      of migrant workers’ wages and the management of temporary labor is becoming more standardized, gaps in labor
                      rights awareness and deficiencies in managing working conditions may still pose risks to workers' health and safety.
                      Therefore, an Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) plan focused on mitigating health and safety risks has also
                      been prepared as part of the LMP. Additionally, the LMP has developed a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for
                      workers to address potential disputes or dissatisfaction among the labor force.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. The project will support activities to promote and scale up the low carbon and natural
                      positive investments in Aha Lake Basin, addressing GHG emissions and climate change vulnerabilities through
                      improved transport connectivity, promotion of non-motorized transport, adoption of energy efficient street lighting,
                      wastewater treatment facilities, and river/wetland rehabilitation along with TA deliveries for low-carbon green
                      account prototype and climate-positive urban planning. According to current GHG accounting, the project
                      implementation is anticipated to bring a total GHG emission reduction of 92,800 tCO2e in five years by project
                      completion and 2,784,000 tCO2e with 30-year operation of the supported infrastructure. Sewage interception and
                      treatment around Aha Lake will reduce the discharge of untreated wastewater into the lake, which will improve



Public Disclosure
                      wastewater collection rate in the lake basin from the current 50% to 100% and wastewater treatment rate from 30%
                      to 70%. The project implementation is expected to lead to a total COD reduction of 4683t/y by 2035 and thus
                      contribute to local water quality improvements and ecosystem services protection. The adequacy of downstream
                      treatment capacity for managing the increased wastewater collection (12501.5m3/d) with the existing wastewater
                      treatment plants has been assessed and confirmed in the preliminary EIA. The small-scale infrastructure supported by
                      the project will have unlikely significant and site-specific environmental impacts regarding dust emission, potential
                      pollution of water sources, noise impacts and solid waste during construction and operation. Needed mitigation
                      measures have been included in the preliminary EMP to address these impacts, which, in particular, cover the
                      management of organic waste(removed invasive plants or plants infected by diseases or insect pests) and
                      construction waste, minimized use and management of hazardous materials (mainly pesticides and fertilizers for
                      landscape restoration and reforestation). In review of local pest management practice, relevant recommendations
                      have been included in the preliminary EIA to ensure the adoption of integrated pest management approach under
                      the project.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. The project will support physical investments in ecological restoration, ecosystem
                      monitoring facilities, construction or upgrading of one selected interchange and various small-scale infrastructure
                      such as essential local infrastructure (e.g., walking and cycling paths, connecting roads, public toilets, wastewater
                      collection and treatment, etc.) and nature-based tourism facilities (such as signposts, boardwalks, hiking trails, LED
                      display screens). These activities are not expected to require a significant influx of laborers considering the scale of
                      construction activities but some labor influx is possible, 500 people as the estimated peak number. Since the project


                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      sites are near built areas, no workers’ camps will be needed during construction. The preliminary EIA identified 15
                      communities/villages and three schools adjacent to the sites of project activities, with possible exposure to negative
                      environmental impacts of construction nuisance, including traffic disturbance and associated road safety risks due to
                      the increase of traffic during project construction and operation. The preliminary EIA has proposed mitigation
                      measures to address these negative impacts. Safety training and Personal Protection Equipment (PPEs) will be
                      provided to safeguard all workers and nearby communities. More site-specific impact assessment and mitigation
                      measures in related to ESS4 will be included in the detailed EIA and EMP expected before negotiation. Universal
                      access will be provided to all facilities the project is financing. Potential risk of sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual
                      harassments (SEA/SH) is deemed to be low, and the project will provide training to project workers and request
                      signing code of conduct to prevent GBV. LMP include procedures for SEA/SH prevention, code of conduct
                      requirement for all workers, and a SEA/SH sensitive grievance mechanism including confidential reporting and
                      survivor-centered approach. Aha Dam is relevant to ESF considering that failure of the dam could cause extensive
                      damage to or failure of the project financed facilities and Aha Lake rehabilitation will be conducted under the project.
                      To ensure the safety of the dam, the borrower will hire independent dam safety experts to conduct dam safety
                      assessment to (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of Aha dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history;
                      (b) review and evaluate the owner’s operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide a written report of
                      findings and recommendations for any remedial work or safety related measures necessary to upgrade Aha Dam to
                      an acceptable standard of safety. The Bank and the Borrower will work together to ensure the recommended dam
                      safety measures are properly applied.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 is relevant. According to the social impact assessment, the project requires the permanent acquisition of 1,662
                      mu of land for the Aha Lake Greenway and connection roads, including 269 mu of state-owned land and 1,393 mu of
                      collectively owned land. Among the requisitioned collective-owned land, 127.3 mu is designated for construction, 454
                      mu for cultivated land, 621.7 mu for forest land, and 190 mu remains unused. The land acquisition follows a linear
                      pattern, particularly for the greenway around the lake, covering four districts, five sub-district offices, 11 villages, one
                      wetland park management office, and one state-owned institution. During the SIA preparation, a detailed socio-
                      economic survey and community consultation were conducted, and initial feedback from affected individuals was
                      gathered. These PAPs were originally relocated from the flooded area of the reservoir when the Aha Reservoir was
                      built in 1950s. The area now lies at the urban-rural junction. Due to the lack of village planning, many residents have
                      built houses independently, resulting in limited public roads. Consequently, the living environment is poor, and travel
                      is inconvenient. Additionally, there is a high number of migrant populations from outside, leading to frequent
                      movement. These inputs have been used to refine the project design, optimize routes, and minimize the impact of
                      house demolitions. The project's land acquisition (LA) and house demolition (HD) will affect a total of 1,697
                      households and 6,387 individuals, including 59 families and 245 individuals whose houses will be demolished. Among
                      the 11 affected villages, four are ethnic minority villages, primarily inhabited by Buyi and Miao people, with 4,728
                      ethnic minority individuals impacted, accounting for 74.03% of the total affected population. Although the total
                      number of affected individuals is significant, the project's linear nature minimizes the impact on each village and
                      household. Most of the acquired land consists of forest land and unused land not intended for farming, keeping the
                      overall impact on livelihoods below 10%. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared to mitigate livelihood
                      losses and manage relocation impacts, ensuring that livelihoods are restored to at least their previous levels while
                      maximizing project benefits for the affected area, particularly for the PAPs. There may be other construction activities


                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                        Page 10 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      with smaller impacts during the project, such as bike lanes and parking lots, which could result in additional land
                      impacts identified during implementation. Any changes in the impact numbers will be processed as an annex to the
                      RAP, documented, and compensated using the same methodology, eligibility criteria, and entitlement matrix as the
                      RAP, in alignment with ESS5. Additionally, during the construction of the greenway around the lake and the river
                      regulation and restoration activities, the contractor may need to temporarily occupy land for work sheds and material
                      storage sites. According to the Feasibility Study Report, an estimated 191 mu of land will be temporarily used. As the
                      project is still in the feasibility study stage, the specific location, type, and extent of temporary land occupation have
                      not yet been determined. However, proper planning and mitigation measures have been developed in the SMP.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The standard is relevant. Proposed activities are designed to enhance the conservation of natural habitats in and
                      around Aha Lake while promoting its ecotourism development. The project-supported physical investments (both
                      construction and upgrading) are scattered in the Aha Lake basin (100km2), with a few located within the scope of
                      delineated ecological redlines (0.33km2) and the national wetland park (0.2km2) but without disturbing and
                      negatively affecting any core reserve for the park. All activities (including infrastructure construction/upgrading and
                      ecosystem restoration in selected landscapes) will be planned and implemented by adopting the low carbon and
                      Nature-based-Solution (NBS) solution, in compliance with domestic ecological regulations and ESF requirements,
                      particularly the existing redline strategy and functional zoning for the national wetland park in the urban settings. At
                      this stage, a preliminary biodiversity impact assessment has been completed to support FSR and EIA preparation,
                      which outline the characteristics of the habitats involved in the project activities and include relevant baseline



Public Disclosure
                      information. According to the assessment findings, the project activities will involve no core reserve and is not
                      expected to degrade any habitat. The Project’s adverse impacts to biodiversity are anticipated to be limited as
                      biodiversity conservation has been integrated into current design by adopting the following principles: i) To avoid or
                      minimize impacts on or disturbance to environmentally sensitive areas and habitats through the optimization of
                      routing/siting for project activities, ii) To reduce disturbance to amphibian and odonate habitats at river estuaries
                      during construction, and restoring affected habitats post-construction, iii) To provide eco-passages across
                      roads/paths (e.g. underpasses or ecological bridges) for amphibians and reptiles; iv) To restore slopes with native
                      plant species using multi-layered planting approach; v) To reduce the barrier effect of roads on animal passing
                      through technical designs (e.g. lowering of road curbs, avoid vertical roadside drainage profiles and using slopes or
                      covers), and vi) To adopt sustainable forest management model in reforestation and forest tending operations. Also,
                      a biodiversity management plan has been developed as one annex of the preliminary EIA report, outlining the key
                      mitigation measures needed to secure and enhance the project’s targeted ecological benefits, covering both
                      construction and operation periods. Before project negotiation, the detailed EIA and EMP will be developed in
                      compliance with the ESS6 requirements to provide site-specific assessment and mitigation measures for the proposed
                      project activities. Quality assurance will be done by WB technical team in implementing the proposed activities and
                      site-specific EMP. Moreover, as part of the Project, careful attention will be paid to restoration activities to ensure
                      that local biodiversity is maintained/enhanced and that native species are not inadvertently replaced with invasive
                      species or other species that would alter the current habitat. The reference to ESS6 will be incorporated in the TORs
                      of TA activities under the project to ensure that activities and outputs are consistent with the requirements of ESF.




                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                 Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is deemed relevant due to the presence of ethnic minority groups in the project area. Guiyang, as a provincial
                      capital, is home to many ethnic groups. The city has a total of 55 ethnic groups, including Miao, Buyi, Tujia, Yi, Dong,
                      Gelao, Bai, Hui, Manchu, Zhuang, Shui, Mongolian, Li, and Yao, among others. Eleven ethnic minority groups have
                      lived in the area for generations, with Miao and Buyi being the predominant ones. The region includes 18 ethnic
                      minority-concentrated townships, where ethnic minority is the majority, 279 ethnic minority-concentrated villages,
                      and 228 ethnic minority natural villages where ethnic minorities live together. The project-affected area is primarily
                      located around Aha Lake in Guiyang, characterized by mountainous and hilly terrain with limited flat land and scarce
                      per capita arable land. Survey results indicate that in most ethnic minority towns affected by the project, per capita
                      arable land is less than one mu, classifying the region as having limited arable land resources and these ethnic
                      minority groups are not attached to ancestral lands. These communities are multi-ethnic, with frequent interactions
                      and intermarriage among different ethnic groups. They use a common language in daily life, and their lifestyles and
                      production methods are largely similar to those of the Han group. Most young people migrate to Guiyang or coastal
                      cities for work and business. While each ethnic group maintains unique cultural traditions and customs, such as
                      singing and dancing during their cultural festivals, there are no significant differences in their overall way of life. The
                      SIA indicates that among the 11 villages affected by the project's land acquisition, ethnic minority groups—including
                      Buyi, Miao, Tujia, Gelao, Li, and Dong—comprise 43.61% of the total population. Among these villages, Jinshan,
                      Zhulin, Lanni, and Baishao have ethnic minority populations exceeding 50% and are classified as ethnic minority
                      villages, primarily inhabited by Buyi and Miao people. Regarding LA and HD, a total of 4,728 ethnic minority
                      individuals are affected. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been developed to restore the livelihoods and living



Public Disclosure
                      conditions of affected individuals, including ethnic minorities. These affected households will be given
                      choices/options if they want to resettle in the same village or area to ensure that the project does not impact the
                      social fabric of the minority villages. Consultations have also been conducted during the preparation of the SIA and
                      RAP to gather concerns and expectations from ethnic minority groups and to establish culturally appropriate
                      engagement methods throughout the project lifecycle. Additionally, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP)
                      has been prepared to ensure the participation of ethnic minorities, promote the preservation and transmission of
                      their cultural heritage, and support the restoration of affected livelihoods. Furthermore, the PMO will actively
                      coordinate with local government development plans and implement measures to support the economic and social
                      development of ethnic minority areas from a broader, more strategic perspective, in line with the recommendations
                      outlined in the EMDP.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. Based on the preliminary screening findings, project interventions are not likely to be in or in
                      the vicinity of legally protected tangible cultural heritage sites. The project activities will involve excavations,
                      demolition, movement of earth in the physical environment, which could potentially affect some movable or
                      immovable objects, sites, structures, and natural features and landscapes. All project activities will be further
                      screened for impacts on cultural heritage during the detailed EIA process. However, the preliminary EMP has included
                      procedures to deal with “chance findings” of archeological artifacts considering the excavation works involved under
                      the project, which will be maintained and implemented in the detailed EMP to be available prior to project




                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                        Page 12 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      negotiation. In addition, for any intangible cultural heritage related to ethnic minority groups, the project will take
                      appropriate measures through the SMP and EMDP to ensure its protection.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The project will involve no Financial Intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No
                       Although China has a comprehensive E&S Framework, its use for the project is not recommended due to the limited
                       experience of implementing agencies in applying ESF. Also, a comprehensive assessment of the borrower framework
                       has not been completed.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                   No




Public Disclosure
                       No financing partner is involved.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Prior to project effectiveness, Guiyang PMO to prepare and disclose the detailed Environmental Impact Assessment
                     (EIA) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP), reflecting the findings and recommendations of the site-specific
                     ecological impact assessment currently being conducted for the project.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Chyi-Yun Huang                         Title:           Senior Urban Specialist

                     Email:                   chuang@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:             Guangming Yan                          Job Title:       Senior Urban Development Specialist

                     Email:                   gyan@worldbank.org



                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     TTL Contact:             Linus Benedikt Pott                   Job Title:    Senior Land Administration Specialist

                     Email:                   lpott@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                           Chyi-Yun Huang, Guangming Yan, Linus Benedikt Pott

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Xiaodan Huang

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Shuang Zhou




Public Disclosure




                    May 31, 2025                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
