Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                        Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



            _For Official Use Only_
                                                       Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01277




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)        Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                          Angola, Angola, Angola,
                          Angola, Angola, Angola,
                          Burundi, Burundi, Burundi,
                          Burundi, Comoros,
                          Comoros, Congo,
                          Democratic Republic of,
                          Congo, Democratic
                          Republic of, Congo,
                          Democratic Republic of,
                          Ethiopia, Ethiopia, Ethiopia,
                          Madagascar, Madagascar,                                                                    Accelerating Access to




_For Official Use Only_
                          Madagascar, Malawi,             EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                       Water, Sanitation and
                                                                                       P506439
                          Malawi, Malawi,                 AFRICA                                                     Hygiene in the Eastern and
                          Mozambique,                                                                                Southern Africa Region
                          Mozambique,
                          Mozambique, Somalia,
                          Federal Republic of,
                          Somalia, Federal Republic
                          of, Somalia, Federal
                          Republic of, South Sudan,
                          South Sudan, South Sudan,
                          South Sudan, Tanzania,
                          Tanzania, Tanzania,
                          Zambia, Zambia, Zambia
                          Financing Instrument            Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date
                          Investment Project
                                                          04-Aug-2025                  25-Sep-2025
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
                          AUDA NEPAD                      AUDA-NEPAD

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The PDO for phase 1 is to improve governance and build institutional capacities for climate-resilient water supply and
                          sanitation service delivery in the participating countries in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) Region.

                          The PrDO for the MPA is to increase access to climate-resilient drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services
                          in participating countries in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) Region


                                                                                                                                              Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)




                          Components
                           Strengthening Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH
                           Advancing Governance, Reforms and Regulation
                           Improving Service Delivery Performance
                           Leveraging Financing for Climate Resilient WASH Infrastructure

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           Maximizing Finance for Development

                           Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
                           Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No




_For Official Use Only_
                           SUMMARY
                             Total Operation Cost                                                                                          15.60

                             Total Financing                                                                                               15.60
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                  10.60
                             Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 10.60
                                 IDA Grant                                                                                                 10.60
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Trust Funds                                                                                                  5.00
                                 Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                              5.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Moderate


                           Decision

                                                                                                                                             Page 2



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           Other Decision (as needed)



                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Regional Context
                          1.       A renewed emphasis on investing in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) region’s water, sanitation and
                          hygiene (WASH) sector is critical to restore long-term growth, enhance climate resilience, and develop human capital.
                          The region is losing 5% of its annual GDP, or approximately $170 billion per year, due to poor WASH services. In 2022,
                          there were 277 million people without access to basic water and 458 million without access to basic sanitation in AFE.
                          These gaps are larger in rural areas, where the largest share of the region’s poor live, with some countries having access
                          to basic sanitation rates as low as 5%. The lack of menstrual-friendly facilities further depresses female school
                          attendance. While progress remains uneven, a growing number of countries are taking steps through reforms,




_For Official Use Only_
                          innovations, and partnerships.
                          2.      Lack of WASH access also has strong gender, equity, and health implications. In AFE countries, the percentage
                          of households where women are responsible for water collection drastically exceeds that of men. In some cases, this
                          percentage is higher than 90%, highlighting deep-rooted inequalities in WASH-related domestic labor. Poor WASH leads
                          to increased diarrheal diseases, the leading cause of child mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), causing more than 8% of
                          child deaths. Nearly 35% of all children are stunted, partly due to unsafe water, inadequate sanitation, and insufficient
                          hygiene. Having safe and reliable water and sanitation facilities at home is especially beneficial for women and children,
                          who bear the disproportionate burden of collecting off-site water.
                          3.        Water and sanitation access gaps are further aggravated by climate change. In 2022, there were an additional
                          63 million people without water and 174 million without sanitation in the region compared to the year 2000. If these
                          trends continue, by 2030, 345 million and 550 million people in the region will be without basic water and sanitation
                          services, making them more exposed to the worsening impacts of climate change, such as heatwaves, floods, and
                          droughts. In fact, Eastern Africa experienced five failed rainy seasons between October 2020 and early 2023, resulting in
                          the worst drought in 40 years. In the AFE region, 69% of all people without water and 71% of those without sanitation
                          live in Fragile, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) countries, where lack of security and institutional weaknesses exacerbate
                          WASH access issues.


                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          4.      On average, public expenditure in WASH is still low and inefficient in the AFE region, with regressive subsidies,
                          high donor dependence, and poor sustainability and efficiency of services. The region’s estimated investment gap for
                          achieving universal WASH access between 2023 and 2030 is $150 billion, or 1.4 percent of AFE’s GDP. Actual investment
                          rates would need to increase 3 times for urban water and 14 times for rural sanitation. Poor operational efficiency and
                          low investment rates, along with low creditworthiness of service providers and poor understanding of the sector by
                          financial institutions, make it difficult for utilities to make necessary investments to improve services and build resilience.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 3



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                          5.        Despite limited public funding, the expansion of WASH access faces obstacles in mobilizing private capital due to
                          regulatory risks and weak legislative environments. Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) are often hampered by lack of
                          technical expertise and de-risking instruments. Accessing commercial financing remains challenging for municipalities and
                          utilities, which undermines the needed investments. The WASH sector faces governance challenges such as institutional
                          fragmentation, unpredictable funding, and weak coordination. Only nine countries in the region have a functioning
                          national government-led platform.
                          6.      There is a consensus in the sector on moving from a business-as-usual approach towards a strategic vision that
                          uses a systems change approach to accelerate access rates and achieve SDG6. The five principles endorsed at the WASH
                          Leadership Summit include government-led planning and monitoring platforms, tackling governance bottlenecks, offering
                          incentives for service delivery efficiency, boosting investments and private sector participation, and embedding resilience
                          to climate change impacts (See Figure 1). Most AFE countries are currently at a basic level for scaling up WASH access,
                          though some frontrunners exist.




_For Official Use Only_




                          Figure 1. Five Principles of the Systems Change approach   Figure 2. Systems Change Composite Index for 24 AFE Countries
                          7.     The World Bank is involved in a major scale-up effort for WASH access with a portfolio of US$5.8 billion, aiming
                          to benefit 54 million people by 2030. However, the project-by-project approach has inherent inefficiencies and
                          fragmentation, making it difficult to mobilize private sector financing or attract new sources of funding like carbon
                          revenues and climate finance.


                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                           The PrDO for the MPA is to increase access to climate-resilient drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services
                           in participating countries in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) Region.

                               Key Results
                          8.        The proposed PrDO indicators include:



                                                                                                                                                     Page 4



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                               •     PrDO Indicator 1: Number of people with access to water supply services. Disaggregated by gender, and sub
                                     sector (rural-urban), and level of service (% safely managed)
                                         o Target 1 by 9/2032: 17 million people with access to at least basic water supply services, of which 50
                                              percent having safely managed access, and at least 40 percent in rural areas1
                               •     PrDO Indicator 2: Number of people with access to sanitation services. Disaggregated by gender, and sub sector
                                     (rural-urban), and level of service (% safely managed)
                                         o Target 2 by 9/2032: 13 million people with access to at least basic sanitation services, of which 10
                                              percent access to safely managed services, at least 80 percent in rural areas2
                               •     PrDO indicator 3: Number of schools and health care facilities with WASH facilities, disaggregated by schools and
                                     health care facilities.
                                         o Target 3 by 9/2032: 7,500 schools or health care facilities with new WASH facilities
                               •     PrDO indicator 4: Number of beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks, disaggregated by gender.
                                         o Target 4: by 1/2032: 17 million (same as PrDO1)

                          9.     The PrDO Indicators are attributable to the Corporate Scorecard: people with access to water supply, sanitation,
                          and hygiene services, and will be used across all country phases. In addition, the AFE-WASH includes a menu of indicators
                          from which participating countries would select relevant indicators depending on the country specific design and needs.
                          10.     The PrDO level indicators will apply to all country-level operations to allow aggregation at MPA level. Country




_For Official Use Only_
                          operations will develop their project results framework, using indicators of choice from a menu of indicators
                          corresponding to the activities under each pillar of the program. The country operations will thus include indicators that
                          can be aggregated at program level, pertaining to results indicators mapped to each of the four pillars of the program (see
                          section Results Framework of the MPA in section VI)


                              D. Project Description


                          11.     The Accelerating Access to WASH in Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE WASH) MPA is a comprehensive, systems-
                          based regional framework designed to scale up sustainable and climate-resilient water and sanitation services. It promotes
                          a long-term, phased approach through Investment Project Financing (IPF) and Program-for-Results (PforR) operations,
                          tailored to each country’s context. The program emphasizes government-led planning, governance reform, efficiency
                          gains, private capital mobilization, and resilience across the water value chain. It aims to significantly increase access to
                          WASH for people, schools, and health facilities by aligning national investment programs with a common regional
                          intervention framework.
                          12.      The MPA consists of 13 phases—one regional and 12 country-specific operations3—with a total envelope
                          of US$2.574 billion, including US$1.32 billion from IDA, US$240 million from IBRD, and the remainder from Private Capital
                          Mobilization (PCM), government counterpart funding, and development partners. Countries are expected to join within
                          the first three years of the eight-year program, with tailored support based on their readiness and needs. The program
                          supports countries with strong delivery systems, those consolidating reforms, and fragile states requiring foundational
                          support, including interventions for refugees and host communities.

                          1 Basic access refers to access to an improved water source that is within 30 minutes return trip; safely managed access means that water is accessible on premises,

                          available when needed, and free of contamination. (JMP)
                          2 Basic access refers to access to an improved sanitation facility (that is, one that hygienically separates human excreta from human contact); safely managed is a

                          higher level of service that requires safe collection and off-site treatment and disposal/re-use.
                          3
                           The 12 participating countries are Angola, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Malawi, Somalia, Tanzania, South Sudan, Mozambique, Zambia,
                          Comoros, Burundi, and DRC.

                                                                                                                                                                                                Page 5



                                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                          13.     The AFE WASH MPA structure consists of four pillars or Program Components encompassing the overall scope
                          of the Program. The four pillars contain a comprehensive menu of activities tailored to the needs of participating countries
                          to achieve the Program’s development objectives. The activities will be tailored to the specific context to effectively
                          advance the reform agenda and achieve the greatest possible impact. The choice of financing instruments will depend on
                          the country’s context.
                          Pillar 1/Program Component 1: WASH Acceleration Platforms
                          14.      This pillar will support the development of (i) a Regional Platform for knowledge and benchmarking and (ii)
                          national WASH platforms and corresponding preparation of national or subnational WASH investment plans. National
                          WASH Acceleration Platforms will consolidate government-led efforts to coordinate sector stakeholders around National
                          WASH Investment Plans on financing and reforms, but also on policy and technical guidance with an emphasis on climate
                          resilience, inclusivity, and gender equality. The pillar will promote budget allocations and preparation of multi-year
                          national or subnational investment plans for WASH in both rural and urban areas that will provide the main framework
                          for expanding timely access to WASH for all. Government-led national WASH platforms will coordinate the efforts of key
                          sector stakeholders, including Ministry of Finance; Ministries of Water and Sanitation; Ministries of Education and Health;
                          other relevant Ministries/agencies; donor partners; and civil society organizations. These platforms will manage linkages
                          with policies and plans for water resources management, floods, and disasters, ensuring the investments proposed are
                          coherent and climate resilient. Countries may adapt from successful examples in the region like the “One WASH platform”
                          in Ethiopia, that coordinates policy, financing and technical inputs through coordinated planning, financing and




_For Official Use Only_
                          implementation of WASH investments. This pillar will also support comprehensive sectoral monitoring and evaluation
                          (M&E) systems to track progress. This pillar will include improving the data and feedback systems that accurately track
                          the time that women spend collecting water (in the context of access to ‘basic’ and ‘safely managed’ water) to inform
                          decisions or incentives for achieving at least basic access for women.
                          15.      The Regional Phase will support countries in setting up the national platforms and preparing National Investment
                          Plans by promoting cross-learning and best practices. Through high-level engagements, the Regional Phase shall advocate
                          for countries prioritizing WASH in policies and in government budgetary allocations. It will be aligned with ongoing regional
                          efforts on mobilizing finance for WASH (under PIDA), the water investment monitoring scorecard, and other efforts for
                          promoting capacity building and resilience. The African Union Development Agency (AUDA-NEPAD), the implementing
                          agency for the Regional Phase, will provide support to capacity building, systems change dashboard, and strengthen
                          partnerships with civil society and other non-state stakeholders for Pillar 1 activities.
                          Pillar 2/Program Component 2: Sector Governance Reforms
                          16.      This pillar will focus on strategic governance and supporting institutional reforms and enhancing regulatory
                          oversight. It will offer incentives and technical assistance to initiate essential governance and institutional reforms. These
                          will include strengthening policies and institutional capacities and improving accountability and transparency within the
                          sector. Sector reforms and their implementation will be informed by analytics and the deployment of tools like Public
                          Expenditure and Institutional Reviews (PEIRs), Water Sector Assessment Programs (Water SAPs), enterprise bottleneck
                          and employment multiplier studies. The pillar will also cover flood and drought management strategies and use the EPIC4
                          Response Framework for identifying bottlenecks and developing roadmaps for improving climate resilience.
                          17.     Depending on the country context, Pillar 2 supports reforms through designing incentives for updating national
                          water policies, enacting modern water laws, clarifying institutional mandates, supporting decentralized service delivery,
                          promoting efficient fiscal transfers, building organizational and personnel capacities in decentralized levels and in national
                          agencies, and skilling community groups to be employed in O&M activities. The vital role of non-sector actors will be
                          recognized and bottlenecks in the operations, e.g. of small and medium-local entrepreneurs, sought to be addressed by

                          4 Enable, Plan, Invest, Control




                                                                                                                                                    Page 6



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                          policy measures to integrate them formally, also easing their access to financing. The Pillar will also support improving
                          citizen engagement and accountability5 by taking stock of existing regulators in terms of capacity to engage consumers,
                          capture and aggregate consumer feedback and improve transparency on service provision including to underserved
                          populations. Regulators will receive technical assistance to expand their capacities, autonomy and mandates. The Regional
                          Phase will support participating countries in revision of policies, strengthening institutions and regulatory frameworks,
                          supporting regulatory twinning arrangements, development of standard regulatory tools/instruments and helping
                          countries adopt these to their contexts, as well as through capacity building and regional knowledge exchanges.
                          Pillar 3/Program Component 3: Improving Service Provision Performance
                          18.      This pillar focuses on enhancing WASH service delivery models by improving the sustainability and climate
                          resilience of operations and service provision in both urban and rural areas. This pillar aims at improving the
                          creditworthiness and climate resilience of urban utilities as well as the implementation of sustainable, resilient and low-
                          carbon operations and maintenance (O&M) models in rural areas. This pillar will support the development and
                          implementation of Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) and Rural Water and Sanitation Service
                          Professionalization Strategies (RWSSPS) to improve operational and financial sustainability of operators. The
                          implementation of these plans and strategies will aim to reduce water losses (thus increasing available water supply and
                          contributing to adaptation) and energy consumption (thus reducing GHG emissions). Other activities will help improve the
                          operating ratio of utilities and efficiency of rural service providers. Support will also be provided to strengthen institutions
                          with dedicated mandate, budget and personnel for scaling up sanitation, especially in rural areas. Particular attention shall




_For Official Use Only_
                          be given to skilling and capacity building of community groups including women and youth groups, for them to be
                          employed in construction, operations and maintenance, and repairs of water schemes, household and public toilets, etc.
                          The pillar will also support developing information management systems, monitoring tools necessary to generate reliable
                          data and evidence, and systems of customer engagement and systematic feedback to guide the PIAPs. Climate resilience
                          will be mainstreamed throughout the plans and strategies by promoting flood and drought disaster risk management,
                          and use of renewable or low-carbon energy sources. This pillar will emphasize the importance of market-based strategies
                          for service expansion backed by innovative financial support, particularly in sanitation for both rural and urban contexts.
                          For urban sanitation, this may involve City-Wide Inclusive Sanitation (CWIS) Plans and their implementation where
                          relevant. For rural areas, this may include strategies for sustaining behavior change and developing market-based
                          sanitation services and innovative models for delivering smart subsidies that crowd-in demand and promote local private
                          sector development and jobs. Under this pillar, private sector and community capacity and innovation will need to be
                          leveraged. The pillar will also promote affordability and inclusion for low-income and vulnerable populations to gain access
                          and improve service delivery through mechanisms like utility scorecards, benchmarking of service providers’ systems for
                          customer and civic engagement and closing customer feedback loops. These activities will contribute to more informed
                          policy discussions and operational strategies for water investments. This will also help harness the potential of water
                          investments in leveraging employment. The Regional Phase will support regional capacity building initiatives for utilities,
                          informal rural and urban service providers, city administrations, rural WASH agencies, and skilling community groups.
                          Pillar 4/Program Component 4: Financing Climate-Resilient WSS Infrastructure and Promoting Private Sector
                          Participation
                          19.       This pillar entails financing all WASH infrastructure to expand access. The pillar will have a strong focus to
                          leverage private sector expertise and capital to expand resilient water and sanitation infrastructure, including WASH
                          facilities in schools and health centers, and rural sanitation programs, as well as in the long-term sustainability of the built
                          infrastructure via adequate operation and maintenance. Along with other pillars, this pillar will support countries to
                          prioritize WASH in their budgets strategically to leverage private and innovative financing. By working with IFC and MIGA,

                          5 For example, through use of diagnostics to assess service providers’ systems for engaging consumers, citizens and civil society and for leveraging consumer feedback

                          for improved responsiveness and service delivery.


                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 7



                                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                          this pillar will finance WASH infrastructure designed to both withstand climatic shocks and improve beneficiaries’ drought
                          and flood resilience6 while aiming to enable and mobilize private capital and expertise, for example through hybrid finance
                          structures, PPP transactions and risk mitigation instruments to mobilize commercial financing and equity and attract
                          competent management. The pillar will promote the use of financing innovations including micro-finance, climate finance,
                          etc. for scaling up access to water and sanitation. Support will be provided to address supply-side bottlenecks including
                          utilities’ access to commercial/blended finance, small entrepreneurs‘ access to innovative finance, and measures to
                          increasing the flow of financing for each of the sub-sectors, e.g. for CWIS in urban sanitation, etc. The program will also
                          identify opportunities for peer-to-peer learning among participating countries. The AFE WASH MPA will develop tools to
                          assess the skills and need gap for participating countries, in order to help design country-specific projects that take into
                          account capacity strengthening and skilling programs that benefit local communities.
                          20.     The pillar includes a range of resilience-building activities, including improving the broader water resource
                          management (WRM) to more efficiently allocate water resources during times of scarcity and provide flood protection;
                          promoting basin-level WRM strategies that integrate flood and drought preparedness and response; supporting
                          investments in water storage, aquifer recharge and development, and water reuse for drought resilience; and ensuring
                          new and rehabilitated infrastructure is climate-resilient.7 At the regional level (Phase 1) expertise will be mobilized to
                          support countries with state-of-the art advisory services and technical support for transboundary aquifer assessments and
                          climate-resilient groundwater management plans to inform national investment plans.
                          21.     The Regional Phase will support country operations collectively and individually across preparation,




_For Official Use Only_
                          implementation and post-closing. Overall, the Regional Phase aims to create a conducive environment for reforms and
                          increase investments, helping countries choose elements from the four pillars of the MPA to facilitate systems changes
                          that are likely to have practical traction in their contexts. Implementation of country phases will generate insights into
                          appropriate systems change elements for different contexts, supporting iterative implementation and encouraging peer-
                          to-peer learning in support of the MPA learning agenda.



                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                            Legal Operational Policies                                                                                         Triggered?
                            Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                                        Yes
                            Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                                  No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          21. Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439) will
                          primarily finance Type 2 and Type 3 technical assistance (TA) activities to support improvements in governance,
                          institutional capacity, regulatory frameworks, and resource mobilization for climate-resilient water supply and


                          6 Improving sanitation contributes to adaptation by reducing the volume of untreated wastewater discharged into the environment (thereby increasing the volume of

                          available water and improving water quality). The improved water quality will in turn lower the incidence of waterborne diseases and reduce the potential impact of
                          floods, as flood waters will become less contaminated (thus raising communities' resilience to floods). In addition, climate-proofing WSS infrastructure will lead to
                          fewer service disruptions."
                          7 The World Bank’s Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief, published in 2017, focuses on the three natural hazards most likely to affect water and sanitation

                          infrastructure—droughts, floods, and high winds. It provides hard and soft recommendations for the climate-proofing of WSS infrastructure.


                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 8



                                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                          sanitation service delivery across the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) region. Activities include support to national
                          WASH investment planning, transboundary aquifer assessments, regulatory strengthening, performance improvement
                          plans for utilities, benchmarking and monitoring systems, and preparation for private capital mobilization in the WASH
                          sector. Although the project will not finance any civil works or infrastructure with direct physical or environmental
                          footprints, it is expected to inform and influence future downstream investments in water and sanitation infrastructure
                          under country-specific operations. As a result, the project carries moderate environmental and social risks, primarily due
                          to potential indirect and downstream impacts associated with those future investments. Key environmental risks include
                          potential impacts on:(1) Occupational and community health and safety, particularly related to poor sanitation and
                          hazardous waste handling, (2) Water use efficiency and water balance, especially in transboundary aquifer systems, (3)
                          Improper disposal of wastewater or sanitation sludge, potentially affecting local ecosystems and drinking water quality,
                          (4) Pollution risks stemming from future infrastructure development if technical guidance is not environmentally sound,
                          (5) Biodiversity and sensitive habitats, particularly where transboundary assessments intersect with ecologically sensitive
                          zones. Key social risks include: (1) Potential exclusion or inequity in access to future services if not addressed during
                          planning, (2) SEA/SH risks associated with the engagement of consultants or facilitation of in-person technical activities,
                          (3) Community health impacts, if downstream investments result in contamination of local water sources or
                          mismanagement of sanitation systems, (4) Unclear delineation of land or water use rights, which may create tension if not
                          well-managed in downstream infrastructure planning. While these risks are indirect in the context of the current TA-




_For Official Use Only_
                          focused phase, they are considered moderate in scale and complexity, and manageable with appropriate mitigation
                          measures. To address these risks, the Borrower, AUDA-NEPAD, will prepare and implement an Environmental and Social
                          Commitment Plan (ESCP) and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). During project implementation, the Borrower will
                          also develop an Environmental and Social Screening Form and exclusion list to guide screening and risk mitigation for
                          activities financed through the Component 4 grant scheme. In addition, the Borrower will ensure that environmental and
                          social considerations are systematically integrated into the terms of reference (ToRs) for all relevant TA activities. The
                          Project Implementation Unit (PIU), housed within AUDA-NEPAD, has strong experience in managing regional technical
                          assistance and policy coordination initiatives but has limited prior experience with the World Bank’s Environmental and
                          Social Framework (ESF). However, AUDA-NEPAD has demonstrated a high level of commitment to building internal
                          capacity for ESF compliance. The PIU will recruit a qualified environmental and social specialist and will be supported
                          through training and ongoing implementation support from the World Bank to ensure effective environmental and social
                          risk management throughout the project implementation.



                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          22.      The AFE WASH MPA’s institutional and implementation arrangements will focus on improved coordination and
                          governance in the WASH sector. At the country level, the platforms will be implemented by relevant agencies, including
                          ministries of water, ministries responsible for sanitation, water and sanitation agencies, utilities, and regulatory agencies,
                          and respective decentralized levels of government, as per each country’s water sector institutional setting. While each
                          country under the Program will differ, implementing arrangements will include (i) a clear governance structure to oversee
                          strategic direction, ensure sector alignment and coordination, and approve workplan and budgets; (ii) the establishment
                          of a Project Management Unit to manage day-to-day coordination, implementation, E&S and fiduciary roles and tracking
                          of project-specific indicators; (iii) developing and regularly updated a strong monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework;
                          (v) targeted capacity-building activities to improve project implementation and improve knowledge sharing.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                          23.      AUDA-NEPAD will serve as the sole Implementing Agency responsible for the Project (phase 1 of the MPA).
                          AUDA-NEPAD will be responsible for overall coordination of the Project through the establishment of a Project
                          Implementation unit (PIU). The PIU will be comprised of AUDA-NEPAD salaried staff, both existing as well as to be recruited
                          staff following the agency’s HR policies. For specific tasks, the PIU is supported by competitively recruited consultants.
                          The PIU has been established on July 22, 2025, assigning existing staff for key roles. Within 30 days after effectiveness.
                          AUDA-NEPAD will competitively select a project coordinator, who will be supported by a team of experts, including a water
                          and sanitation specialist, fiduciary specialists (procurement and financial management), an environmental and social
                          specialist, and a monitoring, evaluation and knowledge management specialist. An Advisory Committee for the Project
                          will be established to engage other regional entities, including AMCOW, AUC8, Regional Economic Communities (RECs) as
                          well as representatives of the MPA participating countries to ensure coordination and facilitate agreement on joint
                          activities. Country Coordination Teams will be set up at the level of the twelve participating MPA countries, that will consist
                          of key stakeholders in the WASH sector, to ensure well-coordinated and demand-driven implementation of the Project’s
                          activities. The Project Operations Manual (POM) will include the roles and responsibilities of the PIU within AUDA-NEPAD,
                          the Project Advisory Committee, as well as the Country Coordination teams within the MPA participating countries. The
                          Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) outlines and justify single-source engagements with entities like
                          ESAWAS (in association with AfWASA and PASA), GWP-SA, as well as IGAD and SADC-GMI for specific services where they
                          bring unique value and competencies.




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                              Victor Vazquez Alvarez
                              Senior Water Specialist

                              Nishtha Mehta
                              Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                              Susanna Smets
                              Senior Water Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                             AUDA NEPAD
                             Amine Idriss Adoum
                             Head of Infrastructure Department
                             amine.idriss@auda-nepad.org

                           Implementing Agencies




                          8 Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, Blue Economy and Sustainable Environment




                                                                                                                                                   Page 10



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Accelerating Access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439)


                           AUDA-NEPAD
                           Amine Idriss Adoum
                           Head of Infrastructure Department
                           amine.idriss@auda-nepad.org

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Victor Vazquez Alvarez, Nishtha Mehta, Susanna Smets




_For Official Use Only_
                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Soma Ghosh Moulik                       04-Aug-2025

                          Country Director:                       Amit Dar                                12-Aug-2025




                                                                                                                                          Page 11



                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
