Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 11/19/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04598




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 21, 2024                                                                              Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P506439                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      AFE WASH MPA                 2025

                     Operation Name            Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Angola, Botswana, Burundi, Comoros,     EASTERN AND                  Water
                     Africa                    Congo, Democratic Republic of,          SOUTHERN AFRICA
                                               Eswatini, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho,
                                               Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique,
                                               Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, South
                                               Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     TBD                       TBD                                     06-Jan-2025                  22-Feb-2025



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     29-Oct-2024               5,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The PDO for phase 1 is to improve governance, institutional capacities and resource mobilization for water and
                     sanitation service delivery in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) Region The PrDO for the overall MPA is to increase
                     access to drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene services in participating countries in the Eastern and Southern
                     Africa (AFE) Region


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities



                    Nov 21, 2024                                                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                     The regional WASH Access MPA aims to increase access to at least basic WASH services at people’s home, in schools and
                     in health centers, following a common intervention framework across participating countries (country-level phases) and
                     through a regional WASH acceleration platform (regional phase). There are multiple phases proposed, of which one is a
                     regional phase. The framework for the MPA is flexible and additional countries could be added if the operating
                     environment improves. The MPA proposes an investments of around US$ 5.4 billion in IDA and US$ 0.65 billion in IBRD
                     (Angola, Botswana), aiming to leverage US$ 0.9 billion of Government financing, US$ 1.4 billion of other development
                     partner financing, and US$ 0.5 billion of private capital financing, with the objective to reach around 73 million people
                     with access to at least basic water and sanitation services (of which around half with basic service level and the other
                     half with safely managed service level). The MPA supports a "systems change" approach tailored to the context of each
                     participating country. The MPA designed with four pillars (or components), each with a different menu of activities and
                     interventions: Pillar 1: Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH : The national platform approach consolidates
                     government-led efforts to achieve universal, sustainable WASH services by integrating funding and promoting cross-
                     sectoral cooperation. National platforms, steered by political and sectoral leadership, will focus on the preparation
                     and/or implementation of National WASH Investment Plans, as well as on policy development, and coordination and
                     mobilization of various sources of financing, while emphasizing inclusivity and gender equality. Digital applications will
                     be leveraged to enhance planning and transparency. Country-level implementation of WASH platforms will involve
                     various government entities. Regional support is provided through benchmarking progress towards SDG6, facilitating
                     knowledge exchange, and attract climate-focused financing to improve WASH access and environmental outcomes
                     across Africa. The Regional WASH Platform (phase I), will serve as a catalyst for countries within the region to embrace
                     more systematic approaches in scaling up access to WASH. Phase 1 aims to facilitate countries' progress in accelerating
                     sustainable access to WASH, through capacity building, progress monitoring, while fostering knowledge sharing among




Public Disclosure
                     participants. Additionally, the Regional WASH platform plays a pivotal role in providing incentives and mobilizing funds,
                     all directed towards advancing the regional WASH agenda. Through these concerted efforts, phase 1 under the MPA
                     seeks to drive meaningful and sustainable improvements in WASH access across the region. Pillar 2: Sector Governance
                     Reforms: This pillar focuses on strategic governance reforms, addressing non-financial barriers, and enhancing
                     regulatory oversight. It will provide incentives and technical assistances to conduct necessary governance and
                     institutional reforms to improve the enabling environment and the efficiency of public investments to attract increased
                     private sector capital. Sector reforms and their implementation will be informed through analytics and the deployment
                     of tools like Public Expenditure and Institutional Reviews, and Water Sector Assessment Programs (Water SAPs) to
                     identify bottlenecks and establish roadmaps for improvement. The approach includes designing incentive schemes to
                     promote efficient capital expenditure and regulatory alignment, with a focus on decentralized government levels. Under
                     the Regional WASH Platform (phase 1), regulators and policy makers will receive technical assistance to expand their
                     capacities and mandates through regional twinning arrangements, knowledge exchange and technical assistance on
                     governance reforms. Pillar 3: Service Providers Performance Improvement: This pillar focuses on enhancing WASH
                     service delivery models by improving the sustainability of operations and service provision in both urban and rural
                     areas. This pillar aims at improving the creditworthiness of urban utilities as well as the implementation of sustainable
                     operations and maintenance (O&M) models in rural areas. It will support the development and implementation of
                     Performance Improvement Action Plans (PIAPs) and Rural Water and Sanitation Service Professionalization Strategies
                     (RWSSPS) to set medium-term objectives and improve operational and financial sustainability. The implementation of
                     such plans and strategies will aim at reducing water losses and energy consumption, improving the operating ratio of
                     utilities and rural service providers through increasing revenues, cost-efficiency measures, leveraging digitalization. It
                     emphasizes the importance of synchronized strategies for service expansion and operational efficiency, particularly in
                     sanitation, and may involve City-Wide Inclusive Sanitation (CWIS) Plans and their implementation where relevant.


                    Nov 21, 2024                                                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                     Additionally, the pillar aims to ensure affordability and inclusion for low-income populations, promote citizen
                     engagement, and improve service delivery through mechanisms like utility scorecards and closing customer feedback
                     loops. Regional capacity building initiatives for utilities, rural service providers, city administrations and rural WASH
                     agencies will be supported through the Regional WASH Platform (phase 1). Pillar 4: Leveraging Financing for Resilient
                     Investments to expand WASH coverage: This pillar aims to leverage both public and private financing to expand resilient
                     water and sanitation infrastructure, focusing on investments in access expansion, including trunk investments, water
                     supply networks, WASH facilities in schools and health centers, and rural sanitation programs. By working with IFC and
                     MIGA, this pillar will finance WASH resilient infrastructure designed to withstand climatic shocks and aims to enable and
                     mobilize private capital, for example through PPP transactions and risk mitigation instruments to mobilize commercial
                     financing and equity. The pillar includes a range of resilience-building activities, by improving the broader water
                     resource management (WRM) context, promoting basin-level WRM strategies, supporting investments in water storage,
                     aquifer recharge, and water reuse. The regional WASH Platform (phase 1) will support countries with state-of-the art
                     analytical and advisory services on climate-resilient design and private financing opportunities, including regional
                     private sector forums. Subsequent regional phases may aim to foster a regional financing facility for WASH, to attract
                     private and climate finance.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     This project (P506439) is Phase 1 of the WASH AFE MPA, the regional WASH Access Accelerator platform, that includes
                     technical assistance and capacity building activities to improve governance, institutional capacities and resource
                     mobilization for water and sanitation service delivery in the AFE region. The scope of the Phase 1 WASH AFE MAP does



Public Disclosure
                     not include civil works but includes Type 2 and 3 technical assistance activities including capacity building, policy,
                     institutions, and regulatory analysis and reforms, flood and drought management plans, Public Expenditure and
                     Institutional Reviews (PEIRs), etc., which may lead to future investments involving civil works. The project is regional in
                     scope, however, there are no civil works planned under the Phase 1 of WASH AFE MAP and no site has been identified
                     to have potential negative E&S impacts from direct operations and activities.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Implementing entity for Phase 1 of this MPA (P506439) is yet to be determined. Once the implementing entity is
                     determined during project preparation, the E&S risk management capacity of implementing entity will be assessed
                     further. Given the TA nature of Phase 1 activities, necessary actions for improvement will be reflected in the ESCP at the
                     project preparation stage.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The environmental risk rating is Moderate. The Phase 1 of WASH AFE MPA (P506439) will finance Type 2 and 3
                     technical assistance activities, including capacity building, policy, institutions, and regulatory analysis and reforms,
                     flood and drought management plans, Public Expenditure and Institutional Reviews (PEIRs), etc. Although the Phase 1
                     of WASH AFE MPA (P506439) will not finance any infrastructure or activities that may have direct environmental


                    Nov 21, 2024                                                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                     footprints on the ground, it will finance technical assistance studies that have potential downstream environmental
                     risks with the objectives to lead to new investments that may include civil works and may impact water usage.
                     Potential downstream environmental risks and impacts are associated with environmental pollution, hydrological
                     ecosystem services, occupational and community health and safety, and impact to water balance, however, the
                     potential downstream environmental risks and impacts are expected to be moderate in scale as the nature of civil
                     works related to WASH interventions occur in already established site with limited physical footprint. Relevant
                     environmental requirements for technical assistance will be incorporated into the terms of reference for that activity.
                     For the AFE country-specific projects, environmental risks will be assessed, and may have different environmental risk
                     classification and risk management instruments as required.
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Phase 1 activities of the program are mostly related to TA activities (Type 2 and 3) on improving governance,
                     institutional capacities and resource mobilization for water and sanitation service delivery in the Eastern and
                     Southern Africa (AFE) Region. The social risks stemming from these activities, based on the currently available
                     information, are deemed Moderate at this stage. These are mostly related to: (i) potential exclusion from some
                     socioeconomically vulnerable sections of the population from project benefits, including those experiencing economic
                     hardship and those in geographically distant areas, particularly given the interest in improving the financial
                     sustainability of the WASH operation, which could potentially create incentives to avoid activities and sectors in the
                     less cost-effective areas and sectors; (ii) potential opposition from some groups of stakeholders to some of the policy
                     changes to be supported by the project, such as those concerned with potential increases in the cost of accessing
                     WASH services for the final users after the improvements (particularly those activities that involve private capitals), or




Public Disclosure
                     those with a vested interest in alternative uses of water, such as irrigation; (iii) other potential downstream social
                     impacts of country-level WASH investment plans, to be supported by Phase 1, which will need to be assessed further
                     once participating countries and activities are formally confirmed. The country-specific projects to be prepared and
                     implemented in the context of the WASH MPA will each have their own assessment of social risks, and may have a
                     different social risk classification and risk management instruments, as needed. The Bank’s due diligence during
                     project preparation will also further assess the capacity of AU to manage social risks. Stakeholder engagement
                     activities will play key role in the identification and management of social risks, the program’s inclusion aspects,


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      Phase 1 of WASH AFE MPA (P506439) are mostly related to TA activities, including support to country-level WASH
                      investment plans, on improving governance, institutional capacities and resource mobilization for water and
                      sanitation service delivery in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) Region. The environmental and social risks
                      stemming from these activities deemed Moderate at this stage. Although the activities will not finance any
                      infrastructure or activities that may have direct environmental and social footprints on the ground, it will support
                      policy reforms and finance technical assistance studies that have potential downstream environmental and social
                      risks with the objectives to lead to new investments that may include civil works and may impact water usage.



                    Nov 21, 2024                                                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                      Downstream environmental and social impacts will be assessed further once participating countries are formally
                      confirmed. Stakeholder engagement activities will play key role.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement activities will play key role in the program to coordinate with various stakeholders to
                      improve program's outcomes and identify potential opposition, particularly in relation to the expected regulatory
                      changes to be supported by the project. The project will need to identify its key stakeholders and undertake
                      stakeholder activities with them during project preparation. A record of them will need to be included in a
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), a document to be prepared and disclosed by project appraisal. The SEP will also
                      include the planned stakeholder engagement measures expected after appraisal and during implementation, along
                      with a grievance mechanism sensitive to SEA/SH issues.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS2 is currently relevant to the project activities. The labor risks associated with phase 1 are expected to be low.
                      Direct workers and contracted workers are expected to be engaged with the project on Type 2 and 3 TA activities.
                      Although the activities will not finance any civil works that may have direct environmental footprints on the ground, it
                      will finance technical assistance studies that have the objectives to lead to new investments that may include civil
                      works. The potential downstream environmental impacts from these TA activities include OHS-related negative risks
                      and impacts, should these investments materialize. Phase 1 of MPA will finance consultants services. Necessary
                      ESS2/LMP requirements will be embedded as part of ESCP.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      ESS3 is currently relevant to the project activities. Although the activities will not finance any civil works that may
                      have direct environmental footprints on the ground, it will finance technical assistance studies that have the
                      objectives to lead to new investments that may include civil works and may impact water quality and usage. The
                      potential downstream environmental impacts from these TA activities are associated with waste management,
                      improper handling of hazardous materials and hazardous waste, water use, impact to water balance, etc., should
                      these investments materialize.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      ESS4 is currently relevant to the project activities. Although the activities will not finance any civil works that may
                      have direct environmental footprints on the ground, it will finance technical assistance studies that have the
                      objectives to lead to new investments that may include civil works and may impact water quality and usage. The
                      potential downstream environmental impacts from these TA activities are associated with inappropriate disposal of
                      wastes and wastewater of all types leading to the spread of infectious disease among workers and community
                      members, impacts to potable water quality, community health impacts from local water resource and land
                      contamination from inappropriate management of solid and hazardous waste, negative impacts on community water
                      use, etc., should these investments materialize. The hiring of consultants may also pose some minimal SEA/SH risks,
                      particularly sexual harassment.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                      Not Currently Relevant


                    Nov 21, 2024                                                                                                          Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural             Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is currently not relevant to the project activities.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional        Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                           Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                 No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                          No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                     No




Public Disclosure
                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                        No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following instruments will be prepared and disclosed by Appraisal:

                     •      Draft Environment and Social Commitments Plan (ESCP), which will include embedded LMP elements and
                     requirements.
                     •      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a grievance mechanism sensitive to SEA/SH.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank




                    Nov 21, 2024                                                                                              Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Accelerating Access To Wash In The Eastern And Southern Africa Region (P506439)



                      Task Team Leader:       Victor Vazquez Alvarez              Title:         Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  vvazquez@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Nishtha Mehta                       Job Title:     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  nmehta1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Susanna Smets                       Job Title:     Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  ssmets@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                        Victor Vazquez Alvarez, Nishtha Mehta, Susanna Smets

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:               Min Ji Sohn

                     ADM Social Specialist:                      Aimonchok Tashieva




                    Nov 21, 2024                                                                                               Page 8 of 8
