Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/21/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04663




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 27, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P506770                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)   D-WATER                      2026

                     Operation Name            Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Bangladesh                Bangladesh                              SOUTH ASIA                   Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Economic Relations        Local Government Department             22-Sep-2025                  04-Dec-2025
                     Department

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     04-Dec-2024               350,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve access to WSS services, reduce pollution loads (entering the rivers and canals), and enhance resilience in
                     Metro Dhaka region


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Program includes three results areas: Results Area 1: Strengthen water governance, planning, and financing. This RA
                     will strengthen water governance in Dhaka by incentivizing priority reforms. This will include (i) establishing national
                     level governance mechanisms, (ii) strengthening institutional framework, capacities and systems at local level (CCs,
                     Municipalities) for implementation, and (iii) improving the regulatory enforcement systems and capacity for addressing
                     key pollution sources. Results Area 2: Improve access to safely managed WSS services and reduce pollution. This RA will
                     support city corporations (CCs) /DWASA in implementing priority small to moderate scale interventions for improving
                     the coverage and quality of WSS services and reducing water pollution loads in rivers and canals. Results Area 3:


                    Jan 27, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)



                     Improve water flows in rivers and canals and enhance flood resilience. This RA will focus on building systems and
                     capacities to shift from a fragmented and reactive approach towards urban flood risks to a more robust and planned
                     approach based on comprehensive planning and adequate infrastructure systems. This RA will support (i) robust
                     planning based on sustainable river and flood management approaches, and (ii) small-scale priority activities such as
                     drainage network improvement, nature-based solutions, and clean-up activities etc. An Investment Project Financing
                     (IPF) component is proposed to provide technical assistance for implementing governance reforms, institutional
                     capacity development, program management, coordination and reporting. The component will support agencies to
                     implement reform activities, prepare investment plans, design and implement investment projects, undertake
                     important technical activities such as information, communication and awareness generation, E&S capacity
                     development, and preparatory studies for investments to be financed in subsequent phases of the program or through
                     other sources. TA will be provided to Bangladesh Bank for conducting feasibility assessments and structuring projects to
                     be financed by the facility. Lastly, this component will finance the costs of independent verification agency, incremental
                     operational costs including recruitment of experts (technical, environment, social, financial management, procurement),
                     and other expenses for program management and implementation support.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Metro Dhaka, comprising Dhaka North, Dhaka South, Narayanganj, and Gazipur cities is home to over 22 million people
                     and is Bangladesh’s economic hub. The region suffers from severe water pollution, inadequate water supply and
                     sanitation (WSS) services, and increasing vulnerability to climate risks. The region's environmental challenges stem from
                     its degraded water systems which include the Buriganga, Turag, and Shitalakhya rivers. Daily 1,500 MLD of untreated



Public Disclosure
                     sewage, 2,400 MLD of industrial effluents and 10,000 tons of solid waste are discharged into these rivers. Unplanned
                     growth, resultant encroachment on riverbanks and sedimentation have reduced drainage capacity causing frequent
                     urban flooding. The urban poor, mostly informal settlers living in flood-prone areas, are disproportionately affected by
                     flooding whilst also contributing to the phenomenon through their daily activities. Women face the dual burden of
                     limited water access and societal barriers which prevent their participation in management of WSS services. The
                     existence of multiple agencies responsible for WSS services, often with overlapping mandates, further hampers
                     effective planning and service delivery.

                     The PforR Program, a part of the Bank funded MPA series, will attempt to address the environmental and social
                     challenges in Metro Dhaka through a phased approach focusing on governance reform, institutional strengthening, and
                     infrastructure investments. Planned interventions include expansion of WSS infrastructure, rehabilitation of drainage
                     systems, and restoration of water flows through nature-based solutions. These measures will benefit approximately 8
                     million people through improvements in public health outcomes, improved pollution management and reduction in
                     flood risks.

                     The IPF component of the project will finance TA activities pertaining to development of strategies, plans and pilot
                     interventions that will subsequently be implemented under the PforR operation or in other phases of the MPA.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     As outlined in the PCN, the Program will be managed by the Local Government Division (LGD) in coordination with
                     Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR). The implementing agencies will be Narayanganj City Corporation, Gazipur City
                     Corporation, Dhaka South City Corporation, and Dhaka North City Corporation. Dhaka Water Supply Authority (DWASA)

                    Jan 27, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)



                     and Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) are also likely to be implementing agencies. Bangladesh Bank (BB)
                     will be responsible for the proposed financing facility under the PforR operations. The Department of Environment
                     (DoE) will be responsible for the overall supervision and monitoring of the environmental aspects of the PforR
                     operations.

                     Of the key implementing agencies, the Bank has worked in the past with DWASA and BWDB through the DSIP and
                     BMWSSIP projects amongst others in the WSS Sector. While both the agencies have set up dedicated E&S Units to
                     manage E&S risks, the respective units continue to be constrained through lack of qualified E&S specialists and
                     supportive systems and leadership to manage E&S risks relevant to their operations. The two agencies have also worked
                     with other IFIs.

                     The City Corporations have very weak E&S risk management capacities. Similarly the LGD also does not currently have
                     the required institutional set up or mechanisms to manage E&S risks and impacts relevant to their mandate.

                     BB has recently updated it's Environment and Social Management System (ESMS), but continues to face challenges in
                     implementing the ESMS.

                     DoE is the enforcement agency mandated to ensure that Bangladesh's Environmental Conservation Rules (ECR) 2023
                     are implemented by Government Departments and Industries. However, DoE is constrained by limited manpower as
                     well as technical capacities and financial resources to effectively meet it's mandate.




Public Disclosure
                     The IPF component will try to strengthen these agencies' capacities for effective E&S management through required TA
                     support.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The Substantial environmental risk rating for the IPF component reflects the outcomes of the IPF activities—such as
                     plans, strategies, and pilot projects—are expected to have adverse impacts, the details of which will become clearer
                     during the preparation and implementation phases, while the following are the glimpses from the PCN. The IPF
                     component focuses on providing technical assistance (TA) for governance reforms, institutional capacity
                     development, and program implementation management. It will support key implementation agencies in achieving
                     results, including preparing investment plans, designing projects, and strengthening institutional systems.
                     Additionally, TA will be provided for E&S capacity strengthening, technical studies for water resource management,
                     river basin planning, and preparatory studies for future investments. TA will also assist Bangladesh Bank and financial
                     intermediaries in feasibility assessments and structuring projects for financing. Support will be provided for piloting
                     water bond transactions by financial institutions to fund water-related investments. The TA component focuses on
                     enhancing environmental outcomes by improving water access through expanded piped networks, reducing reliance
                     on unsustainable sources, and promoting sustainable urban growth. Key initiatives include upgrading wastewater
                     systems to minimize freshwater contamination and reduce waterborne diseases, alongside investments in solid waste


                    Jan 27, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)



                     management to decrease landfill use, lower pollution, and promote recycling, which helps reduce greenhouse gas
                     emissions. However, these infrastructure interventions may lead to environmental degradation, impacting sensitive
                     ecological areas and causing habitat fragmentation. The expansion of services could initially generate more waste,
                     increasing pressure on natural resources as urban populations grow. Challenges such as institutional capacity and
                     climate vulnerability highlight the need for effective compliance management.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The IPF component will provide comprehensive and hands-on support to the key implementation agencies to (i)
                     implement activities for achieving the results including governance reforms, institutional systems, preparing
                     investment plans, designing and implementing investment projects, and (ii) undertake important technical activities
                     such as information, communication and awareness generation, E&S capacity strengthening needs assessments,
                     technical studies and investigations for water resource management and river basin planning, and preparatory
                     studies for complex investments that may be financed in subsequent phases of the program or through other sources.
                     TA will also be provided to (a) Bangladesh Bank and partner financial intermediaries for conducting feasibility
                     assessments and structuring of projects to be financed by the facility and (b) pilot water bond transactions by select
                     FIs for financing water investments. The TA component will also finance the costs of independent verification agency,
                     incremental operational costs including recruitment of experts (technical, environment, social, financial management,
                     procurement etc.), and other expenses for program management and implementation support. The outcomes of the
                     IPF activities are likely to be plans, strategies, pilot interventions (and investments), etc. that could have significant
                     adverse social impacts during implementation - for instance, potential land acquisition, involuntary resettlement,
                     temporary economic or livelihood losses, potential for social exclusion, SEA/SH risks on account of labor influx,




Public Disclosure
                     community health and safety risks, etc. The nature and scale of these risks are not fully known at this stage and will
                     be ascertained during the preparation phase. Appropriate risk mitigation measures will be included in the specific
                     plans and other outputs of the TA activities to address these risks.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant because the project provides technical assistance (TA) for governance reforms, building institutional
                      capacity, and managing program implementation. This includes making investment plans, designing projects, and
                      improving institutional systems, leading to major infrastructure development. The TA will also help with
                      environmental and social (E&S) capacity strengthening, water resource management, and feasibility assessments for
                      financing projects. Additionally, it will support water bond transactions to fund water-related investments of the
                      Bangladesh Bank. While these efforts aim to improve water access, reduce pollution, and promote sustainable
                      growth, they could also lead to environmental degradation and increased waste. These activities could cause
                      environmental and social risks that need careful management throughout the project life cycle. Effective compliance
                      management is crucial to address these challenges.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant




                    Jan 27, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)



                      Proactive and meaningful stakeholder engagement will be critical for the effective implementation of both the IPF
                      component of the project and the larger PforR operations. A detailed stakeholder assessment will be undertaken
                      during the preparation phase and a SEP for the IPF component will be developed and disclosed before appraisal. All
                      stakeholders - especially women and vulnerable and marginalized groups will be included in the engagement
                      activities in the planning, implementation and post implementation operations and maintenance phases of the
                      project.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      IPF TA activities will involve multiple agencies comprising independent consultants, consulting firms, contractors and
                      staff from different government departments. The Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which will be
                      developed during the preparation stage and finalized before appraisal, will include provisions for a Labor
                      Management Plan (LMP). The LMP will be based on national labor laws and regulations and the requirements under
                      ESS 2- specifically principles of fair treatment, non-discrimination and equal opportunity for all workers and workers'
                      rights and responsibilities. It will also specify a grievance redressal mechanism (GRM) for workers where workers will
                      be able to raise workplace concerns without fear of retaliation.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant because, project will prepare investment plans, designing projects, and strengthening institutional
                      systems which would have significant impact, if not carefully considered, related to sourcing of ecological resources,
                      construction related air and water pollution, and climate change effects.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      While ESS 4 may not be directly relevant to the IPF component, the implementation of recommendations from the TA
                      activities funded through the IPF components, viz. strategies, plans, pilot interventions, etc., may have significant
                      community health and safety risks. Mitigation measures for these risks, if and as relevant, will be outlined in the
                      implementation plans for the activities.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      While ESS 5 may not be directly relevant to the IPF component, the implementation of recommendations from the TA
                      activities funded through the IPF components, viz. strategies, plans, pilot interventions, etc., may have significant
                      risks related to land acquisition, involuntary resettlement and restrictions on land use. To the extent possible, large
                      scale land acquisition and measures that lead to significant involuntary resettlement and restrictions on land use will
                      be excluded from the program. Mitigation measures for activities that might require small to medium scale of land
                      acquisition and / or those that involve some extent of involuntary resettlement and restrictions on land use will be
                      based on existing national laws and regulations, and applicable international standards will be negotiated and agreed
                      upon with the Borrower and implemented accordingly.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources




                    Jan 27, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)



                      Technical assistance (TA)/IPF typically involves conducting studies, designing plans, and providing implementation
                      management support to the PforR component rather than directly executing the project. However, the outcomes of
                      TA—such as infrastructure projects, flood risk mitigation—can have a significant impact on biodiversity and natural
                      resources. Therefore, it is important to consider the risks associated with the TA phase, particularly regarding the
                      potential effects of future other infrastructures supported by this program. The terms of reference (ToRs) for these
                      studies will be evaluated in a manner that aligns with the nature and risks of the proposed activities. This evaluation
                      will aim to identify potential risks to ecosystems and develop effective mitigation strategies during the TA phase to
                      inform future project activities. The environmental screening processes will include local assessments that take into
                      account the specific characteristics of the ecosystems involved.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                 Relevant

                      ESS 9 will be relevant as one of the key implementing agencies will be the Bangladesh Bank which is an FI. Other FIs
                      may also be involved in the implementation of some components of the larger PforR operation. At the concept
                      review stage, not much is known about how the project will engage with FIs and for what purpose. During
                      preparation, the contours of the engagement with FIs will get clearer, At that stage, the project will assess the
                      different FIs E&S Management Systems and capacities and, if and as required, build in measures to strengthen the



Public Disclosure
                      same as per the requirements of ESS 9.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         In Part
                       For the IPF-TA component, the project will use, as relevant and applicable, the Borrower's Framework related to labor,
                       grievance redressal, community health and safety, women's safety and environment management. During
                       preparation, a gap assessment between the requirements of the ESF and and the Borrower's Framework will be
                       undertaken and efforts will be made to use the borrower's framework in it's entirety with appropriate strengthening
                       using the principles and provisions of the relevant ESSs.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                TBD
                       Development partners like ADB, AIIB, AFD, EKN, etc. have expressed interest in providing additional financing and
                       technical support to help address the complex water security challenges in metro Dhaka. The Bank will collaborate
                       and co-ordinate with development partners and explore the potential for co-financing or parallel financing. At this


                    Jan 27, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Metro Dhaka Water Security And Resilience Program (P506770)



                       stage, it is not known whether the development partners will co-finance both the PforR and the IFP-TA components of
                       the project, or just the PforR component. The use of a Common Approach to manage E&S risks will be decided if and
                       as required during the preparation stage when more detailed discussions will take place between the Bank and the
                       potential financing partners.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     By appraisal, the borrower will prepare and Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) for the IPF component
                     of the program. The ESCP will also include principles and provisions of a Labor Management Plan (LMP). In addition, a
                     sStakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will also be developed.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Harsh Goyal                         Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                  hgoyal@worldbank.org



Public Disclosure
                      TTL Contact:            David Malcolm Lord                  Job Title:      Lead Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                  dlord@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                               Harsh Goyal, David Malcolm Lord

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                      Mohammad Shahad Mahabub Chowdhury

                     ADM Social Specialist:                             Anindo Kumar Chatterjee



                    Jan 27, 2025                                                                                                   Page 8 of 8
