Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDPA00217




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                Operation Name
                                                                                        Metro Dhaka Water
Bangladesh                     SOUTH ASIA                   P506770                     Security and Resilience
                                                                                        Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date
Program-for-Results
                               19-Oct-2025                  18-Dec-2025
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Ministry of Local
                               Government, Rural
                               Development and
People’s Republic of
                               Cooperatives, Ministry of
Bangladesh
                               Water Resources, Ministry
                               of Environment, Forest and
                               Climate Change

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To provide safely managed sanitation and solid waste management services in selected areas, and strengthen
institutional capacity of Metro Dhaka for water pollution reduction.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                 1,065.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                       610.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                       560.00
    IPF Component                                                                                             50.00



                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)



  Total Financing                                                                                                  610.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                 375.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                             375.00
  Total Government Contribution                                                                                    225.00

  Total Non-World Bank Group Financing                                                                               10.00
    Private Capital and Commercial Financing Amount                                                                 10.00
      of which Private Capital                                                                                      10.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



B. Introduction and Context
 Country Context
1. Bangladesh experienced rapid economic and social progress in recent decades, reaching lower middle-income
status in 2015. Stable macroeconomic conditions underpinned an average annual real GDP growth of 6.3 percent
between 2011 and 2024, and the poverty rate declined. However, the pace of GDP growth and poverty reduction
moderated over the past few years. An interim government was sworn in August 8, 2024, after the former Prime Minister
resigned and left the country amid a mass uprising.
2. Real GDP growth remained relatively resilient in FY25, declining marginally to 4.0 percent from 4.2 percent in FY24,
despite a FY25 first-quarter slump due to the student-led mass uprising. External sector pressures eased. Export growth
rebounded after a sharp contraction in FY24. Inflation averaged 10 percent in FY25. It moderated to average 8.4 percent
in Q1 of FY26 but remains elevated. Monetary policy has remained tight to bring down inflation. Investment activities
have remained subdued due to political uncertainty, elevated raw material and borrowing costs, and lending restrictions
at some banks. The financial sector remains vulnerable to high nonperforming loans and weak governance, prompting
corrective actions by the government.
3. The current account balance has improved, while the fiscal deficit widened. The current account deficit turned into
a surplus in FY25 and continued to remain in surplus in the first quarter of FY26, driven by a sharp increase in remittances
and exports. The exchange rate has remained stable in recent months, and there has been a slow reversal of the depletion
of foreign exchange (FX) reserves. FX reserves sttod at US$26.5 billion (3.5 months of prospective import coverage) as of
September 2025 (compared to US$19.9 in September 2024). The fiscal deficit is estimated to have widened to 4.7 percent
of GDP in FY25, up from 3.9 percent in FY24, reflecting moderate tax revenue growth and higher current expenditures.




                                                                                                                        Page 2



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


    4. Real GDP growth is projected to rise to 4.8 percent in FY26, driven by an increase in private consumption which is
    expected to be supported by moderating inflation. Investment is expected to improve relative to FY25 but remain
    subdued, reflecting election-related political uncertainty and ongoing vulnerabilities in the banking sector. Export growth
    is expected to stay robust despite global tariff uncertainty. From FY27, growth is projected to accelerate on the back of
    an increase in investment activity. The current account balance is likely to revert to a deficit as imports normalize. The
    fiscal deficit is anticipated to remain below 5 percent of GDP. Reform priorities include improving the business
    environment leading to more and better jobs, increasing domestic resource mobilization, stabilizing and deepening the
    financial sector, diversifying exports, and investing in human capital.

     Sectoral and Institutional Context
    5. Dhaka, the economic engine of Bangladesh, generates half of the country's formal employment, contributes 35
    percent to national GDP, and is home to 80 percent of export-oriented garment factories that have been instrumental
    to poverty reduction. But rapid urbanization and industrial growth have outpaced the city's capacity to manage water
    demand, wastewater, and pollution. The result is a severe decline in water quality, with profound implications for public
    health, environmental sustainability, and economic growth. The Dhaka metropolitan region1 (Metro Dhaka) now
    produces approximately 1,800 million liters per day (MLD) of municipal sewage and 2,400 MLD of industrial effluent,
    most of which is discharged untreated into the city's canals and rivers. Between 50 and 70 percent of the city’s 10,000
    tons of daily municipal solid waste is dumped directly in rivers and canals or in adjacent dumpsites, exacerbating water
    pollution. These discharges contain hazardous pathogens, chemicals, and heavy metals, causing a dramatic drop in
    dissolved oxygen and rendering many waterways incapable of supporting aquatic life.2 Groundwater, a primary source
    of domestic supply, is also contaminated by effluent infiltration, leaking sewers, and unsewered sanitation systems.3
    Consequently, water-borne diseases remain prevalent, and the combined environmental, health, and economic costs of
    river pollution in Dhaka are estimated at US$2.83 billion annually.4
    6. The pollution crisis is compounded by poorly managed urban drainage and canal networks. Over half of Dhaka’s
    natural drainage channels have disappeared or are clogged due to unplanned urban growth, encroachment and solid
    waste dumping, and lack of maintenance. As a result, polluted water remains stagnant, with prolonged water logging in
    mostly low-income settlements, creating significant public health risks.
    7. Dhaka's water and sanitation governance is complex and fragmented. The Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage
    Authority (DWASA) is responsible for providing water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in Dhaka city (North and
    South), while CCs manage these services in neighboring cities (Gazipur, Narayanganj, Savar). Drainage responsibilities
    have shifted from DWASA to CCs, but the latter remain ill-equipped. The Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB)
    oversees major river restoration and flood control, whereas the Water Resources Planning Organization (WARPO)
    handles strategic planning. The Department of Environment (DoE) is the primary regulatory authority for water pollution.
    This fragmented structure results in weak coordination, limited oversight and accountability.
    8. Improving Dhaka’s water quality requires an integrated, multi-sectoral approach that combines policy, institutional
    and regulatory reforms with sequenced set of priority infrastructure investments. Key actions include accelerating
    access to safely managed sanitation and solid waste management, supporting policy reforms and regulatory capacity for
    pollution control, enhancing revenue generation and financial sustainability, and strengthening institutional capacity and

1
  Dhaka metropolitan region includes Dhaka city (North and South), Gazipur, Narayanganj, Savar, Kiraniganj, and Purbachal. This region is home to
22 million people- a third of the country’s urban population.
2Biswas, B., and T. Hamada. 2012. “Relation between Hazaribagh Tannery Industry Development and Buriganga River Pollution in Bangladesh.”

International Journal of Environment 2 (2): 117–27.
3 Hoque, M. A., J. M. McArthur, P. K. Sikdar, J. D. Ball, and T. N. Molla. 2014. “Tracing Recharge to Aquifers beneath an Asian Megacity with Cl/Br

and Stable Isotopes: The Example of Dhaka, Bangladesh.” Hydrogeology 22 (7): 1549–60.
4 World Bank Country Environmental Analysis, 2018



                                                                                                                                                Page 3



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


coordination. This program supports the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) to initiate these critical foundational
interventions that can be scaled through subsequent phases. The rationale for public investment is clear: the scale of
market failures, externalities, and public health risks associated with water and solid waste pollution far exceed what the
private sector can address alone. Public investment is essential to de-risk and catalyze private capital, particularly through
blended finance and enabling reforms that improve creditworthiness. The project will leverage public resources to crowd
in private investment, support regulatory and institutional reforms, and lay the foundation for sustainable, scalable
solutions to Dhaka's sanitation and pollution challenge.

 PforR Program Scope
9. The Program-for-Results (PforR) operation supports the first phase of the Blue Network program. The PforR
operation will initially focus on Dhaka and Narayanganj, two cities identified as pollution hotspots and demonstration
sites for scalable models. The program is designed to be demand-responsive, allowing CCs and DWASA to determine their
own pathways and priorities within a consistent results framework. This approach ensures local ownership, efficient
implementation, and real impact on the ground.
10.    Results Area 1 (RA#1): Improved Financial, Institutional, and Technical Capacity. This RA will incentivize priority
interventions to strengthen the governance at national level and financial, institutional, and technical capacity of CCs and
DWASA for delivery of safely managed sanitation and SWM services for pollution reduction and water quality
improvement. Based on findings from institutional assessments, a tailored Financial, Institutional, and Technical (FIT)
scorecard has been developed with a set of actions that will enable agencies to show measurable improvement in their
performance and access incentive grants. Key activities and expected results are summarized below.
11.     Results Area 2 (RA#2): Urban water pollution reduction. This RA will support reduction of urban pollution loads
and concentrations in selected water bodies –through incremental improvements in wastewater, fecal sludge and solid
waste management services, including interception and diversion networks and cleaning up priority canals/ponds and
drains. It will enhance resilience by increasing access to safely managed sanitation services, by improving service delivery
systems, enhancing operational efficiency, and reducing pollution in rivers and canals, and will also thereby improve
public health outcomes. It will also contribute to GHG emission reduction through improved wastewater and fecal sludge
management. The RA will support long-term integrated planning and management, as well as the implementation of
service delivery activities with visible results for demonstration effect on the ground.
12.    An Investment Project Financing (IPF) component will finance goods, consulting services, and incremental
operating and management costs to enable policy reforms, systems development, community engagement, capacity
enhancement, program coordination, implementation and reporting, and investment project preparation for next phase.
13.     Coordinated implementation approach for achieving demonstration impact. The investment activities in RA#2
will be coordinated on an area-based approach to deliver tangible results. Joint implementation and monitoring plans
will be prepared under the Program and overseen by a Joint Task Force (JTF, described in subsequent section on
implementation arrangements). This integrated approach requires strong technical support to be financed under the IPF
component and is critically important to foster credibility, trust, ownership and momentum to catalyze implementation
at scale.
C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
Program Development Objective(s)
To provide safely managed sanitation and solid waste management services in selected areas and strengthen
institutional capacity of Metro Dhaka for water pollution reduction
The PDO indicators are:


                                                                                                                         Page 4



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


      i.   People provided with safely managed sanitation services, of which percentage women/youthCRI
     ii.   People provided with improved solid waste management services
    iii.   Percent reduction in loads of key pollutants5 in targeted reaches of selected canals and a retention pond
    iv.    Improved financial, institutional, and technical (FIT) capacity of DWASA and selected City Corporations to deliver
           wastewater, fecal sludge, and solid waste management services (measured by the FIT score).
    D. Environmental and Social Effects
    14.     The E&S risks of the proposed PforR operation are rated as Substantial, primarily due to the nature of the
    activities to be implemented by CCs and DWASA, and the weak institutional capacities and experience of the agencies
    in managing E&S risks. The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) for the program concluded that while
    Bangladesh has a reasonably comprehensive E&S regulatory framework, the IAs currently lack the required policies,
    systems, operational procedures and human and financial resources to effectively implement the relevant laws and
    systematically monitor compliance. Furthermore, apart from DWASA which has some experience of implementing donor
    funded projects that mandate compliance with internationally recognized E&S standards, DNCC and DSCC have very
    limited experience of implementing such projects and NCC does not have such experience. The E&S rating of the IPF
    component is rated as substantial considering the potential downstream risks related to the implementation of the
    activities in the IPF component – specifically related to preparation of plans, studies and detailed reports for investments.
    15.     The Program seeks to improve the ecological and environmental outcomes through improved water quality and
    reduced pollution, but some of its activities pose environmental risks, particularly during construction. Key environment
    risks include: (i) air and dust pollution; (ii) noise and vibration from heavy machinery and demolition works; (iii) surface
    water pollution from uncontrolled runoff, and dredged materials; (iv) generation of and exposure to dredging and
    construction-related solid and liquid waste which may contain heavy metals, hydrocarbons, and pathogens.; and (v)
    localized drainage congestion from debris, temporary encroachments on water bodies, stockpiling of materials, and
    temporary road diversions over canals. Improper handling, storage, or disposal of dredged materials and sludge could
    cause soil contamination, foul odor, dust generation after drying, and health impacts on nearby communities.
    16.      The Program also faces potential social risks. Key social risks include: (i) potential involuntary resettlement and
    adverse livelihood impacts on people living along canals, drains, and other project sites; (ii) exclusion or inadequate
    participation of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups in planning and decision-making; (iii) lack of meaningful
    consultations with communities, and absence of robust grievance redressal mechanisms; (iv) potential risk linked to
    migrant labor influx and the participation of women workers; (v) spread of communicable and vector-borne diseases at
    congested work sites and in adjacent communities; (vi) temporary access restrictions to homes, businesses, and public
    services during civil works; and (vii) broader community health and safety risks linked to construction traffic, accidental
    spills, and excavation works. A strategic mix of incentive-linked activities and technical support activities have been
    designed to address the identified E&S management capacity gaps and the Program’s E&S risks.
    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




5
    Measured against baseline levels of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BoD), Total Nitrogen (TN) and Total Phosphorus (TP)

                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component

17.     The IPF component will provide technical assistance (TA) for policy reforms, systems development, community
engagement, capacity enhancement, program coordination, implementation and reporting, and investment project
preparation for subsequent phases. The outcomes of the IPF activities are likely to be plans, strategies, studies and other
preparatory activities for future investments that are likely to have significant adverse environment and social impacts
the nature and scale of which will only be known in greater detail during implementation phase. Therefore, the E&S risk
rating of the IPF component of the project is aligned with the E&S rating of the larger PforR operation and are both rated
as substantial.
E. Financing
                                         Program Financing (Template)


                              Source                                Amount (US$, Millions)            % of Total

      International Development Association (IDA)                                    375.00                     61.47%

        IDA Credit                                                                   375.00                     61.47%

      Counterpart Funding                                                            225.00                     36.88%

        Borrower/Recipient                                                           225.00                     36.88%

      Commercial Financing                                                             10.00                       1.64%

        Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                              10.00                       1.64%

                     Total Program Financing                                         610.00



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Harsh Goyal
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient




                                                                                                                       Page 6



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506770)


 People’s Republic of Bangladesh

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives

 Ministry of Water Resources

 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Harsh Goyal

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Josses Mugabi                27-Sep-2025

Country Director:                      Gayle Martin                 22-Oct-2025




                                                                                          Page 7



                                                                                  Official Use Only
