Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 10/14/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04526




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 23, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P506807                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         GGUD                         2025

                     Operation Name            Guiyang Green Urban Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     China                     China                                     EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC         Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                       Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     People’s Republic of      Guiyang Municipal Government              10-Mar-2025                   29-May-2025
                     China

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     11-Oct-2024               320,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance nature-positive urban development in Guiyang.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project is premised on the dual agenda of low-carbon and nature-positive urban development which are essential,
                     interconnected strategies for building livable cities. Low-carbon cities focus on planning, implementing, monitoring, and
                     accounting for low-carbon investments and climate change mitigation. Nature-positive cities prioritize urban
                     development that enhances resilience and livability by integrating nature. A joint approach applied in strategic areas
                     that integrates multi-sectoral interventions, offers solutions to the intertwined challenges of climate change and nature
                     loss, and creates mutually reinforcing benefits essential for long-term economic transformation and building
                     sustainable, livable cities. The project intervention area focuses on the Aha Lake area, strategically located in the core of
                     Guiyang city. It is designated as a national wetland park in 2015, serves as a critical urban green lung with important

                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                         Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     flood control and biodiversity functions. It is recognized that a single project cannot achieve all nature-positive goals or
                     resolve all climate-related issues in Guiyang. Instead, the project targets Aha Lake, which embodies key urban
                     development challenges and high potential, to demonstrate an integrated approach to these goals. These efforts are
                     further supported by city-wide interventions and innovations on low-carbon platforms, nature-positive planning, and
                     enhanced collaboration. The project will include the following three components: Component 1: Low Carbon Urban
                     Mobility for Enhanced Livability (US$165 million). This component will finance improvements and constructions around
                     the Aha Lake, on: (i) NMT network and connections to city-wide green network; (ii) public transit connections (roads
                     upgrade for last mile bus connections to metro stations), facilities (such as bus interchange, and integrated visitor and
                     transit facilities) and services (intelligent transport systems, and improving bus coverage, frequency and service); (iii)
                     road connections to key city thoroughfares; (iv) integrated visitor/parking facilities with electric charging stations and
                     bicycle stands; and (v) traffic and transport management. Component 2: Nature-Positive Urban Solutions for Climate
                     Mitigation, Adaptation, and Biodiversity (US$68 million). This component will finance: (i) restoration of wildlife habitats
                     and eco corridors in the Aha Lake area; (ii) restoration of riverbanks, artificial wetlands, and micro-wetlands, and
                     establishment of ecological buffer zones; (iii) biodiversity monitoring and tracking; (iv) small-scale wastewater
                     treatment and pollution control facilities; (iv) sewage interception ditches and pumping stations; and (v) energy efficient
                     street lighting, public toilets and other small-scale public facilities/amenities such as rest areas, service kiosks, public
                     space furniture, signage and recreational equipment, and an outdoor museum for awareness raising. Component 3:
                     Innovative Approaches, System and Capacity Strengthening (US$17 million). This component will finance: (i) data
                     analysis, collection and integration; software design, development, testing, and deployment through mobile application;
                     and associated hardware and equipment; (ii) related awareness-raising, capacity building, promotional and citizen
                     engagement activities; (iii) technical analysis and development of urban spatial plans; (iv) research and technical




Public Disclosure
                     assistance for informing policies, regulations, and plans on carbon sequestration potentials and carbon market
                     mechanisms in Guiyang; and (v) project management, capacity building and coordination activities. The component
                     aims to lay the foundation for positioning Guiyang as a national, regional, and global good practice city for monitoring
                     and lowering urban emission reduction, incentivizing behavior change, integrating low-carbon and nature-positive
                     considerations into urban spatial planning, enabling research and methodologies for carbon sequestration and policy
                     support for carbon markets.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project aims to improve Guiyang’s capacity on GHG management and nature-positive urban development. It will
                     support Technical Assistance at the municipal-level to enhance carbon monitoring, related policy framework and spatial
                     planning. Guiyang is the capital of Guizhou Province, China with an area of 8,034km2, 72 % covered by forests and
                     grasslands. The built-up area accounts for only 11 percent of Guiyang. The city's permanent population was 6.4 million
                     by end 2023, with a population density of 773.35 people/km2. Guiyang has a minority population of 1.2 million (21% of
                     total population), including 11 ethnic minorities namely Miao, Buyi, Tujia, Yi, Dong, Gelao, Bai, Hui, Manchu, Zhuang,
                     and Shui. Ethnic minorities are mainly concentrated in 18 ethnic townships and 279 ethnic minority villages in townships
                     and 279 ethnic minority villages in non-ethnic townships. Geospatial analytics show significant urban heat island (UHI)
                     effects in the city core, and about 18 percent of Guiyang’s built-up area is exposed to pluvial or fluvial floods.

                     The physical investments will focus on the first national wetland park of Guiyang, Aha Lake, and its surroundings,
                     including sewage interception, forestry management, wetland restoration, energy efficient lighting, and green mobility
                     system. Aha Lake lies in the south west of Guiyang with a total area of 1,024 ha, including 473ha wetland. Formed in

                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     1960 with the completion of Aha Dam (37.5m high), it plays a key role in flood control and ecological regulation. The
                     park is planned for ecological protection, public science education and recreation. It was also amongst the first batch of
                     critical habitats for terrestrial wildlife in China. The project is designed for ecological net gains, and all activities will
                     comply with national and local regulatory and policy framework (including redline strategy and wetland law) without
                     involving any core reserve. Further biodiversity baseline will be provided during project preparation.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Based on initial discussion with Guiyang, a Project Steering Committee has been established for decision making and
                     coordinating project implementation. It will be chaired by the vice mayor of Guiyang Municipality and led jointly by the
                     Guiyang Development and Reform Commission (DRC) and the Guiyang Infrastructure Construction & Investment Group
                     (GICIG), a state-owned enterprise. The Project Management Office (PMO) will be housed and staffed by GICIG,
                     responsible for the day-to-day implementation of the Project, including Environmental and Social (E&S) management,
                     and overall coordination across sectors and institutions at the technical level. The PMO and county PIUs will take the
                     lead in project preparation, implementation, and the day-to-day management of project activities. The PIUs will be
                     supported by an Expert Group.

                     Guiyang Municipality has previous experience in implementing projects financed by the World Bank and other NDBs but
                     is new to ESF. During project preparation, the E&S capacity of GICIG will be assessed and a project-tailored E&S capacity
                     building plan will be developed to support project implementation based on the assessment findings. Generally, the
                     project management capacity, including E&S capacity, varies from strong at the national and provincial level to relatively
                     weak at county level. The PIUs will have dedicated environmental and social staff to coordinate the environmental and




Public Disclosure
                     social issues throughout the preparation and implementation of the project. Technical assistance and training programs
                     will be provided to PIU staff at both levels. Once the PIUs are established, the E&S capacity will be further assessed, and
                     the demands for institutional capacity building for E&S risk management will be identified.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     The environmental risk is deemed Substantial. The project is designed for environmental benefits. The TA activities to
                     enhance carbon monitoring, policy development and spatial planning will contribute to city’s GHG emission
                     reduction, while their downstream E&S implications (incl. induced impacts) will be addressed through ToR review and
                     QA process. Physical investments on sewage interceptor, forestry management, NbS wetland restoration, energy
                     efficient lighting, and greenway (25km long and 7.5m wide for cycling and walking) development around Aha Lake will
                     enhance protection of local water quality and ecosystem. Since Aha Lake is a reservoir, a National Wetland Park and
                     one of the nationally recognized critical habitats for terrestrial wildlife, the project will be designed to enhance its
                     functions for flood control, biodiversity conservation, public education and recreation in full compliance with the
                     established eco-redline strategy and ecological functional zoning. No core zone will be disturbed or negatively
                     affected. Construction nuisance like noise, wastewater, dust, solid waste and soil erosion, as well as pesticide use
                     during reforestation, is expected, which are largely temporary, site-specific and manageable with known mitigation
                     techniques. A small section of proposed greenway will be along the existing dam, but without negative impact on it.


                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                          Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     Based on site visit findings, Aha Reservoir is well operated and maintained by the Municipal Water Administration,
                     with the dam recently reinforced in 2023. A biodiversity impact assessment and a dam safety assessment are required
                     for the project to seek the clearance of responsible authorities and the WB before appraisal. Along with the FSR
                     progress, the EIA will further identify if any associated facilities and cumulative impacts are involved. The risk rating
                     will be revisited during project preparation. Guiyang has previous WB experience but new to ESF, and this project will
                     further build their capacity on ESF.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is considered Substantial. Social risks are associated mainly with Component 2. This component will
                     support initiatives around Aha Lake, its surroundings. Subcomponent 2.1 includes afforestation and creation of buffer
                     zones which could include changes or restrictions in land use and access to forest resources especially in community
                     forests. Subcomponent 2.2 will construct 17kms of sewage ditches and water treatment facilities while
                     Subcomponent 2.3 will require the construction of a 25km cycling and walking path around the lake. New bus lines
                     and associated transit facilities may also be introduced and improvements in urban transport infrastructure will be
                     supported for better access to the area. These activities will lead to land acquisition, including both permanent and
                     temporary acquisition of village collectively-owned forest and agricultural land, as well as house demolition
                     (approximately 6,000m²). There is a risk associated with working conditions not being in line with local laws and ESS2.
                     There may be labor influx associated with civil works that could impact local communities and may increase the risk of
                     SEA/SH. The exact number of ethnic minority households in the project areas is unclear. There is a risk that Ethnic
                     Minorities may be negatively impacted through project activities especially in relation to land acquisition and
                     resettlement and meaningful consultation. Any planning or replication arrangements may have downstream social




Public Disclosure
                     impacts, which will be assessed during project preparation and integrated into social assessments. The scale of social
                     impacts is unclear but they can be mitigated through careful planning and implementation. Social impacts will be
                     carefully assessed during preparation and may result in adjustment of risk rating.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      Although the project is designed for environmental benefits through municipal-level TA activities and low-carbon &
                      Nature-based-Solution infrastructure around Aha Lake, it has E&S risks. Given the high ecological value of Aha Lake, a
                      full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) as well as a Social Impact
                      Assessment (SIA) and Social Management Plan (SMP) will be prepared based on the FSR prior to appraisal, which will
                      include: 1) biodiversity impact assessment; 2) dam safety assessment; 3) pesticide management plan for forestry
                      management; 4) capacity building plan; 5) chance find procedures and Labor Management Procedures (LMP). A
                      Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or a Process Framework will be prepared. If required, an Ethnic Minorities
                      Development Plan will also be prepared. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan and an Environmental and Social
                      Commitment Plan (ESCP) will also be developed before appraisal. All documents will be disclosed by appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant




                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      ESS10 is relevant. This project will have a wide range of stakeholders, including all parties and individuals participating
                      in or having an interest in the project. At concept stage, the potentially affected parties would include local
                      communities, people affected by land acquisition and resettlement, farmers, small shop owners, and vulnerable
                      groups such as poor households and may also include ethnic minorities living in the vicinity of the project. Other
                      interested parties would include the general public, participating and authorizing governmental departments,
                      construction contractors, NGOs, etc. Stakeholders will be further identified and analyzed during preparation. A
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared, documenting the actions on stakeholder engagement,
                      information disclosure, and functioning grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs) throughout project cycle. The
                      borrower will strengthen the PMO capacity for managing public consultation and information disclosure.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. Although exact labor requirements are not clear at this stage, the Project is expected to employ
                      direct and contracted workers. The project will need to develop a Labor Management Procedure (LMP) that will set
                      out how the project workers will be managed, outline working conditions and a worker GRM. To ensure the health
                      and safety of workers during the construction phase, an Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) plan in line with
                      relevant EHS guidelines shall be prepared as part of LMP. It will contain procedures on incident investigation and
                      reporting/recording and reporting of non-compliances, emergency preparedness and response procedures, and
                      continuous training and awareness to workers. The grievance mechanism will contain stipulations for sensitive
                      grievances, including those related to SEA/SH

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      The standard is relevant. The project will support activities to disseminate and scale up the adoption of low carbon
                      and natural positive investments, reducing GHG emissions, for example, through the use of energy efficient lighting
                      around the lake. Sewage interception around Aha Lake will reduce the discharge of untreated wastewater into the
                      lake and thus contribute to water quality and ecosystem services protection. The ESIA will assess these benefits and
                      also review Guiyang wastewater management status and plan to check the adequacy of downstream treatment
                      capacity for managing the increased wastewater collection. The GHG emissions estimate will be conducted during
                      project preparation. The project will support forestry management activities, involving the use of pesticide. A Pest
                      Management Plan will be developed as part of the project EIA to ensure the adoption of integrated pest management
                      approach under the project.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. Project activities are not expected to require a significant influx of laborers considering the
                      scale of construction activities but some labor influx is possible. The physical activities would introduce workers to the
                      project areas and consequently pose health and safety concerns to local communities. Transporting construction
                      material during construction would increase traffic volumes on the roads, causing road safety risks. Potential traffic
                      and road safety risks during construction will be assessed and addressed in the EIA. Training and personal safety
                      equipment will be provided to safeguard all workers. Also, considering the project’s reliance on Aha Lake as an
                      existing medium-sized reservoir, the dam safety assessment will be conducted per the ESF requirements and
                      integrated into the EIA and EMP. A traffic management plan (TMP) and a labor camp management plan (if required)
                      will be prepared as an integral part of the ESMP.


                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant, as the project will result in both physical and economic displacement. Subcomponent 2.2 and
                      Subcomponent 2.3 will require land acquisition, including permanent and temporary acquisition of collectively owned
                      forest land and agricultural land, as well as house demolition (approximately 6,000m²). Subcomponent 2.2 aims to
                      improve water quality in Aha Lake by constructing four sewage ditches totaling 17km in length. Subcomponent 2.3
                      will focus on developing the Aha Lake Greenway, a 25km cycling and walking path as part of a larger city-wide green
                      network. Some activities under Subcomponent 2.1 (upgrading of monoculture planting, creation of buffer zones and
                      afforestation) may be implemented on community forests. The impact category will be further clarified through the
                      SIA process based on the FSR. An appropriate instrument for involuntary resettlement, such as a Resettlement Action
                      Plan (RAP) or process framework, will be prepared by appraisal.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      The standard is relevant. Proposed activities are designed to enhance the conservation of natural habitats in and
                      around Aha Lake. All activities (including reforestation) will be planned and implemented by adopting the low carbon
                      and Nature-based-Solution (NBS) solution, in compliance with domestic ecological regulations and ESF requirements,
                      particularly the existing redline strategy and functional zoning for the national wetland park in the urban settings. No
                      core reserve will be involved. The project will also support reforestation, upgrading of mono-culture planting and
                      upgrading of planting and maintenance mechanisms around the lake, adopting sustainable forest management
                      model. A biodiversity impact assessment will be conducted for the project during preparation to support FSR and EIA



Public Disclosure
                      preparation, which will provide details on ecological impact analysis and mitigation measures as well as measures to
                      secure and enhance the project’s ecological benefits.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is currently relevant. The presence of ethnic minorities around the lake has not been confirmed at this stage and
                      will be assessed during preparation. However, as of 2021, Guiyang is home to 55 ethnic groups, with a minority
                      population of 1.2 million, making up 21.43% of the total population. Eleven ethnic minorities—Miao, Buyi, Tujia, Yi,
                      Dong, Gelao, Bai, Hui, Manchu, Zhuang, and Shui—have lived in the area for generations. These communities are
                      primarily concentrated in 18 ethnic townships and 279 ethnic villages within non-ethnic townships. During
                      preparation, the SIA will verify if any ethnic minorities will be directly or indirectly affected by the project activities
                      and confirm if an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) need to be prepared to mitigate impacts on such groups.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. Based on the preliminary screening findings, project interventions are not likely to be in or in
                      the vicinity of legally protected tangible cultural heritage sites. The project activities will involve excavations,
                      demolition, movement of earth in the physical environment, which could potentially affect some movable or
                      immovable objects, sites, structures, and natural features and landscapes. All subprojects will be screened for impacts
                      on cultural heritage during the EIA and SIA process. However, the EIA and EMP will include procedures to deal with




                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                         Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                      “chance findings” of archeological artifacts considering the excavation works involved for laying the sewage
                      interceptors around the lake and establishment of a walking trail.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      The project will involve no Financial Intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       Although China has a comprehensive E&S Framework, its use for the project is not recommended due to the limited
                       experience of implementing agencies in applying ESF. Also, a comprehensive assessment of the borrower framework
                       has not been completed.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No




Public Disclosure
                       No financing partner is involved.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     • From environmental perspectives, Guiyang PMO to prepare and disclose an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                     and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), including:
                      - a biodiversity assessment
                      - a dam safety assessment
                      - a section on pesticide use or promotion of IPM for forest management activities
                      - a capacity building plan and the requirements related to chance find procedures
                     • From social perspectives, Guiyang PMO to prepare and disclose a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and a Social
                     Management Plan (SMP), including:
                      -PMO to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan or a Process Framework (if required based on findings of the SIA)
                      -PMO to prepare a Labor Management Procedure
                      -PMO to prepare an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (if required based on the findings of the SIA)
                     • Guiyang PMO to prepare and disclose a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP, including the GRM);
                     • Guiyang PMO to prepare and agree with the World Bank on the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP);
                     • Guiyang PMO to designate a representative of the implementing agency to have overall accountability for the
                     environmental and social performance of the project.



                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Guiyang Green Urban Development Project (P506807)



                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Chyi-Yun Huang                        Title:        Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  chuang@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Guangming Yan                         Job Title:    Senior Urban Development Specialist

                      Email:                  gyan@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Linus Benedikt Pott                   Job Title:    Senior Land Administration Specialist

                      Email:                  lpott@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000




Public Disclosure
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                           Chyi-Yun Huang, Guangming Yan, Linus Benedikt Pott

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Xiaodan Huang

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Shuang Zhou




                    Jan 23, 2025                                                                                                   Page 9 of 9
