Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Project Information Document (PID)

                                              Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Oct-2024 | Report No: PIDDC01111




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
        Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
China                          P506807                      Guiyang Green Urban Development Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          04-Feb-2025                  29-May-2025               Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             People’s Republic of China   Guiyang Municipal
Financing (IPF)                                             Government

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increase carbon sequestration, and enhance nature-positive urban
development in Guiyang.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                   400.00

  Total Financing                                                                                        400.00
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                          250.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                            0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                          250.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Counterpart Funding                                                                                   150.00


                                                                                                             Page 1
      The World Bank
       Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)


       Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                150.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                       Concept Review Decision
Substantial



Other Decision (as needed)

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

 1. China's rapid urbanization has driven significant economic growth but at high environmental costs. Over the past
    four decades, nearly 800 million people have been lifted out of poverty, with the urban population increasing from
    459 million in 2000 to about 932 million in 2023 (66 percent of the population). However, this growth has severely
    impacted natural assets like forests and wetlands, fragmenting ecological land and reducing connectivity between
    landscapes and cities. This weakens ecosystem services and affects urban livability.

 2. China's urban areas contribute up to 85 percent of the country's CO2 emissions, a significant part of global carbon
    emissions. From 2000 to 2020, China's CO2 emissions surged by 227 percent (from 3.35 to 10.95 billion metric tons)
    highlighting the critical role of urban development in achieving national and global climate goals. With the urban
    population projected to reach one billion by 2035, cities will play an increasingly important role in reducing carbon
    emissions. Various sectors drive urban emissions, notably the transport sector, which is a major contributor to
    energy consumption and emissions. If unmitigated, transport emissions are expected to peak at 150 percent of
    current levels around 2040. The urban water sector also significantly contributes to GHG emissions due to the
    degradation of organics in wastewater treatments and the operation of treatment facilities.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

 3. Guiyang, located in Guizhou province in Southwest China, has experienced consistently high GDP growth driven
    by urbanization and economic diversification, yet it remains one of China's poorer regions. In 2023, Guizhou
    ranked 22nd out of 31 provinces in Regional GDP, and Guiyang ranked 29th out of 36 major Chinese cities. Urban
    areas in Guizhou are among the poorest (10 out of 31) in terms of per capita household consumption. Educational
    attainment is also low, with just over 20 percent of residents educated beyond high school. Despite these challenges,
    Guiyang's GDP has grown at an annual average rate of 14 percent from 2002 to 2022, consistently ranked among
    the top in China. The city has successfully diversified from traditional industries like aluminum production and
    phosphate mining to the service sector, big data, and technological innovation, making it a key engine of growth for
    Guizhou and crucial for poverty reduction in the province.


                                                                                                                     Page 2
     The World Bank
      Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)


4. Guiyang is largely green, with 72 percent of its land covered by forests or grasslands; it faces significant urban
   development challenges due to its natural topography, limited available land, and high population density with
   only 11 percent of the area being usable for development. According to the 2020 census, Guiyang's population was
   nearly 6 million, with 75 percent residing in the city's six urban districts. The central urban area has an average
   population density of over 30,000 people per km2, comparable to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
   Guiyang is amongst the first batch of low-carbon pilot cities in China, the first approved demonstration city for
   ecological development, and the first national forest city. Its karst landscape confines the built-up area to 11 percent,
   leaving almost no room for expansion.

5. Guiyang set an ambitious goal for carbon peaking by 2030, aligning with China's national targets, and appears to
   have already peaked its carbon emissions; per capita emissions and emission intensity are decreasing, with a shift
   in contributing sectors from energy to transport. Guiyang‘s total GHG emissions in 2017, 2019, and 2020 were
   estimated as 33.71 million, 42.03 million, and 41.92 million tons of CO2 equivalent, respectively. Since 2010, per
   capita carbon emissions have decreased, reaching approximately 6.04 tons per person in 2020, slightly below the
   national average. During the 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-2020), Guiyang's carbon emission intensity decreased by 38
   percent, due to optimizing energy structure, adjusting industrial structure, and implementing energy-saving and
   emission reduction measures. The industrial sector's emissions dropped from 50 percent in 2010 to 38 percent in
   2020, while transport sector emissions increased from 20 percent to 33 percent, and building sector emissions
   remained stable at about 28 percent.

6. Guiyang prioritizes low-carbon and nature-positive urban development to shift towards green growth. Guiyang’s
   14th Five-Year Plan emphasizes the benefits of investing in low-carbon infrastructure and rehabilitating natural
   ecosystems to foster economic growth. The plan aims to harmonize innovation-driven development, a strong
   economy, urbanization, and ecosystem protection. The Project supports this vision by optimizing transport systems,
   improving wastewater treatment facilities, rehabilitating ecosystems, and ensuring energy efficiency. Low-carbon
   initiatives can stimulate technological progress, create jobs, and attract new investments, while nature-positive
   development, such as rehabilitating forests, lakes, and wetlands, can boost tourism and business opportunities.
   Guiyang's commitment to these strategies is crucial for ensuring sustainable economic transformation.

Relationship to CPF

7. The Project significantly contributes to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) Engagement Area
   2 on "Promoting Greener Growth" by addressing regional and global public goods, supporting critical services in
   lagging regions, and implementing strategic pilots relevant to other developing countries. It builds the capacities
   of the Municipal Bureau of Natural Resources, supports market mechanisms for resource management, and aligns
   with CPF Objectives 2.4 and 2.5 by promoting sustainable natural resource management and low-carbon transport
   and cities. The Project's efforts in Guiyang, a demonstration city for low-carbon and ecological development, will
   reduce GHG emissions, enhance carbon sequestration, and serve as a model for other cities. Additionally, the Project
   aligns with China's Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2035 (CCAS),
   and Mid-Century Long-Term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development Strategy by promoting low-carbon
   development, enhancing urban resilience, and restoring natural ecosystems, thus supporting the goals of the Paris
   Agreement.



                                                                                                                       Page 3
     The World Bank
      Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)


C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 8. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is: To reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increase carbon
    sequestration, and enhance nature-positive urban development in Guiyang.


Key Results (From PCN)

9. The following table provides an overview of how the PDO elements will be measured:

     PDO element                        PDO-level indicator
     Reduce greenhouse gas emissions    GHG emissions expected to be reduced through implementation of green initiatives in
                                        urban areas (tons/year)
     Increase carbon sequestration      Net Ecosystem Productivity of rehabilitated ecosystems in Guiyang (gC/m²/year)
     Enhance nature-positive urban      Area of terrestrial land and inland waterbody under enhanced conservation and/or
     development                        sustainable management (hectares)

D. Concept Description

10. The project intervention area focuses on Aha Lake in Guiyang, aiming to demonstrate an integrated approach to
    urban development challenges and nature-positive goals. Aha Lake, a national wetland park and critical urban
    green lung, covers around 10 km² and is central to Guiyang’s future growth. Previously undeveloped due to its role
    as a primary drinking water source, Aha Lake now faces risks of deteriorating water quality, inadequate
    conservation, and inaccessibility. The project seeks to rehabilitate the lake, improving water quality and carbon
    absorption, enhancing transport routes, and providing co-benefits like flood control, urban cooling, and job creation,
    thereby boosting urban livability.

11. Component 1: Low-Carbon Planning, Systems, and Research aims to strengthen Guiyang’s capacities and systems
    for low carbon and nature positive development for a livable city. It will finance a Measurement, Reporting, and
    Verification (MRV) system to support carbon emission reduction accounting and design incentive mechanisms,
    improve urban spatial planning to minimize land use conversions and protect carbon sinks, and develop and verify
    methodologies for carbon sequestration in wetland ecosystems. Additionally, it will help capitalize on forest
    resources as carbon sinks through policy design and market research and explore new urban development models
    and financing approaches to foster private sector participation in low-carbon projects, with a focus on the Aha Lake
    area.

12. Component 2: Aha Lake Low-Carbon and Nature Positive Urban Demonstration Locus focuses on initiatives
    around Aha Lake and its broader water and transport systems to develop standards and demonstrate good
    practices for enhancing urban forests, wetlands, and the lake itself. The aim is to reduce carbon emissions, increase
    carbon sequestration, adopt nature-based solutions for adaptation, and enhance ecosystem services, providing
    replicable methodologies and standards. Improving transport and water systems will reduce energy use and urban
    heat island effects, restore urban ecosystem services, enhance biodiversity, generate jobs, and increase urban
    livability. This component includes rehabilitating local ecosystems, improving water quality through sewage
    interception and pollution control, enhancing green urban mobility with non-motorized transport networks and



                                                                                                                        Page 4
      The World Bank
       Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)


     public transit, and promoting energy-efficient public infrastructure and low-carbon lifestyles. These activities will
     contribute to both mitigation and adaptation.

 13. Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building will cover the costs for supporting the day-to-day
     project implementation. This will include expenditures for complying with the Bank’s Environmental and Social
     Framework (ESF), procurement and financial management requirements, as well as Monitoring and Evaluation
     (M&E).

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                       Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


 14. The project aims to improve Guiyang’s capacity on GHG management and nature-positive urban development. It
     will support Technical Assistance at the municipal-level to enhance carbon monitoring, related policy framework
     and spatial planning. Guiyang is the capital of Guizhou Province, China with an area of 8,034km2, 72 percent
     covered by forests and grasslands. The built-up area accounts for only 11 percent of Guiyang. Guiyang City has
     jurisdiction over 6 districts, 3 counties, and administers 1 county-level city. By 2023, Guiyang City's permanent
     population was 6.4 million, its birth rate was 8.70 percent and population density was 773.35 people/km2. Guiyang
     has 55 ethnic groups with a minority population of 1.2 million, accounting for 21 percent of total population. Guiyang
     has 11 ethnic minorities namely Miao, Buyi, Tujia, Yi, Dong, Gelao, Bai, Hui, Manchu, Zhuang, and Shui. Ethnic
     minorities are mainly concentrated in 18 ethnic townships and 279 ethnic minority villages in townships and 279
     ethnic minority villages in non-ethnic townships.

 15. The physical investments will focus on the first national wetland park of Guiyang, Aha Lake, and its surroundings,
     including sewage interception, forestry management, wetland restoration, energy efficient lighting, and green
     mobility system. Aha Lake lies on the south-west side of Guiyang with a total area of 1,024 hectares, including 473ha
     wetland. Formed in 1960 with the completion of Aha Dam (37.5m high), it plays a key role in flood control and
     ecological regulation. The park is planned for ecological protection, public science education and recreation. It was
     also amongst the first batch of critical habitats for terrestrial wildlife in China. The project is designed for ecological
     net gains, and all activities will comply with national and local regulatory and policy framework (including redline
     strategy and wetland law) without involving any core reserve. Further biodiversity baseline will be provided during
     project preparation.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT


                                                                                                                           Page 5
     The World Bank
     Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)


World Bank
 Chyi-Yun Huang
 Senior Urban Specialist

 Guangming Yan
 Senior Urban Development Specialist

 Linus Benedikt Pott
 Senior Land Administration Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 People’s Republic of China
 Xiang Peng
 Director, International Economic and Financial Cooperation Department, Ministry of Finance
 pengxiang@mof.gov.cn

Implementing Agencies
 Guiyang Municipal Government
 Zhang Neng Zhu
 Secretary
 gyldpmo@163.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Chyi-Yun Huang, Guangming Yan, Linus Benedikt Pott

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                        Alejandro Alcala Gerez                 17-Oct-2024




                                                                                              Page 6
The World Bank
Guiyang Green Urban Development Project(P506807)




                                                   Page 7
