Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Aug-2024 | Report No: PIDDC00814




Public Disclosure Authorized
        The World Bank
        Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
India                          P506340                      Maharashtra Resilience Development Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
SOUTH ASIA                     06-Feb-2025                  29-May-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Government of India          Sangli, Miraj and Kupwad
Financing (IPF)                                             Municipal Corporation,
                                                            Kolhapur Municipal
                                                            Corporation, Maharashtra
                                                            Institution for
                                                            Transformation (MITRA),
                                                            Relief & Rehabilitation
                                                            Department (R&R),
                                                            Maharashtra Krishna Valley
                                                            Development Corporation
                                                            (MKVDC), Department of
                                                            Finance, Ichalkaranji
                                                            Municipal Corporation

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen multi-hazard climate and disaster risk management and institutional capacity for Maharashtra's resilient
development.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        400.00

  Total Financing                                                                                             400.00


                                                                                                                  Page 1
         The World Bank
         Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


                 of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                                        280.00
      Financing Gap                                                                                                                           0.00

    DETAILS
      World Bank Group Financing
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                                       280.00
      Non-World Bank Group Financing
       Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                120.00
          Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                              120.00

    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                  Concept Review Decision
Substantial




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

      1. India’s climate variability, increased frequency and severity of disasters, and temperature spikes1 imperils
         millions. More than 80 percent of India's population lives in areas highly susceptible to extreme seismic risk and
         hydrometeorological disasters, including floods, droughts, and cyclones. Out of the almost 3.3 million km 2 of
         landmass, 59 percent is prone to earthquakes of moderate to very high intensity, 15 percent is susceptible to
         landslides, 12 percent is prone to river floods, and 75 percent of the coastline faces cyclone risk2, 33% of
         experiencing erosion3. India, ranking seventh in climate disaster impact4, has an average annual loss of $87 billion5
         from extreme weather. Rising temperature, sea-level rise, and extreme precipitation due to climate change are
         expected to further retreat the country’s glacier mass, and increase the frequency and magnitude of wildfires,
         landslides, coastal and river flooding. The trajectory of climatic changes, unplanned urbanization, and population
         growth could drive 50 million people6 into poverty by 2040, intensifying health, economic, and food security risks.
         Studies show potential infrastructure losses from sea-level rise and inundation in cities like Chennai, Mumbai, and


1
  Climate Risk Country Profile: India (2021) The World Bank Group.
2 Government of India (2019) Annual Report 2018-19, National Disaster Management Authority of India, Government of India.
3 NCCR (2018) National Assessment of Shoreline Changes along the Indian Coast.
4 Eckstein et al. (2021) Global climate risk index 2021. Who Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events, 2000-2019.
5 WMO (2021) State of the Climate in Asia 2020.
6
  Skoufias et al. (2012) The Poverty and Welfare Impacts of Climate Change: Quantifying the Effects, Identifying the Adaptation Strategies.

                                                                                                                                               Page 2
        The World Bank
        Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


         Kolkata whereas unplanned urban expansion worsens flooding and heat stress in major cities like Mumbai,
         Chennai, Kolkata, Bengaluru, and Hyderabad. Despite achievements7 in reducing disaster-induced mortality,
         significant investments are needed to reduce annual economic losses and strengthen household, community,
         infrastructure and institutional resilience.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context
   2. Maharashtra is one of India’s economic growth engines aiming for a US$1 trillion economy by 2027–288, while
       also facing increased frequency of extreme weather events and climate change impact. It is the second most
       populous state, third largest in area, and the third most urbanized in India9 and contributes 14 percent of the
       national nominal GDP.10 Climate risks are an increasing threat to Maharashtra's development due to the growing
       exposure, rising disruptions and losses across economic sectors. Climate projections indicate an increasing
       frequency of high intensity events such as the 2019 floods where the districts of Kolhapur and Sangli received
       1,918 mm of rainfall during a fortnight in August (6–18 times the normal).11 There have been flooding events in
       the state almost every year since 2019 with 1,246 lives lost during 2019–202212 and increasing instances of
       annual flooding in cities. This period has also witnessed landslides, unseasonal rainfall, dry spells, droughts,
       heatwaves, lightning strikes, and rising frequency of Arabian Sea cyclones impacting the state.
   3. These disasters demonstrate that the past is not a reliable guide for future management of climate and
       disaster risks13. In addition to the rising frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, hazard
       characteristics are also evolving and demand more sophisticated monitoring, management, and mitigation
       investments. For example, continuous rainfall events increasingly trigger mudflows and landslides which are not
       covered by existing early warning systems. Similarly, the recent catastrophic floods emerge from the interaction
       of multiple systems. Floods in the upper-Krishna basin is characterized by concurrent high flows both at
       mainstream and tributaries, causing uncontrollably high backflow near confluences. Given that most flood water
       is attributable to the runoff from free catchments, the operation of upstream reservoirs is insufficient to
       regulate excess flood flows. The impact of flood releases from reservoirs also plays a crucial role. Dams like
       Koyana, Warna and Radhanagari need effective management to balance flood control and water storage. Many
       of the reservoirs in Maharashtra are over 30 years old, with the operational rules not updated since
       construction. Further, frequent disasters place an unprecedented burden on the state’s otherwise stable fiscal
       position, calling for a diversification of financing, including private capital mobilization, and reforms that better
       prepare the public finance management systems for shocks. Advanced catastrophe modeling and quantification
       of risks for undertaking such reforms do not currently exist.
   4. Urban flooding is emerging as a frequent and damaging climate change-related hazard in Maharashtra,
       disrupting lives and economic activity in cities. Many cities in Maharashtra increasingly face flood events due to
       unplanned and unregulated urban development, inadequate river management, insufficient or lacking storm
       water drainage, and encroachments on water bodies and flood zones. Mumbai and Pune experienced disruptive
       flooding as recently as the 2024 monsoon. Smaller cities like Kolhapur, Sangli, and Ichalkaranji -located in the

7 Ray et al. (2021) An assessment of long-term changes in mortalities due to extreme weather events in India: A study of 50 years’ data, 1970–2019
8 Maharashtra Economic Advisory Council (2023) Implementation framework for becoming a $1 Trillion economy.
9 Government of India (2011) Census of India.
10 GoM (2023) Economic Survey of Maharashtra 2022–23.
11 GoM (2023) A Report on Floods 2019 Krishna Sub Basin. https://wrd.maharashtra.gov.in/Upload/PDF/Vol%201%20Main%20Report.pdf
12
   Maharashtra State Disaster Management Plan (2023).
13
   According to the frequency analysis conducted by the flood modeling task force of MKVDC, the devastating 2019 flood is equated to a 25-year
return period. Given the higher frequency of flood events in recent years, this may become an even more common disaster in the near future.

                                                                                                                                             Page 3
        The World Bank
        Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


       upper Krishna sub-basin- are also increasingly impacted but lack adequate risk management capacities
       compared to bigger cities. These cities are located along rivers and experience significant population growth. For
       example, Sangli experienced a 400 percent increase in the size of its settlement areas in flood-prone zones
       between 1985 and 201514. These cities are densely populated and need flood mitigation solutions that cater to
       their specific characteristics, address the needs of the urban poor, and mitigate other climate impacts, such as
       urban heat, and precipitation-triggered landslides. Newly formed urban local bodies such as in the city of
       Ichalkaranji offer opportunities to plan trunk infrastructure based on climate-informed risk assessments, for
       example through the development of drainage master plans. Addressing the challenges of these riverine cities
       requires an integrated approach to fluvial and pluvial flood risk management.
    5. Climate change projections affirm the need for integrated water and disaster risk management approaches
       that enable economic growth and resilience. The existing temporal and spatial variation of water-related
       climate risks in Maharashtra is likely to get amplified due to climate change, both because of the projected
       rainfall and temperature trends as well as the cascading impact on groundwater recharge (due to increased
       runoff during high intensity rainfalls). The only available climate projection15 for the state is ten years old and
       indicates an increase in mean temperature from 1.2 to 1.6°C by the 2030s. The expected amplification of
       variability requires robust plans for different climate scenarios and investments in data, digital infrastructure,
       and decision support systems.
    6. The proposed project will build upon GoM’s efforts to enhance capacity for climate-informed planning,
       decision making and investments for Maharashtra, including by advancing integrated approaches to risk
       management and financing. GoM constituted a high-level committee16 after the 2019 floods to understand its
       causes and make recommendations for future resilience-building. The proposed project will support GoM in
       implementing the recommendations of this committee together with the resilience-building measures
       envisioned in the State’s Disaster Management Plan (2023)17 and the State Action Plan on Climate Change.18

 Relationship to CPF
   7. The proposed project builds on the Climate Change Action Plan 2021–2025 (CCAP), the South Asia Roadmap,
        and the Global Crisis Response Framework (GCRF) and operationalizes key objectives outlined in the CPF. The
        project aligns with Focus Area 1 of the CPF on Resource Efficient Growth by improving resilience to climate
        change and will improve DRM through resilient infrastructure, supporting state DRM institutions, and
        emergency preparedness (Objective 1.5); enhance connectivity and make infrastructure climate-resilient
        (Objective 2.3). It will also directly contribute to core objectives of the GCP and the corporate results indicator of
        people with enhanced resilience to climate risks.
   8. The proposed project is consistent with India’s NDCs, significantly contributing to current and future climate
        change resilience in a highly exposed area and minimizing greenhouse gas emissions.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)




14 GFDRR (2021) India Urban Climate Risk Analysis (Unpublished).
15 TERI (2014) Assessing Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptation Strategies for Maharashtra.
16 GoM (2020) A Report on Floods 2019 (Krishna Sub Basin) by Experts Study Committee.
17 GoM (2023) State Disaster Management Plan.
18 GoM (2023) Draft Maharashtra State Action Plan on Climate Change (2020–2030).



                                                                                                                          Page 4
     The World Bank
     Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


To strengthen multi-hazard climate and disaster risk management, and institutional capacity for Maharashtra’s
resilient development.


Key Results (From PCN)

  9. The project will measure progress toward the PDO via the following proposed indicators:
         a. People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Corporate Results Indicator) (Number of people,
             disaggregated by gender and youth)
         b. Area with reduced flood and landslide risk (ha) (Number)
         c. Expanded communication of early warnings to target population (Number)
         d. People served by emergency management centers with enhanced operational capacities (Number)
         e. A comprehensive strategy to mobilize private capital to finance and transfer disaster risk is adopted and
             prioritized instruments implemented by the state of Maharashtra (Y/N)

D. Concept Description
   10. The project seeks to enhance resilient development in Maharashtra by demonstrating an integrated climate
       and disaster risk management approach. This will be undertaken in the upper Krishna sub-basin, including the
       cities of Kolhapur, Sangli, and Ichalkaranji, which faced unprecedented flooding in 2019 and is also likely to
       experience increased frequency and intensity of extreme hydro-meteorological events. The integration is
       envisioned at the following scales:
            a. Spatial: design and implement climate and disaster risk-informed mitigation actions upstream and in the
                downstream urban areas of the Krishna River and its tributaries.
            b. Levels of governance: a strategic mix of state, district, and city-level actions.
            c. Multi-sectoral: investments anchored at the sectoral entities for water resource management, disaster
                risk management, disaster risk financing and urban resilient development.
   11. MRDP will benefit the state beyond the investments directly financed under the project. The project will
       support the design and establishment of learning platforms in partnership with local organizations to
       institutionalize and share knowledge and data. Feasibility studies in innovative and complex risk reduction
       measures will enable large-scale future investments in climate and disaster risk reduction.
   12. The project builds on the World Bank’s past and current operations in Maharashtra as well as the GoM and
       other development partners' initiatives and will draw lessons from global good practices. This includes over
       three decades of investments in rural water supply and sanitation by the World Bank, the National Hydrology
       Project (NHP), the National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP-II), and the ongoing Maharashtra Project on
       Climate Resilient Agriculture (POCRA). MRDP integrates learned lessons by i) ensuring a multi-sectoral and long-
       term approach to climate and disaster risk management across state, river basin, and local scales, ii) applying
       climate-informed and integrated models for prioritizing project interventions in a complex systems, iii)
       enhancing state capacity and emergency operations through institutional strengthening and data-enabled
       approaches, iv) involving communities and vulnerable groups, and v) building financial resilience to ensure long-
       term sustainability of project activities. The project will also leverage complementarities with Maha STRIDE
       currently in preparation with the same implementing agency in GoM as well as the state’s experience with other
       development partners like ADB, JICA, and AIIB.



                                                                                                                    Page 5
   The World Bank
   Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


13. The multi-sectoral project activities toward enhanced institutional capacity for climate informed and
    integrated risk management aims at reducing the loss of lives and economic damages from disasters in
    Maharashtra. It will improve climate resilience through feeding downscaled state-of-the-art climate models into
    decision making systems for risk management. The proposed components are:
        a. Component 1 – Climate-Informed Flood Risk Management: Reduce fluvial flood risk in the upper-
            Krishna sub-basin through a mix of mitigation solutions, including: i) Climate-informed reservoir
            operations, enhancement of data acquisition, data analysis and utilization for reservoir operations
            towards better flood risk management, ii) Flood risk mitigation works in the Krishna River system
            identified and prioritized through a modeling to determine their relative and collective effectiveness for
            flood mitigation, and iii) Feasibility studies for proposals to moderate extremely high flood intensities
            and reduce drought risk.
        b. Component 2 – Multi-Hazard Resilience Building in Districts and Cities: Enhance resilience of selected
            vulnerable areas through: i) Landslide risk mitigation in hotspots of selected districts using gray
            infrastructure where needed and nature-based solutions where possible, as well as landslide risk
            monitoring systems. ii) Urban flood risk mitigation, e.g., creating detailed risk assessments, high
            resolution maps, and resulting program of measures, including storm water drainage and nature-based
            solutions. The focus will be on institutional capacity development and innovative measures that create
            co-benefits for residents, through e.g., green spaces and corridors, urban wetlands and floodable parks,
            rain gardens, and permeable pavements. Activities shall feed state-level initiatives, incl. institutional
            reforms, to establish a long-term planning ecosystem for urban flood resilience, including, e.g., capacity
            development, multi-level and sectoral cooperation, private capital mobilization, and data-enabled and
            informed management, operation and maintenance.
        c. Component 3 – Upgrading Emergency Management Capacities: Strengthen multi-level emergency
            preparedness and response capabilities through the following: i) Upgrade state, district, and city
            emergency operation centers with state-of-the-art command and control facilities for improved
            situational awareness and decision-making, ii) Strengthen early warning systems, development of
            modules for lightning, landslides and flood early warning; designing effective and inclusive dissemination
            mechanisms through cell broadcasting; and community-based disaster risk management and early
            action capacities, iii) Climate-informed multi-hazard risk assessments for districts using innovative
            approaches such as remote sensing and earth observation, feeding into an integrated digital platform
            for resilience, iv) institutional reforms to enable and strengthen open access and sharing of risk data,
            and iv) Establishment of knowledge and learning platform for resilient development planning.
        d. Component 4 – Private Capital Mobilization for Risk Financing: Enhance the financing capabilities and
            fiscal resilience of GoM across administrative scales through: i) developing diversified public and private
            disaster and climate-risk financing mechanisms for investments in climate mitigation and adaptation, ii)
            linking existing disaster risk reduction mechanisms with risk financing strategies, and iii) transferring
            disaster risks to private capital markets. This entails developing a comprehensive strategy that proposes
            resilience building investments for financial protection and developing risk models to inform disaster
            risk financing decision making and potential disaster risk transfer. Possible financial tools will be
            explored, e.g., credit enhancement for tapping into private capital, resilience and catastrophe bonds,
            and creating a blended financing facility to mobilize private sector investments.
        e. Component 5 – Implementation Support and Knowledge Management: Project and knowledge
            management activities include i) capacity building, ii) coordination, financial management, procurement,

                                                                                                                   Page 6
      The World Bank
      Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


               environmental and social risk management, communication, monitoring and evaluation, and
               stakeholder engagement, and the iii) development of a ‘knowledge lighthouse’ for knowledge
               dissemination at state and country level.
   14. The project design will operationalize WBG’s corporate commitments on climate, citizen engagement and
       gender:
           a. Paris Alignment: The project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement and is consistent
               with the implementation of India’s climate strategies including the updated First Nationally Determined
               Contributions and the Long-Term Low-Carbon Development Strategy. None of the project components
               are anticipated to result in a significant increase of greenhouse gas emissions. Where possible, energy
               saving measures will be integrated into the project design. The scope of the proposed project does not
               result in risks to climate change mitigation. Its activities will enhance the resilience to climate and
               disaster risks, thus actively contributing to climate adaptation. The choice of activities has been
               informed by the need to address multiple hazards and climate impacts and address differentiated
               impacts of on women and marginalized groups.
           b. Citizen Engagement will be crucial for designing and implementing locally responsive and community-
               based interventions that enhance the sustainability of project outcomes. Community-based approaches
               will be implemented in planning and implementation of disaster risk preparedness and management
               measures. Early warning systems will include information sharing and dissemination mechanisms that
               ensure all segments of the population, particularly the most vulnerable, receive timely warnings. MRDP
               will support learning and knowledge sharing for building capacity of local stakeholders, facilitating equal
               access to critical knowledge and data, and promoting broader community resilience-building.
           c. Gender: Recognizing the gendered impacts of disasters and extreme weather events, the project will
               focus on specific gender gaps and design interventions to close these gaps. MRDP will prioritize the
               inclusion and participation of women in disaster preparedness and their access to early warning
               systems. The labor force participation of women in Maharashtra is 38 percentage points lower than that
               of men. Consequently, the project i) will train and hire women to staff emergency operation centers and
               ii) identify opportunities to skill and employ women in nature-based solution interventions.
           d. Climate Co-Benefits: Maharashtra’s vulnerability to disasters is exacerbated by the impacts of climate
               change. The project intends to address these vulnerabilities through strategic investments aimed at
               strengthening adaptive capacity though an integrated climate and disaster risk management approach.
               The project will generate adaptation co-benefits through its interventions under all components. Under
               component 1, the project will finance interventions to reduce fluvial flood risk such as climate-informed
               reservoir operations and flood risk mitigation works. Component 2 will focus on landslides and urban
               flood risk mitigation (pluvial and fluvial flood risk) through, e.g., gray infrastructure, storm water
               drainage, and NBS. Under component 3, the project will support upgrading emergency management
               capacities including early warning systems and community-based disaster risk management. Component
               4 will focus on developing diversified public and private disaster and climate-risk financing mechanisms
               to ensure that investments in climate mitigation and adaptation are sustainable.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies


                                                                                                                      Page 7
       The World Bank
       Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


                                                                                  Triggered?
                                                             Last approved                           Current
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                      No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



Based on the assessment carried out at Concept Stage, environmental and social risks are rated 'substantial'. These
emanate from interventions associated with (i) flood risk management, including reservoir operations, improvement of
river cross-sections and nallah restoration (Component 1), (ii) landslide risk mitigation (Component 2.1), (iii) storm water
drainage works (Component 2.2) and, (iii) upgrade of Emergency Operation Centers (EOCs) (Component 3).
Environment: The likely adverse impacts due to works under Component 1 include: (i) impacts on ecology and habitats -
both aquatic and riparian; (ii) impact on vegetation, plantations and forest areas; (iii) changes in water quality/flows
during construction phase; (iv) pressure on natural resources (particularly large quantity of stone required for protection
works); (v) delays in obtaining regulatory permits and slippages in compliance to conditions therein; (vi) disruption to
services due to shifting of utilities; (vii) OHS issues, particularly those associated with work in/around water and
construction vehicles/machinery movement, (viii) direct or indirect impacts on cultural heritage and, (x) issues with
management of dredged materials. The potential risks/impacts associated with works under Component 2 include: (i)
loss of trees/vegetation; (ii) OHS risks for workers; (iii) community health and safety risks (specifically around sensitive
receptors); (iv) improper disposal of wastes/debris; (v) increase in air/dust, soil, water and noise pollution during
construction; (vi) impact on cultural/common property resources and; (vii) disruption of services due to utility shifting.
For construction and operation of EOCs, the primary issues are associated with e-waste management, energy footprint
and, life & fire safety risks. Social: River widening and nallah restoration works in rural areas are likely to involve
acquisition of small parcels of private agriculture lands along the riverbanks, including government and private
structures and field crops. For the urban storm water drainage interventions, minor impacts are likely on private
structures and livelihoods (like staircases, ramps, shops etc.) over the existing drains/roads. For pumping station, land
acquisition will be required if the Municipal Corporations are not able to identify suitable government land. Collective
impacts on tribal people are not expected to be significant, given their low presence in the project area (less than 1%).
Given the scope of construction work in the rural areas and the towns and establishment of construction sites and labor
camps will lead to risks associated with labor influx, labor camp management and OHS/CHS. Managing expectations and
concerns of key project stakeholders, including project beneficiaries, adversely impacted groups, local governments, and
community groups/leaders will be critical for effective stakeholder management. Institutional Risks: The lack of technical
and operational expertise in the PMU and PIUs in assessing, mitigating and managing E&S risks and impacts consistent
with applicable ESSs is an additional risk factor. While the exact nature of environment and social risks/impacts due to
project interventions will only be known during the assessments, deployment of experts, establishment of systems and
capacity development measures need to be streamlined early-on given the nature and complexity of proposed project
interventions. The risk ratings will be revisited once more granular/specific information on the location and scale of
interventions is available. E&S Instruments: At the project level, an Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Labour Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared. Relevant

                                                                                                                        Page 8
       The World Bank
       Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


aspects of ESS 1, ESS 2, ESS 3, ESS 4, ESS 5, ESS 6, ESS 7, ESS 8 and ESS 10 along with national/state (Borrower) systems
will be assessed and required mitigation measures will be reflected in the Environment and Social Commitment Plan
(ESCP). For priority investments to meet the readiness criteria of Govt. of India, sub-project level ESIA, ESMP and RAP
(and other instrument/s, as needed) will be prepared commensurate to the potential impacts envisaged from proposed
interventions. All ES instruments prepared by project appraisal will be consulted upon, and disclosed on MRDP and
World Bank websites.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Anup Karanth
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Satya Priya LNU
   Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

   Jolanta Kryspin-Watson
   Lead Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Government of India

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                      Page 9
     The World Bank
     Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


 Sangli, Miraj and Kupwad Municipal Corporation
 Shubham Gupta
 Municipal Commissioner
 smkcorporation@gmail.com

 Kolhapur Municipal Corporation
 K. Manjulekshmi -
 Municipal Commissioner
 commissionerkmc@rediffmail.com

 Maharashtra Institution for Transformation (MITRA)
 Praveen Pardeshi
 Chief Executive Officer
 ceo-mitra@mah.gov.in

 Relief & Rehabilitation Department (R&R)
 Sonia Sethi
 Principal Secretary
 psec.r&r@maharashtra.gov.in

 Maharashtra Krishna Valley Development Corporation (MKVDC)
 Atul Kapole
 Executive Director
 edmkvdcpune@gmail.com

 Department of Finance
 Om Prakash Gupta
 Additional Chief Secretary
 acs.finance@maharashtra.gov.in

 Ichalkaranji Municipal Corporation
 Omprakash Divate
 Municipal Commissioner
 mun.comm.imc@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate


                                                              Page 10
     The World Bank
     Maharashtra Resilience Development Project(P506340)


APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                  Anup Karanth, Satya Priya LNU, Jolanta Kryspin-Watson

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:             Abhas Kumar Jha                       18-Jul-2024

Country Director:                     Hideki Mori                           01-Aug-2024




                                                                                              Page 11
