Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDPC00132




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                           Metro Dhaka Water
Bangladesh, Bangladesh,
                               SOUTH ASIA                    P506770                       Security and Resilience
Bangladesh
                                                                                           Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               22-Sep-2025                   04-Dec-2025                   Water
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Economic Relations             Local Government
Department                     Department

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To improve access to WSS services, reduce pollution loads (entering the rivers and canals), and enhance resilience in
Metro Dhaka region

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              To be decided

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                         330.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            330.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                         300.00
    IPF Component                                                                                                 30.00
  Total Financing                                                                                                 330.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

FINANCING


                                                                                                                     Page 1
        The World Bank
        Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)



    Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                                   330.00
      World Bank Lending                                                                                                               330.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context
 Country Context
1. Bangladesh experienced rapid economic and social progress in recent decades, reaching lower middle-income
status in 2015. Stable macroeconomic conditions underpinned an average annual real GDP growth of 6.4 percent between
2010 and 2023. Over the same period, poverty and extreme poverty declined by 19.6 and 6.8 percentage points to 30
percent and 5 percent, respectively.1 However, the pace of poverty reduction has slowed during the past few years, and
urban inequality has widened.
2. An interim government led by Nobel Laureate Dr. Muhammad Yunus was sworn in August 8, 2024, after former
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina resigned and left the country amid a student-led mass uprising. The events surrounding the
resignation caused severe economic disruptions, including a surge in inflation, and a decline in industrial and service sector
activities and exports and remittance inflows. The economic activities and the law-and-order situation have been gradually
improving since the transition.
3. Real GDP grew by 5.2 percent in FY24. On the supply side, GDP growth was primarily driven by industry, which
expanded by 5.8 percent—lower than the decadal average of 9.5 percent, impacted by energy shortages, import
restrictions, and monetary tightening. Services growth also slowed to 5.3 percent as domestic purchasing power declined
due to persistent inflation. Agricultural growth remained modest at 3.3 percent.
4. The fiscal deficit is estimated to have reached 4.5 percent of GDP in FY24. Revenue growth was robust but remained
one of the lowest globally at 8.5 percent of GDP. Expenditure is estimated to have increased modestly to 13.0 percent of
GDP, driven by current expenditure. The public debt to GDP ratio increased to 38.8 percent but remained sustainable.
5. Bangladesh is at low risk of overall and external debt distress in the January 2023 joint IMF-World Bank Debt
Sustainability Assessment (DSA). Bangladesh is not currently subject to Debt Limits Conditionality under the Sustainable
Development Finance Policy (SDFP). In its most recent Staff Report, the IMF stressed the need for Bangladesh to accelerate
its ambitious reform agenda to achieve a more resilient, inclusive, and sustainable growth, requiring substantial
investments in human capital and infrastructure.
6. Bangladesh faces a high level of vulnerability to climate and disaster hazards. The Global Climate Risk Index ranked
Bangladesh as the seventh most affected country by weather-related loss events in the 2000-20192 period, with high
vulnerability to cyclones, floods, and storm surges. Recurring flooding in Bangladesh affects a greater population than any
other natural hazard, impacting more than a million people annually. Addressing climate risks will reduce disruptions to
economic growth and enhance resilience of vulnerable populations.

1 Based on international poverty line of US$3.65 and US$2.15 per day (2017 purchasing power parity) for poverty & extreme poverty, respectively.
2 German watch (2021) Global Climate Risk Index 2021



                                                                                                                                            Page 2
         The World Bank
         Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)



    Sectoral and Institutional Context of the Program
7. Bangladesh’s transition to an upper middle-income country will involve rapid economic transformation and
urbanization. Bangladesh is one of the most densely populated countries (1,084 persons per km 2), with population
projected to grow from 170 million to 265 million by 2050. Over this period, the urban population is also expected to
increase from 38 percent to 60 percent. The major cities of Dhaka and Chattogram, along with other regional urban
centers, are the hubs of economic growth, and industrial and export activities, that contribute significantly to Bangladesh’s
employment, and GDP. The Dhaka metropolitan region3 (metro Dhaka), with 22 million people, accounts for one-third of
the country’s urban population, generates half of the country’s formal employment, and contributes 35 percent to the
national GDP. Chattogram is the country’s main port city and export powerhouse.4 Other major cities such as Gazipur,
Narayanganj, Comilla, Sylhet, Mymensingh, and Barisal are evolving rapidly as regional growth centers.
8. Bangladesh is endowed with substantial water resources, but rapid urbanization and economic development have
led to a sharp rise in water demand. As the world’s largest delta country, Bangladesh has a network of more than 430
rivers and canals that provide fresh surface and ground water resources to meet drinking water needs and demand from
agriculture, industries, fisheries, and other economic sectors. However, the demands for water have and will continue to
increase substantially across major consumption sectors – residential, industrial, and agriculture - due to the ongoing
structural and economic transformation of the country.
9. Dhaka’s water security is threatened by severe pollution, and flooding. Urban settlements and industrial clusters
within and around in Dhaka are polluting rivers and canals through the discharge of untreated sewage and industrial
effluent, which often contains hazardous chemicals and heavy metals. As a result, these critical drainage networks suffer
from reduced flows, sedimentation, encroachment, impaired navigability, and massive pollution that has destroyed their
natural ecology and rendered the water unfit for drinking, irrigation, or industry use. Metro Dhaka is increasingly being
impacted by climate change - flooding risks are compounded by inadequate stormwater drainage systems, and reduced
water flow capacity in rivers and canals due to pollution, encroachment, and siltation.
10. Inadequate coverage and poor quality of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in metro Dhaka is adversely
affecting water security and livability.5 Water Supply: There are significant spatial disparities in access to water supply
services in metro Dhaka – while Dhaka city has 70 percent piped water supply network coverage, the adjacent cities
(Gazipur, Narayanganj, Savar) have less than 25 percent coverage. High dependency on contaminated groundwater
(including E coli and heavy metals) with limited water treatment capacity is a major concern from public health
perspective. Sanitation: Dhaka city’s piped sewerage system currently covers only 20 percent of the population, and an
additional two percent of households have access to a functional fecal sludge management (FSM) system. Access to safely
managed sanitation services (including onsite sanitation) options is very low in the other cities. It is worth noting that
metro Dhaka’s WSS service delivery challenges are intricately intertwined with the pollution and flooding issues – on one
side, inadequate sanitation services is a major contributing factor to water pollution, while on the other side, widespread
pollution and flooding issues threaten the quality and sustainability of WSS services.
11. Governance challenges in the water sector include fragmentation, institutional capacity, and regulatory constraints.
The overlapping and fragmented mandates, weak inter-institutional coordination (at national and local levels), lack of
accountability, and misaligned incentives are adversely affecting the efforts to implement coordinated planning, service
delivery, and monitoring systems for addressing the above-mentioned challenges. Water service providers are facing
institutional capacity constraints including inadequate human resource capacity (staffing levels, skills and expertise), lack

3
  Dhaka metropolitan region includes Dhaka city (North and South), Gazipur, Narayanganj, and Savar.
4
  Chattogram produces 40 percent of Bangladesh’s industrial output, handles more than 75 percent of the exports, contributes 40 percent of the
government’s revenues, and generates employment for 16 percent of the total employed labor force in the industrial sector
5 Safely managed water supply and sanitation service coverage in Bangladesh stands at 54% and 29% respectively.



                                                                                                                                            Page 3
          The World Bank
          Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)


of customer and service delivery orientation, and inadequate planning and monitoring. Institutional systems for asset
management and operations are weak. Lack of institutional capacity to plan, design and implement projects and carry out
sustainable O&M in a timely and quality manner is a fundamental reason behind increasing water pollution and flood
risks. Lastly, regulatory enforcement for pollution control and service delivery standards remains weak due to lack of real-
time monitoring system, weak capacity to monitor compliance, especially for industries, and weak enforcement of punitive
measures available as per the regulations. The encroachments in wetlands and river corridors have severely impacted
water flow capacity in the metro Dhaka.
12. Addressing the above-mentioned challenges requires a multi-sectoral phased approach comprising a package of
governance reforms, institutional development and infrastructure investments. Such an approach should (i) structure
fiscal incentive mechanisms to improve WSS service delivery (coverage, quality and efficiency), reduce pollution and
enhance resilience; (ii) implement policy and regulatory reforms to enforce service delivery standards, and address
pollution and encroachment issues; (iii) strengthen institutional capacity for integrated multi-sectoral planning,
implementation, sustainable operations and monitoring; and (iv) implement reforms to enable cost recovery, financial
sustainability, creditworthiness, and private capital mobilization.
    Relationship to CAS/CPF
13. The proposed PforR Program is consistent with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY23-27
(discussed by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors on April 27, 2023, Report No. 181003-BD) and Country
Climate and Development Report, and directly contributes to the World Bank Group’s mission of ending extreme
poverty and boosting shared prosperity on a livable planet. It will support CPF’s aim to “contribute towards improved
socioeconomic inclusion” and “enhance climate resilience” through energy efficiency and resilient water supply services.
The Bangladesh CCDR also highlights the inadequacy of WSS in the country and the need for improved sanitation as an
adaptation measure to urban flooding. It will enhance gender equality and empowerment and hence contribute to
‘improved socioeconomic inclusion’ by reducing water-related costs such as collection time that presently fall
disproportionally on women and girls.
14. The PforR Program and the overall MPA are part of a World Bank South Asia regional initiative or “program of
programs” to provide Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) services to about 100 million people across the South
Asia Region by 2035. It will contribute directly to the objectives and beneficiary targets under the World Bank’s newly
launched Global Challenge Program on Water Security and Climate Adaptation (Water GCP) – focusing on pillar 1:
achieving universal access to safely managed WSS, and pillar 3: reducing the impacts of floods and droughts and managing
water resources sustainably.6
     Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument
15. The Program for Results (PforR) instrument will support the GOB in establishing a platform to advance the
implementation of critical interventions to enhance Dhaka’s water security and resilience. It will adopt a comprehensive
and integrated approach for implementation underpinned by institutional development, governance reforms, and
restructured financial incentives to fund priority investments. The PforR is the right instrument to support systems
development and institutional capacity necessary for long-term implementation of the government program to tackle the
complex water security and resilience challenges of Dhaka in an incremental manner. It will pave the way for future
investment programs that may focus on complex infrastructure development activities in subsequent phases.
    C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators
     Program Development Objective(s)


6
    The pillars are as defined in the approved water GCP approach paper https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/Search/34400279

                                                                                                                                  Page 4
          The World Bank
          Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)



    To improve access to WSS services, reduce pollution loads (entering the rivers and canals) and enhance resilience in
    Metro Dhaka region
 PDO Level Results Indicators
16. The proposed PDO level results indicators are:
      •   People provided with safely managed drinking water supply and sanitation services, of which percentage women.
      •   Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to flood risks, of which percentage women.
      •   Amount of wastewater/fecal sludge collected and treated as per regulatory norms.
      •   Institutional framework and water quality monitoring system adopted for pollution management.
    D. Program Description
    PforR Program Boundary
17. The proposed PforR Program (‘P’, the Program) will support a subset of GOB program interventions for enhancing
water security and resilience in metro Dhaka. The proposed Program will support GOB in operationalizing the UIP, laying
the foundation for the long-term implementation of critical interventions and kickstarting a subset of priority and
impactful activities in the immediate to short-term through incentives focused on development results including
institutional development. The GoB has (i) identified four focus areas, namely river pollution management, urban planning
and land management, improved water flows and flood resilience, and improved navigation and water borne
transportation and (ii) prioritized implementation in seven hotspots7 which have high pollution levels, population density,
service gaps, and increased exposure to flood risks. The proposed Program will provide financial incentives and technical
support to the four hotspot areas in metro Dhaka and will focus on improving governance; building institutional systems;
identifying, planning, and implementing short term lower risk priority investments; and enhancing financial sustainability
and private capital mobilization.
18. More specifically, the boundaries of the Program are as follows:
      •   Services. The Program will focus on drinking water supply, sewerage management and sanitation, and storm water
          drainage. Some small scale and less complex activities related to solid waste management, industrial effluent
          management, and canal rehabilitation will also be supported.
      •   Governance, institutions, and financing. The Program will support governance reforms for improved coordination
          and sustainable management of water resources, institutional capacity development, regulatory enforcement,
          water resource planning, water quality monitoring systems and financial sustainability.
      •   Duration. The Program will be implemented over a period of six years (2026-2032).
      •   Financing. The PforR Program budget is US$330 million, funded by IDA credit.
      •   Implementation responsibilities. The Program will be managed by the Local Government Division (LGD) in
          coordination with Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR). The implementing agencies will be Narayanganj City
          Corporation, Gazipur City Corporation, Dhaka South City Corporation, and Dhaka North City Corporation.
          Bangladesh Bank (BB) will be responsible for the proposed financing facility. Technical Assistance will be provided
          to support the implementing agencies and WARPO (for river basin and water resource planning). LGD will
          coordinate with Department of Environment, Rajdhani Unnayan Kartripakkha (RAJUK) and Ministry of Industries
          for pollution control regulations, land zoning regulations and industrial effluent management.
The Program comprises three mutually reinforcing results areas (RA), as briefly described below.



7
    Gazipur, Narayanganj, Savar, Kallyanpur, Goranchatbari, Kamrangirchar, and Purbachal

                                                                                                                           Page 5
          The World Bank
          Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)


19. Results Area 1 (RA#1): Strengthen water governance, planning, and financing. This RA will strengthen water
governance in Dhaka by incentivizing priority reforms. This will include (i) establishing national level governance
mechanisms for coordinating and monitoring program implementation, including fiscal allocations and other policy issues,
(ii) strengthening institutional framework, capacities and systems at local level (CCs, Municipalities) for implementation,
and (iii) improving the regulatory enforcement8 systems and capacity for addressing key pollution sources.
20. More specifically, RA#1 will incentivize preparation of city water security & resilience plans (CWSRP) for integrated
investment planning and implementation approach. These plans will be prepared by CCs and municipalities for their
respective jurisdictions and will lay down the investment priorities, with clear linkage to WSS access, pollution reduction
and flood resilience objectives. It will institutionalize the long-term, multi-sectoral, and spatially targeted investment
planning process, and will also enable the implementation agencies to identify, prioritize and implement investment
activities under this Program. These plans will also play a key role in establishing participatory process for stakeholder
engagement and awareness generation during planning and implementation (inc. community led maintenance).
21. Additionally, RA#1 will support financial performance improvement and enable private capital mobilization. It will
incentivize (i) reforms for transparent financial management systems (planning, budgeting, expenditure management),
tariffs for cost recovery and own-source revenues (OSRs) enhancement, and (ii) operationalization of a dedicated financing
facility within Bangladesh Bank’s Green Transformation fund to help mobilize private sector financing for water sector.
22. Results Area 2: Improve access to safely managed WSS services and reduce pollution. This RA will support city
corporations (CCs) /DWASA in implementing priority interventions for improving the coverage and quality of WSS services
and contribute to reducing water pollution in rivers and canals. The key activities would include drinking water supply
network and treatment systems and household connections, on-site sanitation and fecal sludge management systems,
river corridor cleanup campaigns, interception/ diversion networks and decentralized treatment, and solid waste
collection, recycling and material recovery facilities. The focus would be to support the implementation of small to
moderate scale activities with visible results for demonstration effect on the ground. In addition, this RA will prioritize two
cross-cutting interventions at the local level (i) the development of water quality monitoring systems, and (ii)
strengthening operations and maintenance (O&M) capacity and systems – for WSS services and pollution management.
23. Results Area 3: Improve water flows in rivers and canals and enhance flood resilience. This RA will focus on building
systems and capacities to shift from a fragmented and reactive approach towards urban flood risks to a more robust and
planned approach based on comprehensive planning and adequate infrastructure systems. This RA will support (i) robust
planning based on sustainable river and flood management approaches, and (ii) small-scale priority investments for
rehabilitating and connecting canals and rivers for improved water flows, and reducing flood risks through drainage
network improvement, nature-based solutions, and clean-up activities.
24. An Investment Project Financing (IPF) component is proposed to provide technical assistance for implementing
governance reforms, institutional capacity development, program management, coordination and reporting. Firstly, the
IPF component will provide hands-on support to the key implementation agencies to (i) implement Program activities
including governance reforms, institutional systems, preparing investment plans, designing and implementing investment
projects, and (ii) undertake important technical activities such as information, communication and awareness generation,
E&S capacity development, needs assessments, technical studies and investigations for water resource management and
river basin planning, and preparatory studies for investments to be financed in subsequent phases of the program or
through other sources. Secondly, TA will be provided to BB and partner financial institutions for conducting feasibility
assessments and structuring projects to be financed by the facility. Lastly, this component will finance the costs of



8
    In coordination with the ongoing efforts under World Bank assisted Bangladesh Environmental Sustainability and Transformation (BEST) Project

                                                                                                                                              Page 6
       The World Bank
       Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)


independent verification agency, incremental operational costs including recruitment of experts (technical, environment,
social, financial management, procurement), and other expenses for program management and implementation support.
 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening
25. The Program is expected to provide significant environmental, social and economic benefits. However, there may be
some adverse environmental and social (E&S) impacts that need careful management. Program interventions will be
designed to reduce pollution levels in rivers and canals, but construction activities could have potentially negative
environmental effects, including noise, dust, and water pollution. Given the fact that Dhaka and its surrounding areas are
some of the most densely populated urban / peri-urban areas in the world, there is a likelihood of irreversible adverse
social or economic impacts. There are probable community health and safety risks during the construction phase and
O&M phases of the program. Additionally, the handling and disposal of dredged materials and construction waste must
be carefully managed to prevent secondary pollution as well as associated impacts on health and safety of people.
Rehabilitation efforts in river corridors and wetlands also have the potential to affect local biodiversity and ecosystems if
not managed properly.
26. During the preparation phase, a comprehensive Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) will be
conducted. The Program activities will be designed carefully to exclude large-scale and high-risk activities that may affect
critical natural habitats and cause significant environmental impacts (including potential impacts on rivers or canals) from
the Bank’s funding. The ESSA will identify the gaps and weaknesses, if any, between the country systems and applicable
WB policies for PforR operations and the measures required to address the same. ESSA will also inform the list of activities
to be excluded from both the Bank and GoB financing based on risk assessment. For the Program, appropriate DLIs and
interventions in Program Action Plans (to be determined through ESSA) will be included in the Program. Proactive and
meaningful stakeholder engagement will be critical at every stage of the Program. Appropriate stakeholder engagement
strategies and plans will be developed right at the start of the Program and implemented throughout.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component


27. The IPF component will provide technical support to address the implementation agencies’ E&S capacity constraints.
The TA activities proposed under the IPF component will inform and support the planning and implementation of activities
under the PforR operations, and therefore the downstream E&S risks and impacts relevant to the implementation are
likely to be significant. Hence, the E&S risks of the IPF component have also been rated as substantial.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank



                                                                                                                         Page 7
     The World Bank
     Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program(P506770)


 Harsh Goyal
 Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 David Malcolm Lord
 Lead Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Economic Relations Department

Implementing Agencies
 Local Government Department
 Md Nazrul Islam
 Additional Secretary
 devwing@lgd.gov.bd

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                  Page 8
