Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                            Report No: PADHP00139


                                                   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                      ON A

                                                                               PROPOSED LOAN

                                                                  IN THE AMOUNT OF JPY 60,954,300,000
                                                                      (US$426 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                                       TO




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                     INDIA

                                                                                     FOR A

                                                        KARNATAKA WATER SECURITY AND RESILIENCE PROGRAM




                                                                                 MAY 30, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Water Global Practice
                                South Asia Region


                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

        (Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2025)

          Currency Unit = INDIAN RUPEE (INR)
               INR 84.51 = US$1
                    US$1= JPY143.085

                      FISCAL YEAR
                    April 1 - March 31




  Regional Vice President: Martin Raiser
Regional Practice Director: Dina Umali-Deininger
        Country Director: Auguste Tano Kouame
        Practice Manager: Sumila Gulyani
      Task Team Leaders: Kristoffer Welsien, Anup Karanth




                                                   Official Use Only
                  ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ACG      Anti-Corruption Guidelines
BBMP     Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike
BWSSB    Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board
Capex    Capital Expenditure
CoE      Centre of Excellence
CPF      Country Partnership Framework
DLI      Disbursement Linked Indicator
DLR      Disbursement Linked Result
DRF      Disaster Risk Financing
DRM      Disaster Risk Management
e-GP     e-Government Procurement
E&S      Environmental and Social
ESSA     Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
FBM      Fiscal and Budgetary Management
FLL      Field-Level Leadership
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GHG      Greenhouse Gas
GoK      Government of Karnataka
GRS      Grievance Redress Service
IA       Implementing Agency
IFSA     Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment
INR      Indian Rupee
IVA      Independent Verification Agency
JICA     Japan International Cooperation Agency
KCHRIS   Karnataka Climate Hazard and Risk Information System
KPI      Key Performance Indicator
KSAPCC   Karnataka State Action Plan on Climate Change
KSDMA    Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority
KSNDMC   Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Center
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MFD      Maximizing Finance for Development
MI       Minor Irrigation and Groundwater Development Department
MLD      Million Liters Per Day
NBS      Nature-Based Solution
NRW      Nonrevenue Water
O&M      Operations and Maintenance
OHS      Occupational Health and Safety
OSR      Own-Source Revenue
PAP      Program Action Plan
PCE      Private Capital Enabling
PDO      Program Development Objective
PforR    Program-for-Results
PMU      Program Management Unit
POM      Program Operational Manual
PPP      Public-Private Partnership
RA       Results Area
                                                               Official Use Only
RD     Revenue Department
SIDM   State Institute of Disaster Management
STD    Standard Tender Document
STP    Sewage Treatment Plant
SWD    Stormwater Drain
WSS    Water Supply and Sanitation




                                                Official Use Only
The World Bank
Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ............................................................................................................................................. i
I.     STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................................... 1
       A. Program Strategic Context ........................................................................................................... 1
       B. Multi-Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................... 1
II.    PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................................ 4
       A. Program Development Objective (PDO) ....................................................................................... 4
       B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .......................................................................................... 4
       C. PforR Program Scope ................................................................................................................... 5
       D. Disbursement Linked Indicators .................................................................................................. 9
       E. Role of Partners ......................................................................................................................... 11
       F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Program Design ............................................................... 11
III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION...................................................................................................... 12
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ....................................................................... 12
       B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ........................................... 13
       C. Disbursement Arrangements ..................................................................................................... 13
IV. PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS SUMMARY .......................................................................................... 14
       A. Technical ................................................................................................................................... 14
       B. Fiduciary.................................................................................................................................... 18
       C. Environmental and Social .......................................................................................................... 20
       D. Program Action Plan.................................................................................................................. 22
V.     RISKS ............................................................................................................................................. 25
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ......................................................................................................... 26




                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project Beneficiary(ies)   Operation Name
India                      Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program
                                                     Does this operation have an IPF
Operation ID               Financing Instrument
                                                     component?
                           Program-for-Results
P506272                                              No
                           Financing (PforR)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)             [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Small State(s)                                             [ ] Conflict
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
24-Jun-2025                            31-Dec-2030
Bank/IFC Collaboration                 Joint Level
Yes                                    Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
Improve water security related municipal services, institutions and financing in Bengaluru.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate




                                                                                                                      i


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)



Organizations

 Borrower:                     India

 Contact                       Title                       Telephone No.      Email
 Manisha Sinha                 Additional Secretary        01123092882        manisha.sinha@nic.in
 Simrandeep Singh              Director                    01123095069        simrandeep.iasjk@nic.in
 Implementing Agency:           Revenue Department , Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Minor
                               Irrigation & Groundwater Development Department, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara
                               Palike
 Contact                       Title                       Telephone No.      Email
 Manish Moudgil                Principal Secretary,        080-22032995       secy.dm@gmail.com
                               Revenue (DM)
 Ram Prasath Manohar           Chairman                    080-22945100       chairman@bwssb.gov.in
 Mr. Raghavan                  Secretary                   080-22034173       prs-im@karnataka.gov.in
 Tushar Giri Nath              Chief Commissioner          080-22975550       comm@bbmp.gov.in



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

SUMMARY

  Government program Cost                                                                             1,400.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                 670.00
   Total Program Cost                                                                                  669.00

   Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                       1.00

  Total Financing                                                                                      670.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                           0.00

Financing (US$, Millions)

 World Bank Group Financing

                                                                                                                 ii


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                            426.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Commercial Financing                                                                                       5.00

      Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                       5.00

   Counterpart Funding                                                                                     239.00

      Borrower/Recipient                                                                                   239.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                   2026             2027            2028             2029            2030             2031

Annual                 80.00          150.00           140.00            40.00           16.00             0.00
Cumulative             80.00          230.00           370.00           410.00           426.00          426.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                       Contributing Practice Areas
Water                                                      Urban, Resilience and Land; Climate Change

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                             Rating
1. Political and Governance                                               ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                          ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                         ⚫ Moderate

                                                                                                                  iii


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE

Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No


Legal Operational Policies                                                          Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         No
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   No


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Section I.B.1(a), Schedule to the PA: The Program Implementing Entity shall vest the overall responsibility for
implementation, management, and monitoring and evaluation of the Program in RD, MI, BWSSB, BBMP and KSDMA, as
set forth in detail in the Program Operational Manual.
Section I.B.1(b), Schedule to the PA: The Program Implementing Entity shall establish, within three (3) months of the
Effective Date, and thereafter maintain throughout the period of Program implementation, a Program Steering
Committee, to be chaired by the Chief Secretary, comprised of representatives from RD, MI, BBMP, BWSSB and KSDMA,
as further detailed in the Program Operational Manual, which shall be responsible for providing policy guidance,
oversight, and strategic direction for the Program.

                                                                                                                    iv


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Section I.B.1(c), Schedule to the PA: The Program Implementing Entity shall establish, within three (3) months of the
Effective Date, and thereafter maintain throughout the period of the Program implementation, the Program
Management Unit within the RD with composition, resources, and terms of reference acceptable to the Bank and set
forth in the Program Operational Manual, for carrying out the day-to-day implementation, management, and
coordination of the activities under the Program.
Section I.B.2, Schedule to the PA: The Program Implementing Entity shall prepare, approve and adopt, within three (3)
months of the Effective Date, a Program Operational Manual in form and substance acceptable to the Bank, and
thereafter ensure that the Program is carried out in accordance with the Program Operational Manual.
Section I.C, Schedule to the PA: The Program Implementing Entity shall appoint by not later than one (1) month of the
Effective Date, and thereafter maintain a Verification Agent, under terms of reference, satisfactory to the Bank, to
verify the data and other evidence supporting the achievement of DLRs and recommend corresponding withdrawals;
and ensure that the Verification Agent: (i) carries out the verification process(es) in accordance with the Verification
Protocol; and (ii) submits to the Borrower, Program Implementing Entity and the Bank the corresponding verification
reports in a timely manner and in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank.
Section IV.A, Schedule to the PA: The Program Implementing Entity shall: (a) ensure that the Program activities involving
collection, storage, usage, and/or processing of Personal Data are carried out with due regard to the Borrower’s and/or
Program Implementing Entity’s existing legal framework and appropriate international data protection and privacy
standards and practices and ensure legitimate, appropriate and proportionate treatment of such data; (b) in the event
that the approval of any new legislation regarding Personal Data protection may have an impact on the activities
financed by the Program, ensure that a technical analysis of said impact is conducted, and that the necessary
recommendations necessary to efficiently protect Personal Data, are implemented, as appropriate; and (c) in sharing
any information, report or document, ensure that such information, report or document does not include Personal
Data.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                          Citation                       Description                    Financing Source
                                                             No withdrawal shall be
                                                             made on the basis of DLRs
                                                             achieved prior to the
                                                             Signature Date, except that
                                                             withdrawals up to an
                              Section III.B.1(a), Schedule
Disbursement                                                 aggregate amount not to        IBRD/IDA
                              2 to the LA
                                                             exceed JPY11,876,055,000
                                                             may be made on the basis
                                                             of DLRs achieved prior to
                                                             this date but on or after
                                                             August 1, 2024.
                                                             No withdrawal shall be
                                                             made for any DLR under
                              Section III.B.1(b), Schedule   Category (1) to (8), until
Disbursement                                                                                IBRD/IDA
                              2 to the LA                    and unless the Borrower
                                                             has furnished evidence
                                                             satisfactory to the Bank
                                                                                                                       v


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


                                                          that said DLR has been
                                                          achieved.
                                                          The Borrower may
                                                          withdraw an amount not to
                                                          exceed JPY6,410,235,000
                                                          as an advance; provided,
                                                          however, that if the DLRs
                                                          is/are not achieved (or only
                                                          partially achieved) by the
                                                          Closing Date, the Borrower
                            Section III.B.2, Schedule 2
Disbursement                                              shall refund such advance      IBRD/IDA
                            to the LA
                                                          (or portion of such
                                                          advance) to the Bank
                                                          promptly upon notice
                                                          thereof by the Bank. Except
                                                          as otherwise agreed with
                                                          the Borrower, the Bank
                                                          shall cancel the amount so
                                                          refunded.




                                                                                                               vi


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


 I.   STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A. Program Strategic Context
1.       India is urbanizing rapidly, facing challenges in creating livable cities that serve as growth hubs while ensuring
water security and resilience. Cities host about a third of India’s population but contribute 48 percent to employment
and 54 percent to Gross Domestic Product (GDP). India’s urban population is projected to double to over 950 million by
2050. Managing this transition effectively is crucial to shaping growth and avoiding disorganized urban sprawl, and
inadequate services that hinder cities’ potential as growth and job hubs.1 Recognizing this, the Government of India 2024-
2025 budget prioritized urban development and quality of services to foster sustainable and vibrant growth.2 In parallel,
the 100 cities initiative was launched to help accelerate and sustain water supply and sanitation service improvements
through leveraging bankable projects. Specifically, the 100 cities knowledge framework outlines a strategic roadmap to
‘raise the bar’ through a series of policy, institutional, investment, and financing shifts to enhance bankable projects and
accelerate service improvements. The 100 cities initiative forms an important part of the strategic context that has
informed and helped shape the design of this Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program.
2.       Karnataka is an economic powerhouse, driven by its urban centers, but it increasingly faces adverse impacts of
climate change, especially floods and droughts. The state’s GDP per capita is approximately US$3,000, compared to
US$1,900 for India, 38 percent of which is contributed by Bengaluru alone.3 As the second-most drought-prone state in
India, 77 percent of Karnataka’s land is considered arid or semi-arid, and the largely agrarian rural economy is heavily
affected by droughts. Between 2001 and 2020, almost 60 percent of the state experienced drought conditions at least
once, and 23 of the 31 districts have faced acute water scarcity. In addition, Karnataka is witnessing an increasing
frequency of extreme weather events including flooding and landslides. Cyclones affect coastal districts with higher
intensity in addition to storm surges, erosion, and landslides in the coastal Malnad region, and northern districts. The
impact of these events is significant in cities, where rapid unplanned development is exacerbating climate risks. Bengaluru
is one of the fastest-growing metropolises in India and has experienced unprecedented economic growth. About one out
of six people in Karnataka live in Bengaluru. The city’s population has grown from 4 million in 1991 to around 14 million
in 2024 and is projected to reach 28 million by 2041. 4
B. Multi-Sectoral and Institutional Context
3.      For Bengaluru to continue the path of prosperity and growth, it will need to address its water security
challenges. Bengaluru faces the rising challenge of frequent flood-induced disruptions and economic losses. Between 2013
and 2020, a total of 1,167 flood events 5 and 372 flood hotspots have been identified. The flood prone area accounts for
19 percent of the city's total built settlement, and the share of built-up area increased from 37 percent in 2002 to 93
percent in 2020. As a result, the losses from climate related disasters are rising. The flood management problem in
Bengaluru stems largely from the following five factors: (a) climate risks from increased rainfall intensity and peak flows;
(b) incomplete stormwater drain (SWD) network, inadequate maintenance systems, and poor solid waste management;
(c) deterioration of the extensive lake system, caused by pollution and siltation, largely from discharges of sewage-
contaminated SWDs; (d) inefficient infrastructure which has not kept pace with rapid unplanned city expansion or with
the climate change–aggravated extreme weather events; and (e) limited use of nature-based solutions (NBSs) to reduce


1 World Bank. 2016. Leveraging Urbanization in South Asia: Managing Spatial Transformation for Prosperity and Livability, Washington, D.C.
2 Government of India’s Union Budget 2024-2025.
3 Government of Karnataka. 2024. Economic Survey of Karnataka 2023-24.
4 Expert Committee Report, Government of Karnataka, 2010.
5 L. Rangwala, S. Chatterjee, A. Agarwal, B. Khanna, I. Uri, B. Shetty, R.B. Palanichamy, and A. Ramesh. 2024. Climate Resilient Cities: Assessing

Differential Vulnerability to Climate Hazards in Urban India. New Delhi: World Resources Institute India.


                                                                                                                                                     Page 1


                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


climate-induced peak flows. The lack of adequate disaster risk management (DRM) capabilities such as impact-based
forecasting, early warning, and emergency operations further affect flood management.

4.      Key water security related infrastructure and services—water, sanitation, drainage—have not kept pace with
Bengaluru’s rapid expansion and this has exacerbated water stress. The Greater Bengaluru area, governed by the
municipal corporation Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) since 2006, grew by 1,028 percent6 from 1973 to
2017. The core area of the city has a high coverage of SWD network. It also has adequate sewage and reliable water supply
services provided by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB). In 2007, the city expanded to cover the
110 surrounding villages (expanded area). As a result of rapid and unplanned development and insufficient funding, the
city has struggled to extend water supply, sewer, and stormwater infrastructure and services to the expanded areas,
where residents rely on private borewells, septic tanks, and limited SWDs. The expanded area faces acute water stress
with observed pre-monsoon declines in groundwater levels across 70 percent of the city’s wells while also overlapping
with some of the most flood-prone parts of the city. Consequently, more Bengaluru’s citizens are facing water stress,
which can be summed up as – ‘too much, too little, and too polluted’.

5.       Historically known as the ‘City of Lakes’, Bengaluru has a vast cascading lake system that is now polluted and
disconnected. Bengaluru has 204 cascading lakes, of which 21 have been reclaimed for infrastructure such as a stadium
and a bus terminal. The remaining 183 lakes hold great potential for reintegration into a system where lakes serve as
balancing reservoirs during floods and droughts. However, many sections of sewage trunk lines are located in SWDs, with
hundreds of dilapidated and leaking machine-holes (manholes). In the absence of a proper sewage system in the expanded
area, raw sewage is discharged into SWDs, and lakes are currently intentionally bypassed to avoid raw sewage in city lakes.
With support from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the Government of Karnataka (GoK) is currently
constructing 14 sewage treatment plants (STPs) in the expanded area, but an additional nine STPs are needed to prevent
sewage from entering the SWDs and lakes. The investment in STPs needs to be accompanied by completion of the related
sewer network and household connections. Desludging of existing lakes, addition of sewage treatment capacity, and
upgrading of Bengaluru’s SWD network (860 km, of which one-third needs reinforcement or strengthening) can create the
basis for a rejuvenated lake system and increase flood management in the city.

6.       Implementing circular economy principles – including sewage treatment, reduction of water losses, and water
reuse – offers great potential for addressing water scarcity. The core area’s water supply went up from 1,450 million
liters per day (MLD), lifted 300 meters from the Cauvery River and piped about 90 km to Bengaluru, to 2,225 MLD including
in the 110-village area with the recent commissioning of the Cauvery V stage project. However, this is still not enough to
bridge the gap between demand and supply, as the city’s demand stands at 2,632 MLD according to some estimates 7.
Approximately 85-90 percent of this water (about 2,000 MLD) returns as wastewater from households. However, only 15
MLD is currently reused by commercial and industrial users and the bulk of it is used to fill lakes and tanks in the drought
prone districts adjoining Bengaluru. Investment in scaling up treatment and sales of wastewater would provide additional
revenue for BWSSB, increase the total available water to the city during droughts, and help rejuvenate city lakes with the
additional benefit of increased groundwater recharge. The city also has significant water savings opportunities through
reduction of non-revenue water (NRW), which stands at around 27 percent for Bengaluru.

7.      Infrastructure is critical, but it cannot alone solve the problem. Karnataka experienced severe floods in 2023 and
its worst drought in decades in 2024. As per one estimate,8 high-intensity rainfall events are now two to six times more

6 Indian Institute of Science. 2017. Frequent Floods in Bangalore: Causes and Remedial Measures.
7 Kulranjan, Palur, and Nesi. 2023. How Water Flows Through Bengaluru: Urban Water Balance Report. Water, Environment, Land and Livelihoods

(WELL) Labs at Institute for Financial Management and Research. Bengaluru.
8 Center for Study of Science, Technology and Policy. 2021. Climate Change Risks to Rainfed Agriculture in Karnataka: Implications for Building

Resilience.


                                                                                                                                                  Page 2


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


likely than during the 1999–2019 period. To better tackle climate exacerbated flood and drought risks in Bengaluru and
larger disaster risks in Karnataka, there is a need to strengthen institutions that manage water and DRM. The current
institutional setup needs to be aligned with new legal mandates and emerging sector needs with state-of-the-art decision
support systems, clear roles and responsibilities, user-oriented climate and disaster monitoring services, and public
engagement platforms. Both BWSSB, responsible for water and wastewater, and BBMP, responsible for SWDs, have
limited staffing capacity and integrated water security planning is not carried across agencies. BBMP’s two departments
responsible for SWD and lakes largely work in silos and the current pilots on NBS could benefit from an integrated and
scaled approach.

8.      The design of solutions should address not only current water stress but also future risks. Water balance
analyses unveil the general trend of water shortages in Karnataka. With increased water scarcity, short- and long-term
decisions around water allocation between sectors become increasingly important. Over the next decades, it is expected
that Bengaluru will continue to grow beyond the 2007 expanded area, but proper planning for both the current and future
expansion has not yet started. In addition, Karnataka lacks a long-term comprehensive water security plan to manage all
aspects of the water cycle and DRM, especially considering climate change and rapid urbanization.

9.       There is currently no mechanism to quantify disaster risks and take informed decisions on diversifying disaster
risk financing (DRF). Since 2009, flood- or drought-related estimated losses have been higher than US$1.2 billion for every
affected year, going as high as US$4 billion in some years. Between 2008 to 2024, funding from the Government of India,
primarily through the National Disaster Response Fund, was only 8 percent of the total estimated losses for droughts and
6 percent for floods.9 Currently, the only pre-identified source of funds available to states for post-disaster finance is the
State Disaster Response Funds (SDRFs) made available through the 15th Finance Commission’s allocations for the period
2021-2025. Karnataka has access to US$497 million under this allocation. Most of the funds were used for the floods in
2021 and 2022 and the drought in 2023. Private insurance penetration is low in the state, in line with the trend across
India where less than 10 percent of homes and less than 30 percent of farmers and cropped area are insured. Quantifying
the needs and leveraging blended finance opportunities for financing climate resilience measures can enable Karnataka
to meet its climate goals.

10.      To deliver a climate-resilient city that is free of pollution and provides high-quality service to citizens, BBMP
and BWSSB need to become financially stronger and improve operational efficiency. There is a considerable financing
gap in providing water security and resilience to the fast-growing city. The current financing needs of the city dwarf
available financing. To close the gap, it is important to strengthen the finances of the city and its services agencies. This,
in turn, entails a focus on own-source revenues (OSR), leveraging finance from different sources, and operational
efficiency. BBMP's OSR registered lower annual growth compared to national and state GDP growth rates. BBMP is
overwhelmingly dependent on property tax, which per capita is much less than, for instance, many of Maharashtra’s cities.
With limited information available on what kind of service improvement and capital investment is required in the next
five to seven years, there are no clear goals for BBMP to reach. With the absence of a medium- to long-term fiscal plan to
actualize future operational expenditure and capital expenditure (capex) requirements, BBMP's physical and financial
planning remains short-term, and high OSR growth and adequate infrastructure development are not achieved. Lastly,
lack of asset management results in costly long-term asset maintenance.

11.      BWSSB faces significant financial and operational challenges that limit its ability to invest in essential system
maintenance and operational upgrades. The water tariff was last revised in 2014; it has since neither been adjusted for
inflation nor the increasing price of energy. Currently, around 41 percent of BWSSB’s operating funds go toward electricity
bills. However, recently BWSSB has developed a tariff adjustment proposal that protects low-income groups. While

9 Computed from KSNDMC data.




                                                                                                                          Page 3


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


BWSSB’s structure incentivizes service expansion and capital investments, it lacks focus and financial resources for
operational efficiency and asset replacement. Despite past successes with innovative performance-based contract
projects on NRW reductions that achieved short paybacks of 2.5 years, replacement of approximately 4,000 km of aging
water supply pipes remain unfinanced. Similarly, energy efficiency investments with attractive returns remain
unimplemented. Solutions are available, but the financial capacity to invest in technologies for operational efficiencies
and operations and maintenance (O&M) is arguably the main challenge.

12.     Opportunities for private sector participation and public-private partnerships (PPPs). BWSSB has experience
with design-build-operate contracts but has not, yet, used large-scale PPP contracts that leverage private investment.
However, BWSSB plans to advance PPP investments, which could include upgrading six existing STPs for biogas generation
as well as other large PPP projects on energy efficiency, water reuse, and NRW. BBMP has implemented small-scale PPP
projects and is exploring PPP-financed solid waste management parks. These PPPs will help leverage finance and private
sector technology and expertise to improve overall operational efficiency.

13.      Tackling floods, droughts, and other climate-related challenges calls for a transformative approach to DRM in
Bengaluru and Karnataka. It is projected that Bengaluru will keep growing till at least 2045, and climate shocks will
increase in both frequency and intensity. To prepare for this, the following three-pronged approach to water security and
climate resilience is needed. First, water- and DRM-related infrastructure and services need to improve. Second,
institutions need to be strengthened to facilitate coordinated planning and delivery of integrated solutions. Third, new
financing models need to be introduced and the financial strength of service delivery institutions for climate resilience
needs to improve. This transformation includes the operationalization and scale-up of tertiary treatment for water reuse,
mainstreaming of urban NBSs, and lake development to achieve integrated cascading water-balancing urban reservoirs.

 II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

 A. Program Development Objective (PDO)
14.     The PDO is to improve water security related municipal services, institutions, and financing in Bengaluru.

 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
15.     The PDO indicators by outcomes are the following:
Outcome 1: Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience
PDO Indicator 1: People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Corporate Scorecard Indicator, number, gender
disaggregated)
PDO Indicator 2: People provided with safely managed sanitation (Corporate Scorecard Indicator, number, gender
disaggregated)
Outcome 2: Strengthening institutions and integrated planning
PDO Indicator 3: Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented (Text)
Outcome 3: Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions
PDO Indicator 4: Own-source revenue increased (Percentage)




                                                                                                                      Page 4


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


                                                             Theory of Change




 C. PforR Program Scope
Government program
16.       With resilience as its key organizing principle, the Karnataka State Action Plan on Climate Change (KSAPCC)
2024 will serve as the overarching government program (‘p’, the government program), with an estimated expenditure
of US$1.4 billion (‘p’) on sectors relevant to this Program. The KSAPCC contains adaptive and mitigative strategies for the
entire state through key priority sectors, including agriculture, animal husbandry, water resources, forest and biodiversity,
coastal zone, and energy, at the district level between 2025 and 2030. Owing to the cross-cutting nature of water security
and resilience, the government program will include three additional elements: (a) the Bengaluru Climate Action and
Resilience Plan launched by BBMP in 2023; (b) the GoK’s Water Policy Implementation Roadmap, 2023; and (c) the state
DRM plan.10 The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan targets emission reduction and climate change risk and
vulnerability reduction across sectors and is aligned with the KSAPCC. The Water Policy Implementation Roadmap is a 10-
year plan at the state, district, and technical support level, which aims to monitor policy goals related to efficiency of water
use, sustainable water management, healthy watersheds, and so on. The State Disaster Management Plan is a
comprehensive plan mandated by the Disaster Management Act and developed by GoK to identify mitigation,
preparedness, response, and recovery actions for managing disasters. The responsibility framework, outlined in Volume
II of this plan, outlines action areas for different state agencies in this regard.
17.      The Program supported by the Program-for-Results (PforR) operation (‘P’, the Program) will support a subset of
GoK initiatives on circular economy, climate adaptation, resilience and DRM, to address flood and sanitation management
issues in the city of Bengaluru.


10 The government program is further detailed in the Technical Assessment.




                                                                                                                           Page 5


                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


18.        The Program boundaries are defined as follows:
           •   Services. The Program will cover selected service sectors under the government program, including water,
               sanitation, SWDs, and groundwater recharge that are a subset of the KSAPCC, Bengaluru Climate Action and
               Resilience Plan, and the Water Policy Implementation Roadmap.
           •   Institutions and state capability. The Program includes institutional reforms and capability enhancement for
               improved delivery of sanitation, water security planning, and drainage services as well as floods and DRM.
           •   Financing. The Program budget is US$670 million, with US$426 million from IBRD, US$246 million from the
               GoK, and US$5 million from commercial financing. In terms of geographic scope, the PforR prioritizes
               Bengaluru due to its economic salience to the State of Karnataka, population concentration, and climate
               vulnerability. However, several of the results under the PforR will have statewide benefits.
19.       The government program largely overlaps with the PforR Program. Several guiding principles were used to
determine the PforR Program boundaries and select the state-level interventions for PforR Program support. First, while
the GoK interventions focus on discrete action for climate resilience, the PforR Program will support interventions under
an umbrella of water security, climate resilience, and DRM, with infrastructure investments focused on Bengaluru. Second,
the PforR Program will support institutional reforms, integrated planning, and enhanced coordination between the five
critically interlinked institutions: BWSSB, BBMP, the Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Center (KSNDMC),
Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority (KSDMA), and Minor Irrigation and Groundwater Development
Department (MI). Third, the PforR Program will focus on a range of activities to enhance financing for climate resilience.
Thus, these interventions will make the city more resilient to climate change–exacerbated droughts, floods, and landslides.
                                                            Table 1: Program Scope
                                Government program                               Program Supported by the PforR
      Objective       Tackle climate change at state level in    Strengthen institutional capacity and improve operational and
                      Karnataka and lay the ground for crucial   financial performance for enhanced resilience to climate risks in
                      mitigation and adaptation actions.         Karnataka including increased access to climate resilient
                                                                 infrastructure and services for its residents.
      Duration        2024–2030                                  2025–2030
      Expenditure     US$1.4 billion                             Total: US$670 million, including IBRD: US$426 million
      Geographic      Karnataka                                  Karnataka with a focus on Bengaluru.
      coverage                                                   Reasons for non-alignment. Bengaluru is prioritized due to its
                                                                 economic salience, population concentration, and climate
                                                                 vulnerability.
       Results area   1. Water, wastewater, and stormwater;      RA1: Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water
      (RA)            2. Disaster management; 3. Urban           security and resilience (wastewater, stormwater, groundwater
                      planning, greening, and biodiversity; 4.   recharge, NBS, and DRM); RA2: Strengthening water security
                      Solid waste; 5. Energy and buildings; 6.   institutions (energy efficiency); RA3: Enhancing financial
                      Transportation and air quality             capabilities and resources of key institutions.
                                                                 Reasons for non-alignment. Sectoral priorities on transportation
                                                                 and air quality (6) do not contribute to the objective of the PforR.

20.        The Program supports the state in achieving water security and resilience through three results areas.

21.      RA1: Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience. RA1 will focus on water,
sanitation, drainage, and DRM infrastructure and services that directly improve safely managed water supply and
sanitation (WSS) services and enhance resilience to climate exacerbated floods and droughts. The construction and


                                                                                                                                        Page 6


                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


rehabilitation of WSS infrastructure will incorporate climate-informed design to enhance the system’s resilience while also
strengthening the resilience of the targeted sector and beneficiaries to identified climate risks. It will incentivize BWSSB
to scale up and accelerate circular economy investments. Specifically, the Program will support advanced drinking water
treatment from an in-city lake; development of nine STPs with a combined capacity of 148 MLD demonstrating tertiary
treatment, with revenue streams for reused wastewater; household sewer connections; methane capture and biogas
generation; and development of solar sludge dryers. The STP investments will have a dual effect in that it will allow the
city to use its lakes for flood management, and the application of wastewater reuse technology will provide resilience to
drought because treated wastewater will be reused for non-potable purposes, reducing the demand for freshwater in
times of drought. The Program will assist the MI to fill 40 cascading lakes by diverting the treated wastewater from
Bengaluru city to the greater Bengaluru area as a drought resilience initiative with some flood prevention benefits as well.
22.     Through a multi-agency approach, RA1 will incentivize BBMP to improve SWDs and rejuvenate lakes that will
be integrated to create climate-resilient balancing reservoirs that dynamically retain and release water for groundwater
recharge, while creating recreation and green zones that improve flood management. BWSSB will support this integration
by sealing leaking machine-holes (manholes) in the sewer trunk lines in the SWDs which would also improve public health
outcomes in the city. The integration of SWDs with city lakes is a key climate adaptation strategy to manage increased
surface water runoff during climate-induced extreme rainfall events, thereby reducing flood risks and improving
groundwater recharge through water retention in city lakes. In addition, the Program will demonstrate NBSs in flooding
hotspots in each of the city’s eight zones.
23.       RA2: Strengthening water security institutions. To transform the institutional approach to managing SWDs, the
Program seeks to institutionalize a coordinated multi-agency approach for SWD that will develop joint O&M
implementation plans with citizen engagement and behavior change campaigns. A new digital water and environmental
governance system will be developed to monitor and track critical sector indicators such as STP effluent quality, STP
utilization rate, water reuse rate, household sewer connections, and a lake health index. This joint approach will involve
BWSSB, Karnataka Pollution Control Board, and BBMP’s SWD, lakes, and solid waste management divisions and will apply
to the entire 860 km of BBMP’s SWDs. The Program will develop and operationalize advanced flood modelling. Karnataka
has high female workforce participation, while women in India also spend 4.5 times more time on unpaid work, including
childcare, compared to men. Data shows that having a child below 6 years increases women’s time spent on care work by
95 minutes a day. To help address gender disparity, RA2 will formalize childcare provisioning.
24.      The institutional structures related to DRM will be reformed through the enhancement of KSDMA’s capabilities
and the establishment of functional units such as the Mitigation unit within KSDMA. This new unit will facilitate the
development and implementation of a wide array of DRM activities tailored to address the specific challenges posed by
multiple hazards. Central to this reform effort will be the KSNDMC, which will be scaled into a Centre of Excellence (CoE)
focused on proactive climate actions and strategies for managing extreme weather conditions. This CoE will serve as a
vital hub for research and innovation and will offer services to mainstream DRM across sectors. A key feature of the CoE
will be a new comprehensive data model–the Karnataka Climate Hazard and Risk Information System (KCHRIS). KCHRIS is
a decision-support platform with: (i) data integration and dynamic risk assessment helping to identify vulnerable areas
and populations, providing real-time data and predictive analytics for timely emergency response; (ii) mitigation planning
by identifying potential risk reduction measures and evaluating their effectiveness; and (iii) an interface for resilience-
building initiatives by providing insights into long-term climate trends and potential impacts on communities. These efforts
will also include the operationalization of the State Institute of Disaster Management (SIDM).
25.     RA3: Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions. RA3 seeks to strengthen the financial
sustainability of BWSSB and BBMP. It will incentivize the improvement of BWSSB’s cost recovery through enhanced
operational efficiencies, including energy efficiency and NRW reduction. The Program will support increasing BWSSB’s


                                                                                                                        Page 7


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


own-source revenues and advance the first PPP in BWSSB’s history which will aim to mobilize at least US$5 million private
capital.11 The PPPs will bring innovation, enhance operational efficiency, and ensure adequate O&M to enhance asset
quality and longevity. The Program will support measures for improvement in MI’s energy efficiency. The Program will
support BBMP to strengthen capital investment planning and financial reporting systems and increase its own-source
revenues. Lastly, RA3 will incentivize the establishment of the Disaster Risk Financing unit and the development of the
state DRF strategy including the operationalization of a blended finance facility expected to enable at least US$50 million
investments for DRM. This will include identifying, securing, and channeling financial resources from various sources such
as government budgets, private investments, international aid, and innovative mechanisms such as climate finance and
insurance tools, to enable the implementation of DRM strategies.
26.     Program beneficiaries. The Program will give two million people access to safely managed sanitation and provide
four million people with enhanced resilience to climate risks.
27.    Value addition. The Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program raises the ambition of key parts of the
government program, as shown in Table 2.
                                                       Table 2. Program Value Addition
                                                                                                    Government   PforR
                                              Program Value Addition
                                                                                                     program
       Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience (RA1)           (🗸)        🗸
       Integrated flood management approach with NBSs                                                              🗸
       Joint SWD O&M plans and benchmarking                                                                        🗸
       Circular economy: tertiary treatment, reuse, biogas generation and solar technologies           (🗸)         🗸
       Introducing a 10-year O&M period for STPs                                                                   🗸
       Strengthening water security institutions (RA2)                                                             🗸
       Performance benchmarking of municipal water security institutions                                           🗸
       Karnataka Climate Hazard and Risk Information System (KCHRIS)                                               🗸
       Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions (RA3)                                    🗸
       Increase revenue and implement operational cost optimization via energy efficiency and NRW      (🗸)         🗸
       Advancing PPPs                                                                                              🗸
       Disaster Risk Financing Unit                                                                                🗸
      Note: (🗸) Proposed as part of the Program but not yet implemented by the government.
28.      Expenditure framework. The Program will be implemented under BWSSB, BBMP, MI, and KSDMA’s existing
expenditure frameworks. An assessment of the expenditure framework found that the fiscal status of the state is
satisfactory. Karnataka has a well-developed system of accounting based on budget coding system, which allows the
detailed tracking of sector expenditure patterns.
29.      Expenditure for both BBMP and BWSSB have been showing an increasing trend during the last four years. The
two implementing agencies are responsible for most of the Program Expenditure and account for the bulk of the DLIs.
BBMP’s annual expenditure has grown at a compound annual growth rate of about 12 percent from US$837 million
(FY2019–2020) to US$1,382 million (FY2022–2023). For BWSSB, the compound annual growth rate of expenditure during
the last four years has been 8 percent from US$496 million (FY2019–2020) to US$675 million (FY2022–2023). The share
of capex as a percentage of total expenditure stands at 51 percent for BBMP and 59 percent for BWSSB.


11
     The PPP will likely focus on smart water meters for large volume consumers.


                                                                                                                         Page 8


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


30.      The annual estimated cash flows during the Program life cycle for BBMP and BWSSB are expected to be an
average of US$80 million and US$35 million, respectively, which is relatively small compared to their current annual
spending of US$1,382 million and US$675 million. The World Bank-financed PforR operation will contribute US$426
million, which is around four percent of the two entities’ entire budget, thus demonstrating their ample capacity to absorb
these funds. Table 3 below shows the projected 5-year expenditure for all the implementing agencies under the Program.
                                    Table 3. Projected 5-Year Expenditure (in US$ million)
                              FY 24 - 25       FY 25 - 26     FY 26 - 27       FY 27 - 28    FY 28 - 29         Total
              BBMP               74.28            79.26          80.44            81.70         83.03         398.71
              BWSSB              33.10            35.52          35.83            36.15         36.49         177.09
              KSDMA              12.00            13.00          13.00            13.00         13.70          64.70
              MI                  3.50             4.50           5.50             7.00          9.00          29.50
                           Grand Total                                                                         670.00
31.     Financing support. The Program financing is US$670 million to be implemented over five years. The World Bank
(IBRD) will finance US$426 million (or 63.6 percent) of the PforR Program (‘P’) as per Table 4.
                                                   Table 4. Program Financing
                                                                    Amount                     Amount
                           Source                                                                                     % of Total
                                                                  (US$, million)            (JPY, million)
  Counterpart Funding                                                 239                       34,198
  Borrower/Recipient                                                  239                      34,198                    35.7
  International Bank for Reconstruction and
                                                                        426                    60,954                    63.6
    Development (IBRD)
  Commercial Financing                                                   5                      715                      0.7
  Total Program Financing                                               670                    95,867                    100

 D. Disbursement Linked Indicators
32.      The Program’s incentive model consists of eight disbursement linked indicators (DLIs) grouped into three RAs
across five disbursement periods. Table 5 presents the DLIs under each of the RAs and the financing amounts allocated
to each DLI. Further details, including activity descriptions, and verification procedures are provided in Annex 1.
                                             Table 5. Description of DLIs under the Program
                                                                                                                   Amount (JPY) and
   Rationale for DLI                                         DLI Description
                                                                                                                    (US$ indicative)
 RA 1: Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience
 Strengthening and       DLI 1: Integrated flood management system strengthened                                     12,019,140,000
 integrating SWDs,       This DLI includes four disbursement linked results (DLRs): DLR 1.1 disburses upon the      (US$84 million)
 lakes, and NBS in a     city’s 8 zones having achieved institutional enhancement of social and environmental
 flood management        management; DLR 1.2 disburses upon completion of scaled NBS in each of the city’s
 system will improve     eight zones; DLR 1.3 involves 40 MI lakes able to receive treated water from
 resilience to floods.   Bengaluru; and DLR 1.4 disburses upon completion by BBMP of 16 integrated flood
                         management systems. This includes SDW improvements and integration and
                         rejuvenation of in-city cascading lakes, including sensors for depth and water quality.




                                                                                                                                   Page 9


                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Operationalizing          DLI 2: Circular economy operationalized                                                     5,723,401,000
scaled circular           DLI 2 supports the construction of nine new STPs in the expanded area and one              (US$40 million)
economy investments       advanced water treatment plant that will produce drinking water from in-city lakes.
and removing raw          For the STPs, reuse of tertiary treated wastewater, methane capture and biogas
sewage from SWDs          generation, solar sludge dryers, and long O&M design-build-operate contracts will be
will improve water        operationalized at scale. The DLI’s three scalable DLRs will disburse upon: completion
availability and public   by BSWSSB of 10 circular economy sites (DLR 2.1); establishment by BSWSSB of
health outcomes.          100,000 household sewer connections (DLR 2.2); and a 100 percent increase in
                          volume of wastewater reuse over baseline (DLR 2.3).
RA 2: Strengthening water security institutions
Enhancing scientific   DLI 3: Water security system enhanced                                                          5,141,760,000
understanding and      DLI 3 disburses against: (i) the operationalization by BBMP of a digital environment          (US$36 million)
systems for            and water governance system (DLR 3.1) that includes: (a) streamlining environment
integrated flood       and water procedures, such as monitoring, permitting and inspections; (b) industrial
management.            wastewater pollution monitoring; and (c) implementation of a public-facing lake
                       health index; and (ii) operationalization and integration of advanced stormwater
                       modelling (DLR 3.2).

Institutionalizing a      DLI 4: Municipal O&M institutions integrated and professionalized                           9,014,355,000
coordinated O&M           This DLI applies to all of BBMP’s SWDs (860 km) and all 183 lakes and seeks to             (US$63 million)
approach for all SWDs     systematically improve and modernize municipal O&M institutions through a
in Bengaluru will         periodic performance score. It includes maintaining annual flood management
increase water            professional score at 50 (DLR 4.1), fixing leaking machine-holes in the SWDs by
availability and          BWSSB (DLR 4.3), and achievement of utility enhancement program score of 100 (DLR
climate resilience.       4.2). The DLI tracks city-wide sector performance across the eight zones of Bengaluru.

Implementing reform       DLI 5: Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented                   11,017,603,250
and operationalizing      The DLI disburses against achievements within the Program’s disaster risk                  (US$77 million)
DRM institutions in       governance reform program. Disbursements will be made against the establishment
alignment with legal      of KSDMA’s operational program (DLR 5.1), launch of the KCHRIS data model by
mandates and global       KSDMA (DLR 5.2), establishment of CoE (DLR 5.3), establishment of the mitigation
best practice.            unit and creation of mitigation project pipeline by KSDMA (DLR 5.4), and achievement
                          of energy efficiency performance enhancement score of 100 (DLR 5.5). The reform
                          program is detailed in the Program Operational Manual (POM).
RA 3: Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions
Increasing OSR and      DLI 6: Own source revenues, financial reporting, and transparency improved                   12,877,655,000
meeting the 2021        DLRs 6.1-6.2 disburse against pro-rated OSR growth with a target of 45 and 30                (US$90 million)
FBM Rules               percent increase over baseline for BBMP and BWSSB, respectively. DLR 6.3 disburses
promulgated by GoK.     against achievement of municipal financial reporting and transparency score of 100
                        per GoK’s 2021 Fiscal and Budgetary Management (FBM) rules 6 and 8.
Strengthening the         DLI 7: BWSSB’s financial and operational efficiency improved                                3,577,140,000
financial foundation      To be eligible for disbursement under this DLI, BWSSB will demonstrate achievements        (US$25 million)
for a climate-resilient   towards improved financial and operational efficiency. Disbursements will be made
water-secure city by      against execution of performance-based contracts for NRW reduction (DLR 7.1),
moving BWSSB              execution of energy efficiency investment at river Cauvery (DLR 7.2), ISO 50001
toward                    certification on energy management (DLR 7.3), completion of PPP transaction
creditworthiness.         advisor’s project feasibility report (DLR 7.4), and signing of a PPP contract (DLR 7.5).




                                                                                                                                 Page 10


                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


 Enabling risk and           DLI 8: Financing for addressing disaster and climate risks enhanced                               1,431,860,000
 resilience financing        To be eligible for disbursement under DLI 8, KSDMA will establish an institutional               (US$10 million)
 through strategic and       mechanism for financing disaster and climate risks (DLR 8.1), mobilize capital using
 market-based                market-based DRF instruments (DLR 8.2), and mobilize capital from non-GoK sources
 mechanisms.                 to the blended finance facility (DLR 8.3). The three DLRs are further detailed in the
                             POM.
 Front end fee                                                                                                                  152,385,750
                                                                                                                               (US$1 million)
 Total                                                                                                                        60,954,300,000
                                                                                                                             (US$426 million)

 E. Role of Partners
   Name of Partner       Nature of Involvement
   JICA                  Collaboration around construction of STPs in Bengaluru’s 110 villages area. JICA is
                         finalizing the construction of 14 STPs with BWSSB.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Program Design
33.      World Bank-financed water investments in retrospect. Globally, the water sector is fundamentally challenged by
the failure to maintain physical infrastructure, leading to its premature deterioration in what is often referred to as the
'build-neglect-rebuild' cycle,12 given that deteriorated infrastructure is commonly rebuilt. In acknowledging this syndrome,
large World Bank-financed investment projects are increasingly shifting focus to strengthening institutions, supporting
reforms, and financial sustainability. The World Bank is strategically seeking to demonstrate and institutionalize novel
institutional approaches that can be replicated in other states in India and beyond. The Program will incentivize
institutional and policy reforms, improvements in service delivery, and enhanced finance sustainability to help the state
government provide a strategic and systematic response to water stress and climate shocks. The PforR instrument has
proven effective in government programs where the results are clear, the GoK is highly capacitated, and where the World
Bank’s added value lies in enhancing institutions and financial ingenuity.
34.     Opportunities to leverage and converge across World Bank-financed operations and technical assistance in
Karnataka. The Program would leverage the learnings and institutional architecture from closed, current, and pipeline
operations. These include the Second Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (P170873), Atal Bhujal Yojana (Abhy)-
National Groundwater Management Improvement Program (P158119), Rejuvenating Watersheds for Agriculture
Resilience through Innovative Development Program (P172187), Karnataka Urban Water Supply Modernization Project
(P130544), National Hydrology Project (P152698), Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039), Second
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (P144726), and Strengthening Coastal Resilience and the Economy Project
(P180932). The Program seeks to create synergies across various operations by leveraging DRM platforms for Karnataka
and demonstrating a long-term comprehensive water security plan for Bengaluru. The operation will also prioritize
financing reform of BBMP and BWSSB to ensure an increase in OSR, which synergizes with the broader water reform
agenda. The expenditures under these operations are excluded from the PforR, and there is clear demarcation in scope
and coverage between the various projects.

35.     To match the Program’s ambition and value addition, a wide-reaching capacity-building framework is required.
The PforR instrument has proven most effective when ambitious result frameworks are accompanied by access to world-
class expertise and resources for sustained capacity-building support. Such capacity-building frameworks will include,


12 Mohanty, N. 2005. Moving to Scale, in India’s Water Economy: Bracing for a Turbulent Future. Oxford: Oxford University Press.




                                                                                                                                          Page 11


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


among other activities, advanced wastewater treatment and reuse, PPP transaction advisory services, flood modelling,
NBSs, and, for the first time in a larger Indian water utility, rollout of energy efficiency training certification under the
International System for Standardization (ISO) 50001. To address the issues around lack of adherence to city bylaws and
wastewater effluent standards, the Program will support the development of a new paradigm in digital water and
environmental governance, especially on standardized, efficient, and transparent procedures for industrial and residential
wastewater inspection and audits. To ensure effective execution of key innovations, it is critical that resources are
available to provide world-class expertise to support Program implementation.
36.     Communication strategy and behavior change communication are critical aspects of the Program. Critical
aspects of the water security and resilience agenda lie in the hands of citizens and community groups. The Program will
have a dedicated focus on developing a communication strategy around water security and resilience. In addition, a
behavior change campaign will be developed by testing tactics that drive success in socially conscious campaigns focusing
on addressing barriers, motivations, and the social context of citizens and key actors whose changed behaviors can
strengthen water security.

III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
37.     The Government of Karnataka is responsible for the Program’s overall implementation, including its technical
aspects. Since the Revenue Department (RD), BBMP, and BWSSB are new to the PforR instrument, the Program will require
considerable focused implementation support from the World Bank, particularly during the early stages of
implementation. Government staff will need to make a rapid shift in their focus on sensitization and capacity building,
especially of their technical staff including those at the zonal level.
38.    Program implementing agencies (IAs). The Program will be coordinated and managed by the RD at the state level.
The main IAs along with the fiduciary responsibilities will fall under the RD, BWSSB, MI, and BBMP.13 The Program will be
implemented following the GoK’s fiduciary and environmental and social (E&S) legal framework. The IAs under the
Program are as follows:
   a)   RD is the nodal agency for the Program and a Program Management Unit (PMU), established at the RD will have
        the overall responsibility for compliance, monitoring, and implementation of the Program. The PMU will be
        established within three months of loan effectiveness and will include specialized technical personnel as well as
        environmental, social, financial management, and procurement experts. The staff may either be brought in on
        deputation or hired from the private market. KSNDMC and KSDMA fall under the RD and lead the DRM activities
        and institutional reforms including the establishment of the blended financing mechanism.
   b)   BBMP, the fourth-largest municipal corporation in India, is the administrative municipality responsible for the
        greater Bengaluru metropolitan area. Its roles and responsibilities include the development of the city, flood
        management, health, hygiene, licensing, solid waste, and education. Under the Program, BBMP will be responsible
        for the construction of SWDs, rehabilitation of lakes, and integrated flood management. Readiness: More than 30
        percent of the BBMP contracts for civil works have been tendered.
   c)   MI has jurisdiction over irrigation projects that have a command area up to 2,000 ha. The department oversees
        planning, designing, investigation, construction, and maintenance of minor irrigation projects in the state.


13 The Program will be coordinated with the Water Resources Department including the   Advanced Centre for Integrated Water Resources
Management.


                                                                                                                               Page 12


                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


   d)   BWSSB, formed in 1964, is one of the first water supply and sanitation utilities in India with jurisdiction of the
        entire BBMP area. Under the Program, BWSSB will lead the implementation on STPs, NRW, energy efficiency, and
        PPPs. Readiness: More than 30 percent of the BWSSB contracts for civil works are ready for tendering.
   e)   KSDMA facilitates, coordinates, reviews, and monitors all disaster-related activities in the state including capacity
        building. KSNDMC provides proactive and innovative science and technology inputs.
39.     The Program will have a Program Steering Committee (PSC) under RD. The PSC will be established within three
months of loan effectiveness and will provide policy guidance, oversight, and strategic direction to departments and
agencies. Other key entities participating in the Program in collaboration with the IAs include the Karnataka Pollution
Control Board and Advanced Centre for Integrated Water Resources Management.
40.     The POM will guide the implementation process and include: (a) the activities and timetable of actions to be
carried out under the Program and excluded activities; (b) detailed description of the activities under the Program; (c) the
Program’s monitoring, evaluation and reporting requirements; (d) the respective roles and responsibilities of entities
participating in the Program; (e) the composition and responsibilities of the PMU; (f) detailed procurement arrangements,
including the timing and procedures to conduct post procurement reviews, and detailed financial management
arrangements (including the Anti-corruption Protocol for the application of the World Bank Anti-corruption Guidelines),
applicable to the entities involved in the implementation of the Program and receiving proceeds of the loan; (g) the
Program Action Plan; (h) the framework and standard operating procedures for compliance with environmental, social,
and other requirements under the Program; and (i) the verification protocols for the DLIs and DLRs. The POM will be
adopted within three months of loan effectiveness and disclosed on the GoK’s website.

 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
41.      Achievements against the PDO will be measured through the Results Framework developed for the Program.
The PMU will develop a specific monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system to track Program achievements. In addition to
the Program-specific M&E system, the Program will support three major M&E system enhancements: (a) joint M&E
systems for the 860 km of SWDs that facilitate cross-agency collaboration and planning; (b) a digital environment and
water governance system for effluent monitoring, adherence to city bylaws that facilitates cross-agency coordination and
verification for BWSSB and the Karnataka Pollution Control Board, among others; and (c) an M&E system under BWSSB
for energy efficiency.
42.     Verification of DLIs will be carried out by an independent verification agency (IVA) hired by the RD not later
than one month after loan effectiveness. The results reported by the RD in Results Reports, as achieved under the
Program, will be verified through a desk review and physical inspection that test the accuracy and quality of results
claimed. The IVA will prepare Results Verification Reports, which will be shared with the RD and the World Bank. The
reports will be used to determine the amount of the eligible disbursement to be made based on the results achieved.
Further details on the verification process for each DLI are included in Annex 1 and in the verification protocol of the POM.
43.    Midterm review. A midterm review will be an opportunity to assess the status of the Program implementation.
The midterm review will be in addition to the annual verification exercise and is expected to be held in 2027.

 C. Disbursement Arrangements
44.     The GoK will undertake the Program activities and receive reimbursements from the World Bank on the
achievement of DLRs. Disbursements will depend on the borrower providing evidence satisfactory to the World Bank that
DLI targets have been achieved as per the agreed verification protocol detailed in the POM. Disbursements will be made
against DLIs, irrespective of the Program expenditure incurred at the time of releasing the DLIs. The Program does not
have timebound DLIs. In the last year of the Program, the RD, in coordination with the World Bank, will reconcile the


                                                                                                                        Page 13


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


audited Program expenditure with the DLI amounts disbursed by the World Bank. Any shortfall in the Program expenditure
in relation to DLI disbursement will be adjusted from the final DLI claim or refunded. As per the World Bank PforR Policy
and the nature of underlying investments, the World Bank will provide the GoK an advance of up to 25 percent of the
loan.
45.     The GoK may submit claims for prior results achieved on the basis of DLRs prior to the signing date but on or
after August 1, 2024. The prior results and advance taken together cannot exceed 30 percent of the total loan amount.
The RD will prepare technical reports to document the status of achievement of DLIs. The technical reports will be verified
by an IVA, appointed as per terms of reference agreed with the World Bank. Upon validation of DLIs by the IVA, the PMU
will communicate the achievement of DLIs to the World Bank along with supporting documents. If the RD is unable to
achieve the DLI target set out in any year, it will be rolled over for future years till the DLI target is achieved.

 IV. PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS SUMMARY

 A. Technical
46.      Strategic relevance. The Program has high relevance because it directly responds to service delivery challenges in
Bengaluru amid increasing urbanization and a looming water crisis fueled by a fragmented institutional landscape and
climate change. The Program has identified a critical set of urban services in Bengaluru including water supply, sewage,
drainage, groundwater recharge, and DRM. Addressing these will improve the city’s service performance while tackling
the effects of climate change, resilience, and sustainability-related challenges that the city is facing in the context of rapid
urban expansion. The Program is consistent with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for India FY18-22,
discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on September 20, 2018 (Report No. 126667-IN) and extended to FY25 by
the corresponding Performance and Learning Review dated October 23, 2023. The CPF emphasizes the need for resource-
efficient growth approaches to managing India’s urban areas. The Program responds to all the interventions under “Pillar
3: Reducing the impacts of floods and droughts and managing water resources sustainably” of the Global Challenge
Program through the restoration of lakes and aquifers, activities to reduce flood and drought, and green infrastructure
investments to enhance climate adaptation and water security. It is also consistent with India’s long-term strategy,14 which
promotes “low-carbon municipal service delivery through resource efficiency, management of water, solid, and liquid
waste” and highlights the need for “strengthening basic infrastructure such as sanitation systems, […] as well as
institutional infrastructures such as disaster response teams” for building climate resilience. It also responds to the stated
goals of the GoK’s Water Policy, which is to facilitate water security, and the optimal utilization of the state’s water
resources for health, food, energy, environment, and other societal purposes.
47.     Technical soundness. The Program is technically sound, relying on strong government ownership and building on
experiences in Karnataka and in India. The sectors—wastewater treatment, SWDs, groundwater recharge, and DRM—
have economies of scale and spillover effects. Therefore, public sector providers are uniquely positioned to deliver these
services, but they will require improvements to their technical capacities and operational modalities, including citizen
interface, to ensure longer-term sustainability. In assessing the technical soundness, several key elements that required
strengthening were identified.
48.      The approach to sewage treatment stands to benefit from the Program. Tertiary treatment and water reuse are
being used by BWSSB, though not at scale. The Program will scale the application of tertiary treatment with a focus on its
financial benefits, specifically by strategically designing STPs with the purpose of selling tertiary treated wastewater to
nearby industries. The approach carefully links the financial analysis of water reuse potential with the increased capex of
tertiary treatment, showing rapid amortization of the investment. Biogas utilization in India has traditionally been

14
     Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 2022. India’s Long-Term Low-Carbon Development Strategy. Government of India.


                                                                                                                                         Page 14


                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


reserved for only very large STPs. Nonetheless, investments in biogas generation have attractive payoffs and greenhouse
gas (GHG) reduction effects for medium and even small STPs. The Program will demonstrate these benefits in one medium
size STP (35 MLD). That STP could later serve as valuable practical demonstration facility for many other similar size STPs.
Solar sludge dryers make use of renewable solar energy to dry sludge providing among the lowest energy demand of all
drying approaches, strongly reducing the sludge volume. This technology, new to BWSSB, could also serve as a valuable
demonstration plant for many other STPs under this Program. Open technology bidding allows bidders to propose any
technology that fits specific set criteria for STP investments. BWSSB has traditionally specified the technology used for
STPs, thus constraining market know-how by removing possibly cheaper but unfamiliar technologies from competition.
The Program will introduce open technology bidding.
49.     BWSSB has traditionally used design-build-operate contracts with an operational period of five years, which by
international standards is short. With JICA support, BWSSB has implemented contracts with a seven-year operational
period. The Program will use a ten-year operational period under the design-build-operate contracts which enhances the
relevance of operational expenditures in the bids’ evaluation and thus supports financial sustainability. In summary, for
the investments in STPs, the Program is technically sound and innovative in that it introduces a range of approaches and
technologies that BWSSB can later mainstream.
50.      An integrated approach to flood management has not been adopted by BBMP for a variety of practical, technical,
and institutional reasons. The Program’s stepwise transition to integrated flood management is technically sound. It
institutionalizes: (a) advanced flood modeling systems that use fine-scale datasets to identify vulnerable areas and the
development of flood risk maps for Bengaluru; (b) strategic utilization of lakes and wetlands as balancing reservoirs for
management of floods and droughts equipped with flood management control measures such as sluice gates and remote
sensing technologies; (c) nature-based and other water retention solutions that provide low-cost interventions to address
peak flows in flooding hotspots; and (d) integrated sub-catchments flood management plans.
51.      Enhanced financing and improved professionalization. BBMP is one of the richest municipal corporations in India
and could ideally borrow from the capital markets to finance investments, as other Indian municipalities have done. The
Program will incentivize BBMP to strengthen its OSR, thus improving its creditworthiness and allow it to raise commercial
financing to fulfil its mandate and improve services for citizens. The financial position of BWSSB, on the other hand, has
been declining and the state is saddled with the burden of financing all major repairs and capital works and increasing
BWSSB’s debt burden, as there is limited capacity to pay interest or principal on outstanding debt from government
institutions. With its aging water supply and sewer pipelines, inadequate asset planning on its part will require massive
rehabilitation works. The Program will support BWSSB revenue increase and implement a series of cost reduction activities
such as NRW reduction and energy efficiency measures.
52.      Institutional reforms for DRM. The Program will support reforms to strengthen the disaster risk governance
framework in Karnataka, including strengthening, operationalizing, and establishing DRM-related institutions. This
includes KSDMA, KSNDMC, and SIDM. Established in 1988 as the Drought Monitoring Cell, KSNDMC has played an
important role in hazard monitoring in Karnataka through a network of weather stations, data acquisition partnerships,
and modelling capabilities developed over the years. It has also contributed to other disaster management functions such
as early warning and post-disaster needs assessments which are typically to be undertaken by the State Disaster
Management Authorities (SDMAs) as mandated by the Disaster Management Act. The KSDMA was constituted officially
in 2008 but is yet to become operational with many of its mandated functions being undertaken by the RD or KSNDMC.
Increasing extreme weather events and disasters in Karnataka call for: (a) a fully functional SDMA with state-of-the-art
infrastructure and decision support systems; (b) clear roles and operational relationships among different agencies with
DRM functions; (c) user-oriented climate and disaster monitoring services; and (d) institutionalized capacity-building and
public engagement platforms. Karnataka is yet to establish and operationalize its SIDM as mandated by the Disaster


                                                                                                                       Page 15


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Management Act. The Program’s approach to institutional reforms of DRM is technically sound in that it will support the
following specific activities:
    •   Strengthening of the overarching Disaster Risk Governance Framework in Karnataka, including development of a
        draft bill;
    •   Functional review of KSNDMC including the development of organizational structure, staffing, and revenue
        models for KSDMA and KSNDMC;
    •   Operationalization of the SIDM, including development of a business plan and annual training calendars;
    •   Consolidation of the hazard vulnerability mapping data available with KSNDMC with local knowledge and need-
        based vulnerability surveys for development of a decision support system, ‘KCHRIS’, to enable future utilization
        of risk information at multiple levels.
53. Disaster risk financing. From 2008 to 2024, funding from the Government of India, primarily via the National
Disaster Response Fund, was 8 percent of the total estimated losses for droughts, and 6 percent for floods, meaning the
bulk of the financial burden following major disasters is on the state. To address these gaps, the Program will: (a) establish
dedicated DRF and Mitigation units within KSDMA; (b) commission a catastrophe risk modeling study to quantify risks
from natural hazards; and (c) support the development of financial instruments for risk financing.
54. Blended finance facility. This activity will support the development of a blended finance facility to meet Karnataka’s
need for substantial climate resilient investments, leveraging both public and private finance. Blended finance, which
pools capital from various sources, presents a strategic approach to mobilize climate finance, leveraging private
investments to enhance returns and mitigate risks. Specifically, the blended finance facility for Karnataka could mitigate
risks and enhance returns through the following: (a) enable identification and resourcing of low-cost climate finance that
can catalyze green investments and accelerate implementation; (b) leverage use of development finance and
philanthropic funds to attract private capital into deals; (c) de-risk, reduce uncertainty of advisory and preparatory services
to facilitate private investment in high-impact projects, reduce high initial costs before commissioning of a project helping
manage the failure rates and elevated transaction costs associated with high-risk enterprises or projects that are
experimenting with, testing and piloting new business approaches; and (d) design tools to 'crowd in' private capital
including market incentives and guarantees to stimulate innovation on equal terms for mature or credible projects by
signaling that macroeconomic risks can be managed, and that the investment is commercially viable.
55. The field-level leadership (FLL) approach is a model of leadership development that aims at creating a broad cadre
of change champions at all levels of government. To increase performance of large government agencies, the World
Bank-financed water operations are increasingly applying the inexpensive FLL approach to form positive changes in the
behavior and performance of civil servants. Under RA2, FLL will be progressively rolled out and cover 1,000 BWSSB and
BBMP staff. Initial implementation, to be completed in the first two years of the Program, will include: (a) training of FLL
master trainers; and (b) rollout of FLL workshops led by the master trainers. The momentum of the initial phase will be
sustained through impact evaluations, documenting success, recognizing change leaders, and supporting informal support
groups.
56. Citizen engagement is an important aspect of the Program, specifically around solid waste management, and the
behavior change campaign as per the interventions specified under DLR 4.1. Citizens will also be involved and consulted
in the development of the zonal action plan and the annual O&M plans for SWDs. To maximize citizen’s input, the
consultation will be carried out in each of the eight zones and at the ward level in solid waste management hotspots. The
Program includes two intermediate indicators on citizen engagement, namely: (a) zonal flood management performance
score (number), wherein each zone is incentivized to carry out systematic citizen engagement at the ward-level, and (b)
behavior change campaign launched.



                                                                                                                         Page 16


                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


57. Gender. At 43 percent, Karnataka’s female labor force participation rate is 6 percentage points above the national
average.15 The Program conducted a gender assessment and found that this percentage holds true for the three IAs –
BBMP, BWSSB, and KSDMA, across job roles and numerically translates to approximately 3,500 women. Analysis of India’s
time use survey shows that having children under the age of six increases women’s time spent on care work by 95 minutes
a day. Women in the three IAs spend between 60 to 120 minutes per day dropping and picking up children from childcare
facilities compared to men who do not take on these care work responsibilities. While women are a large part of the
workforce in the three IAs, they do not have access to childcare provisioning near the workplace. This leads to women
spending more hours working on unpaid care work, as it is unevenly distributed within households, burdening women
more. To help address this disparity, the Program will formalize childcare provisioning. BBMP, KSDMA, and BWSSB will
designate space in their main offices to run model childcare centers. The centers will be: (a) permanent and certified by
relevant government authorities; (b) child-proof for safety, well ventilated, and hygienic with access to washrooms
designated for children; (c) staffed by trained childcare workers; and (d) have trained security personnel for the safety and
security of children and workers. The Program will support the three agencies in enhancing financial sustainability through
improved operational efficiency, revenue generation, and capital investment planning. The centers will be a service for
the current and future workforce and lay the foundation for continuous childcare provisioning in the three IAs as new
women workers join. This initiative will also inspire other large-scale organizations and corporations in similar sectors to
promote the provision of employer-supported childcare. The activities will be measured by an indicator on the number of
women who enrolled their children in newly established childcare centers to save time. Additionally, a survey will be
conducted to capture changes in the time use of women beneficiaries.
58. Maximizing finance for development (MFD). The Program promotes private sector solutions and private capital
mobilization and is private capital enabling (PCE). A minimum of US$5 million commercial loans for PPP transactions with
BWSSB is expected to be leveraged under DLI 7 by 2030. Collectively, the achievement of indicators from DLIs 6 and 7
(verified as MFD-enabling) on improving operating and financial performance are removing the binding constraints to
enable private sector solutions such as additional PPP transactions in the water sectors over the duration of the Program.
These are aligned with the Water Policy Implementation Roadmap (GoK 2023) that include roadmaps for sustainable
private sector solutions. DLI 8 is also verified as PCE. It seeks to enable DRF instruments and unlock blended financing
facility capitalized also by the private sector among other non-GoK sources. A total of US$18.75 million is expected to be
enabled from private sector capital and is monitored by a monetary PCE indicator ‘Funds mobilized from non-GoK sources
(US$)’. Additional private capital investment could be enabled from the PPP concessions awarded under DLI 7 which would
result in additional PCE. This is tracked by a respective DLI. At the Implementation Completion and Results Report stage,
the PCE targets will be reviewed if additional commercial loans are accessed.
59. The Program is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The Program is
aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The operation is aligned to India’s climate
commitments including the Nationally Determined Contributions, National Action Plan on Climate Change, and Long-Term
Low-Carbon Development Strategy.
60. Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Karnataka is extremely vulnerable to droughts, floods, landslides,
rising temperatures, and increasing precipitation variability. The Program area faces high exposure to climate risks, with
the main climate and disaster risks affecting the Program being droughts and floods. Increased climate risks will raise
pressure on limited water resources, and urbanization may further increase strain on infrastructure. Extreme flooding
could also increase risks both to water production and sanitation facilities. These risks are reduced by climate-proofing
existing and new WSS infrastructure and through the implementation of soft components. The increased volume of
wastewater being treated, coupled with households’ decreased reliance on septic tanks, will not only enhance public

15
     Periodic Labour Force Survey, Government of India, 2022-2023.


                                                                                                                        Page 17


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


health outcomes but also reduce groundwater pollution from leaking septic tanks, thereby enhancing communities’
resilience to droughts and rising temperatures by improving groundwater quality. Moreover, the NRW reduction will
increase the volume of available water, the filling of cascading lakes in drought prone districts with treated wastewater
will recharge groundwater, and the activities in support of the integration of lakes and upgraded SWDs will provide
balancing (buffer) storage, increasing the residents’ resilience to droughts. The activities aimed at institutional
strengthening and improved DRM will directly reduce the risk and potential impact of the climate-related risks relevant to
this area. Lastly, investing in the efficiency and financial resilience of the utility will allow adequate O&M, thereby ensuring
more reliable and climate-resilient services. Thus, climate risks may be reduced to an acceptable level and are not likely
to have material impact on the operation and its development objectives. The only adaptation-related risk identified at
this stage is the possibility of a large share of the current customers not accepting the higher water tariff, especially if the
improvements in service delivery are not manifest before the tariff hike.
61.       Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The operation is not at material risk of having a negative impact
on the country’s GHG emissions development pathways. All Program activities are on the Universally Aligned List and will
contribute to climate change mitigation by reducing the volume of untreated septage and wastewater being discharged
into the environment (especially wetlands and lakes); capturing the methane emitted during treatment to be used as an
energy source;16 and reducing the energy intensity of WSS processes. A reduction of GHG emissions will be derived from
both water supply and sanitation interventions. Mitigation-related activities center on: (a) methane capture and biogas
utilization at STPs; (b) reduction of NRW; (c) in-city advanced water treatment and reuse that will reduce the need of lifting
water from the Cauvery River; and (d) reduction in energy consumption by improving energy efficiency. In addition,
improving the operational and financial performance of STPs will allow BWSSB to continue investing in energy efficiency
enhancements in both water and wastewater, thereby further reducing GHG emissions.
62.      GHG emissions. A GHG emissions accounting analysis was carried out for the Program’s wastewater treatment
activity. Compared to the baseline scenario, the net emissions for the provision of STPs are estimated to be an average of
-72,100 tCO2e annually and total of -1,442,000 tCO2e over 20 years.
63.      Economic rationale. An economic analysis was performed to assess the economic internal rates of return of capital
investments in nine STPs managed by BWSSB and 173 km of new and 80 km of rehabilitated SWDs managed by BBMP.
Together these two capital investments consist of 60 percent of the total Program costs. The quantifiable benefits of the
STPs were measured by the market value of secondary and tertiary treated water to be discharged from these plants. The
benefits of the SWDs were measured by expected avoided losses to the households from future floods. See Technical
Assessment for details. Overall, the average rate of return for the Program is 19 percent with the net present value in the
range of US$361 million to US$844 million and benefit-cost ratio in the range of 2.1 to 3.3 for discount rates of 10 and 5
percent, respectively. Based on the Monte Carlo simulations, the probability of low economic returns is 17 percent for the
overall Program. The absence of data and the high level of uncertainty of the avoided losses from annual floods resulted
in the relatively large probability of low rate of return.
 B. Fiduciary
64.     An Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA) of the selected IAs was carried out during the preparation of
the Program and finalized in March 2025. The IFSA focuses on the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency, and accountability. It concluded that fiduciary systems together with agreed mitigation measures provide
reasonable assurance that the financing would be used for the intended purposes. The IFSA identified key fiduciary risks
that may affect the PDO and recommended system improvement and mitigation measures that will be implemented


16
  Moreover, the less polluted water bodies are, the lower the treatment costs for producing potable water will be, thus lowering the utility’s
operational expenses and increasing available funding for O&M.


                                                                                                                                       Page 18


                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


during the life of the Program as part of the Program Action Plan (PAP). Based on the IFSA, the overall fiduciary risk is rated
Substantial.
65.      Expenditure framework effectiveness and efficiency. BBMP, BWSSB, KSDMA, and MI have varied institutional
structures. They are an urban local body, a board, a statutory body, and a department, respectively, as per legal structures
prevalent in India. They have their own revenue sources (property tax and cess for BBMP and water/ sewerage charges
for BWSSB) and receive grants for capex. The capacity of BBMP and BWSSB to absorb the allocated funds is shown by their
total spending, which during the last four years accounted for US$807-US$1,095 million for BBMP and US$495-US$674
million for BWSSB. The expenditure shows an increasing trend with a compound annual growth rate of 10.73 percent and
10.82 percent for BBMP and BWSSB, respectively. The total expenditure of the implementing entities for the Program
period (next five years) assuming a notional growth rate of five percent is US$11.3 billion.
66.      GoK has a clear public financial management framework for planning, budgeting, accounting, and audit. The
framework is included in the state’s Budget Manual, Karnataka Treasury Code 1963, Karnataka Financial Code 1958, and
other financial rules. However, BBMP, BWSSB, and KSDMA use their own financial rules/ manuals being autonomous
entities under a distinct legal structure. Similarly, MI uses the core GoK systems for accounting and payments. These rules
cover all aspects of the public financial management cycle and have been found to be adequate under implementation:
(a) budgets for the entities are approved by their own governing bodies but grants are approved by the state annually, (b)
the entities spend in accordance with relevant laws, and internal guidelines and manuals following double entry principles,
(c) receipts/ payments are made at several decentralized accounting locations (and using commercial bank accounts
except for MI which works with the GoK Treasuries payment systems) by trained staff and using legacy accounting systems,
and (d) regular and established auditing arrangements ensure that reasonable checks and balances are in place.
67.     Funds flow. Expenditure under the Program will be made by each IA using its own accounting/ payment systems.
Disbursements from the World Bank will flow to the Government of India and then the ‘consolidated fund of the state’
managed by the finance department of the GoK. Funds will flow from the finance department to the four IAs through the
budget lines of the department in charge, that is Urban Development for BBMP and BWSSB, the RD for KSDMA, and MI.
68.     Risks and mitigation measures: (a) both BBMP and BWSSB use accounting software but the systems are
fragmented in the form of many stand-alone systems; as a mitigation measure, both entities have launched studies to
assess how various systems can be linked to strengthen internal controls/ improve efficiency; (b) as a public facing utility,
BBMP needs to improve its detailed financial reporting to the public; DLI 6 will incentivize BBMP to improve its OSR,
financial reporting, and transparency; (c) internal audit in BWSSB is weak and unsystematic; the board has decided to
strengthen this by introducing terms of reference for the IA and an annual work plan; and (d) the Statutory Audit faces a
backlog in the case of BWSSB, and it is preparing an action plan to ensure timely completion of audits.
69.      Program audit reports will be submitted within nine months of the end of each FY. The entities are independent
of each other and follow different audit arrangements. Therefore, the following arrangements for audit have been agreed:
(a) BBMP: Audit report will be issued by the Karnataka State Audit and Accounts Department; (b) BWSSB: The Comptroller
and Auditor General of India is the auditor but there is a significant backlog and only FY20–21 audits have been received.
Hence, it was considered difficult to be able to meet the timeliness requirement. Therefore, the audit report will be issued
by a firm of Chartered Accountants; and (c) KSDMA and MI: Extract from Annual State Finance Accounts will be considered
as an audit.
70.     The Program’s procurement entities,17 BBMP and BWSSB, follow the GoK’s procurement procedures and these
are disclosed on the GoK’s website. The POM provides detailed day-to-day guidance on the procurement and contract

17
   As per the defined institutional and implementation arrangements, GoK’s departments, agencies, organizations within the Program boundary
involved in procurement and contract management.


                                                                                                                                        Page 19


                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


management. The Program’s procurement profile comprises civil works such as SWDs and STPs, which will be
implemented by BBMP and BWSSB, respectively, and a few consultancy services. The STPs are expected to be contracted
with an extended O&M period and evaluated on a life cycle costing basis with performance conditions.
71.      GoK’s procurement system meets the basic principles of public procurement. Open tendering is the preferred
procurement method. The state enacted the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Act and issued Karnataka
Transparency in Public Procurement Rules in 2000 and issued government orders. The GoK is the first state to mandate
the Standard Tender Documents (STD) in 2005. Before initiating the procurement through the Program, the procurement
entities incorporate the World Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-
Results Financing, dated February 1, 2012, and revised July 10, 2015 (Anti-Corruption Guidelines - ACG) mandatorily in the
STDs, and these STDs are adopted for all Program procurement activities. The Gok issued a Government Order in 2002 to
instruct procurement entities to prepare Procurement Plans. However, the procurement entities are not preparing the
Procurement Plan in line with the GoK’s Government Order. The Procurement Plan is an essential planning and monitoring
tool that helps the procurement entities link the Program’s procurement activities with the outputs and outcomes
(DLI/DLRs) expected under the Program and Program Expenditure Framework.
72.     The GoK mandates the use of an e-Government Procurement (e-GP) platform above the threshold of INR
500,000. The e-GP will be used from publication till the award including the contract management module. The
procurement entities widely use open tendering method with a single stage two envelope (technical and financial)
procurement method. After opening of the technical envelope, the committee completes the technical evaluation
manually and inputs the results into the e-GP system. The Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Act provides
detailed guidance on publication, opening, evaluation committee, negotiations, and procurement appeals. In the absence
of a dedicated cadre for procurement, the engineers have the primary responsibility to articulate procurement process
and manage the awarded works contracts. The engineers may take advisory/supervisory support from project
management or supervision consultants. The engineer records the Measurement Book, verifies it, and certifies the
completed work for payment. The payment is made to the provider’s commercial bank account electronically.
73.      The procurement risk is Substantial and will be reviewed during implementation of the Program. Based on the
identified gaps, the IFSA has recommended various measures to strengthen the existing procurement and contract
management system. They include: (a) providing detailed guidance on procurement and contract management as part of
the POM; (b) updating the STDs including the World Bank’s Technical, E&S, and ACG for PforR, and adopting these for the
Program’s procurement; (c) preparing a Procurement Plan in line with the GoK’s Government Order; (d) operationalizing
information system for monitoring the overall procurement cycle, including contract management through a set of Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs) as per the IFSA; (e) establishing a fiduciary complaint handling system; (f) carrying out post-
procurement reviews; and (g) imparting procurement trainings periodically. Six PAP actions with clear timelines have been
agreed to mitigate the fiduciary risk.
74.     Procurement exclusions. The Program does not include any high-value contracts exceeding the prescribed
threshold set by the World Bank’s Program-for Results-Directive. For envisaged procurement activities, the Program’s
procurement entities closely monitor the contracts at key stages (after the approval of cost estimates through technical
sanction, before tendering is initiated, and before the contract is awarded) to ensure that contracts above the prescribed
high-value contracts threshold are excluded from the Program. The Program's procurement entities periodically submit a
report as per the format provided in the POM.
 C. Environmental and Social
75.      Under the Program, key activities would involve infrastructure relating to construction of nine STPs, one water
treatment plant, 400 km of sewers network and sewage pumping stations, retaining walls and lining of SWDs (173 km),
fortifying of existing stone masonry storm water walls (80 km), 50 lake rejuvenation activities; construction of buildings at


                                                                                                                        Page 20


                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


KSDMA; and construction of one pumping station and pipelines for filling of 40 lakes by MI using treated wastewater. It
would also involve institutional strengthening activities within BBMP, BWSSB, KSDMA, and MI.
76.     In line with the World Bank PforR Guidance, an Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was
carried out and comprised review of secondary literature review, consultations (field and state level), assessment of E&S
system strengths, and areas for improvement, besides site visits. Furthermore, the ESSA identified the risks and
opportunities and confirmed compatibility of the Program with the core principles on: (a) E&S management systems; (b)
natural habitats and cultural properties; (c) public and worker safety; and (d) land acquisition and livelihoods.
77.      The main environmental risks are: (a) the substantial occupational health and safety (OHS) and hazard risks for
workers and communities due to numerous work fronts for construction of sewers, lining of SWDs within the densely
populated urban settings, and potential traffic disruptions; (b) the residual pollution of SWDs discharging into lakes
downstream if broken machine-holes of underlying sewers are not repaired as planned; (c) management of solid waste in
the SWDs to be fully integrated into Bengaluru’s overall solid waste management program; (d) ensuring of water quality
during construction of SWDs and STPs; (e) minimization of tree felling at STP sites; (f) management of usual construction-
related pollution, dust, oil spills, noise, etc.; and (g) reputational risks if the lake water quality continues to be poor due to
constraints in sewage treatment considering that many current STPs cannot upgrade to tertiary treatment facilities, due
to a shortage of land. The key social risks are: (a) potential disruptions to and impacts on livelihoods of
communities/vulnerable groups that have encroached upon the existing ‘Right-of-Way’ (or land within the buffer zone of
SWDs) or catchment area, which will be considered for upgrading the SWD network and lake filling scheme; (b) disruption,
safety, and gender-based violence/SEA/SH18 risks to communities, particularly in congested urban locations wherein nine
STPs are envisaged on government lands that have already been identified; (c) inadequate measures at construction sites
on city roads that have led to accidents/fatalities in the past and might occur again; (d) inadequate information
dissemination to communities on use of treated water; and (e) inadequate community awareness in disaster situations.
78.      Comprehensive and overarching legal and regulatory provisions on E&S exist at the national and state levels.
BWSSB, BBMP, and MI that are responsible for executing infrastructure works, have a robust grievance redress mechanism
in place. In addition, BWSSB and BBMP have a Public Relations Office Cell and a well-developed system of
citizen/stakeholder engagement. Key gaps identified therefore include the need for: (a) strengthening compliance with
applicable E&S laws related to contractor’s environmental management systems, including occupational and community
health and safety and diligent monitoring of contractors by IAs (and project management consultants, if applicable)
through formal reporting; (b) strengthening of the system of water quality monitoring; and (c) provisions to manage the
physical and economic displacement impacts of civil works on ‘vulnerable’ encroachers/unauthorized occupants in
relation to the activities under the World Bank-financed PforR. However, the Program does not include any activity that
may have significant adverse E&S impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. Overall, the ESSA found that the
E&S policies and legal framework applicable to this sector are largely compatible with the E&S core principles of the PforR.
79.       The following actions recommended in ESSA have been agreed: (a) hire a social specialist and an environmental
specialist at state-level PMU; (b) strengthen E&S provisions in tendering and contracting procedures and undertake real-
time monitoring and reporting throughout the construction and operation period to comply with the E&S provisions; (c)
develop systems to manage impacts related to physical and livelihood impacts in World Bank-financed investments as per
approved provisions including enrollment of vulnerable project affected persons into ongoing government schemes; (d)
develop and enforce site-specific plans on ‘safe work zone’ practices for all Program activities related to SWDs, STPs, and
lake-filling; (e) strengthening of water quality monitoring systems covering both BBMP and BWSSB so that ambient
pollution levels (particularly at the lakes and lake inflows) could be matched with the various SWDs and STP outfalls, to be


18 SEA/SH = Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment.




                                                                                                                            Page 21


                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


able to take remedial actions; and (f) ensure no diversion of treated water from STPs to channels flowing into the
downstream Bannerghatta National Park.
80.       Grievance redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a
Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the
existing program grievance mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints
received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and individuals
may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection
Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and
procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to
address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been
brought directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For
information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s GRS, visit https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on
how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 D. Program Action Plan
  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexprogramactionplan#doctemplate
  Action                                                                                            Completion
  Description         Source        DLI# Responsibility Timing                                      Measurement
  Institutional       Environmental NA   RD, BWSSB,     Other     Before the                        Staff contracted
  Enhancement for     and Social         KSDMA,                   commencement                      and joined duties.
  E&S                 Systems            KSNDMC, MID              of sub-project
  Management: (i)                                                 activities.
  Hiring at PMU
  State-Level: Social
  Specialist and
  Environment
  Specialist; (ii)
  Appointing
  dedicated
  Environmental
  Officers within
  each
  implementing
  agency.
  Develop and         Environmental NA   BWSSB,         Other     Throughout                        Construction Zone
  enforce a           and Social         KSDMA, MID               construction                      Management
  Construction        Systems                                     period.                           (CZM) Plan
  Zone                                                                                              developed and
  Management                                                                                        enforced through
  (CZM) Plan to                                                                                     regular
  mitigate E&S risks                                                                                inspections and
  pertaining to                                                                                     corrective actions
  occupational and                                                                                  to address any


                                                                                                                   Page 22


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


community health                                                                         identified risks
and safety                                                                               effectively.
including traffic
management.
Development and     Environmental    NA     BBMP and        Other       Develop the      Water quality
Implementation      and Social              BWSSB                       Plan within 6    monitoring
of Program          Systems                                             months of        network and plan,
Specific Water                                                          program          Implementation
Quality                                                                 effectiveness;   report.
Monitoring                                                              Implement
Network and                                                             within 2 years
Plan: Design and                                                        of program
implement a                                                             effectiveness.
comprehensive,
program-specific
water quality
monitoring
network for raw
and treated
sewage at STPs,
SWDs and lakes.
Receipt of IAs’     Environmental    NA     BWSSB,          Recurrent   Semi-Annually    Monitoring
monitoring          and Social              KSDMA, MID                                   template for
reports to comply   Systems                                                              semi-annual
with E&S                                                                                 reporting.
provisions
                                                                                         Semi-annual E&S
included in
                                                                                         monitoring
contract
                                                                                         reports submitted
agreements of
                                                                                         till completion of
Program
                                                                                         works.
investments—
during
construction and
O&M phase.
Include in the      Fiduciary        NA     All program     Other       Before           Program-specific
Program's           Systems                 implementing                tendering for    STDs prepared
Standard tender                             agencies                    works.           and utilized for all
documents the                                                                            procurements
World Bank’s E&S                                                                         under the
clauses to ensure                                                                        Program.
E&S, OHS, ESHS,
GBV, and SEA


                                                                                                            Page 23


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


compliance and
risk mitigation,
and ACG for
PforRs.
Develop ICT          Fiduciary        NA     State PMU       Other       Within six        Operationalizes
platform for         Systems                                             months of the     procurement and
monitoring the                                                           Program's         contract
procurement                                                              effectiveness     management
cycle including                                                          and semi-         monitoring
contract                                                                 annual report.    system and
management and                                                                             displays KPIs as
displays                                                                                   per IFSA on its
procurement KPIs                                                                           dashboard, and
on the dashboard                                                                           discloses
as per the IFSA.                                                                           necessary
                                                                                           information in the
                                                                                           public domain.

Submit fiduciary     Fiduciary        NA     BBMP,           Recurrent   Semi-Annually     Submit the semi-
KPIs report as per   Systems                 BWSSB,                                        annual report as
the IFSA table                               KSDMA                                         per the agreed
                                                                                           format in POM.

Establish a          Fiduciary        NA     BBMP, BWSSB     Other       Mechanism         Establish fiduciary
fiduciary            Systems                 and KSDMA                   established       complaint
complaint-                                                               within three      handling
handling                                                                 months of         mechanism.
mechanism at the                                                         program           Submit semi-
Program’s                                                                effectiveness.    annual reports
agencies to                                                              Submit semi-      within the two
redress                                                                  annual reports.   months after the
procurement,                                                                               semi-annual
financial                                                                                  reporting using
management, and                                                                            the formats
corruption-                                                                                provided in the
related                                                                                    POM.
complaints.
BBMP and BWSSB       Fiduciary        NA     BBMP and        Other       Within 12         Conduct study on
to conduct           Systems                 BWSSB                       months of         how fiduciary
studies to assess                                                        Program's         systems can be
various fiduciary                                                        effectiveness.    improved, and
systems                                                                                    implement the
(including                                                                                 study


                                                                                                           Page 24


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


  accounting                                                                                           recommendations
  software) and                                                                                        within a
  implement                                                                                            reasonable
  recommendations                                                                                      timeframe

  Strengthen            Fiduciary          NA      BWSSB             Recurrent     Continuous          Internal audit
  internal audits at    Systems                                                                        strengthened to:
  BWSSB                                                                                                broaden scope,
                                                                                                       include
                                                                                                       qualitative
                                                                                                       aspects, and
                                                                                                       cover a range of
                                                                                                       procurement
                                                                                                       aspects.



 V. RISKS

81.     The overall risk rating is Substantial. The main risks and mitigation measures are summarized below.
82.     Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks is rated Substantial. While BWSSB and BBMP
are gaining experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects, there is limited experience with the PforR
instrument. These risks are mitigated by targeted DLIs, the establishment of a strong PMU, and focused implementation
support from the World Bank, particularly during the early stages of implementation.

83.     Fiduciary risk is rated Substantial affected by the multiplicity of implementing entities which follow acceptable
but varying fiscal rules. Procurement and financial management for these entities fall outside the state departments;
however, these are well defined and while the implementation arrangements are acceptable, they may be defined by
different rules. These risks will be mitigated by a binding Program Action Plan on strengthening fiduciary capacity which
will address gaps and instill fiduciary accountability.
84.      E&S risk is rated Substantial. BBMP and BWSSB have demonstrated high capacity to implement infrastructure
investments at scale, however, as this is the first PforR for the IAs, there is a general lack of experience in implementing
results-based programs. The E&S impacts and related risks will be mitigated through Program Action Plan actions. DLR 1.1
is specifically designed to mitigate E&S related risk at the onset of the Program through an operationalization of an
enhanced social and environmental management system targeting SWDs infrastructure.




                                                                                                                       Page 25


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)



                                                                     ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padpfrannexpolicyandresult#doctemplate
Program Development Objective(s)
Improve water security related municipal services, institutions and financing in Bengaluru.


PDO Indicators by Outcomes


   Baseline                                                                            Closing Period
   Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience
   People provided with safely managed sanitation (Number of people) CRI
   Jun/2025                                                                            Mar/2030
   0                                                                                   2,000,000
     ➢People provided with safely managed sanitation - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Jun/2025                                                                            Mar/2030
   0                                                                                   960,000
     ➢People provided with safely managed sanitation - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Jun/2025                                                                            Mar/2030
   0                                                                                   1,000,000
   People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Number)
   Jun/2025                                                                            Mar/2030
   0                                                                                   4,000,000
     ➢People with enhanced resilience to climate risks - Female (Number)
   Jun/2025                                                                            Mar/2030
   0                                                                                   1,920,000
     ➢People with enhanced resilience to climate risks - Youth (Number)
   Jun/2025                                                                            Mar/2030
   0                                                                                   2,000,000
   Strengthening institutions and integrated planning
   Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented (Text) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                            Mar/2030



                                                                                                           Page 26


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


   Not started                                                                        Implemented
   Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions
   Own source revenue increased (Percentage)
   Aug/2024                                                                           Mar/2030
   0                                                                                  30


Intermediate Indicators by Results Areas


   Baseline                                                                           Closing Period
   Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience
   Storm Water Drain upgraded (Kilometers)
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2030
   0                                                                                  253
   Integrated flood management system strengthened (Number) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2028
   0                                                                                  16
     ➢Institutional enhancement of social and environmental management (Yes/No) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2026
   No                                                                                 Yes
     ➢Zonal nature based solutions completed (Number) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2030
   0                                                                                  8
     ➢Lakes able to receive treated water from Bengaluru (Number) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2028
   0                                                                                  40
     ➢Integrated flood management system completed (Number) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2028
   0                                                                                  16
   Circular economy operationalized (Number) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2030
   0                                                                                  10
     ➢Circular economy sites completed (Number) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                           Mar/2030
   0                                                                                  10


                                                                                                          Page 27


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


  ➢Household sewer connections (Number) DLI
Aug/2024                                                                               Jun/2025
0                                                                                      100,000
  ➢Increase in wastewater reuse (Percentage) DLI
Aug/2024                                                                               Mar/2030
0                                                                                      100
Strengthening water security institutions
Water security system enhanced (Yes/No) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                               Mar/2027
No                                                                                     Yes
  ➢Digital water governance system operationalized (Yes/No) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                               Mar/2027
No                                                                                     Yes
  ➢Integration of advanced storm water modelling (Yes/No) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                               Mar/2027
No                                                                                     Yes
Municipal O&M institutions integrated and professionalized (Yes/No) DLI

Jun/2025                                                                               Mar/2029
No                                                                                     Yes
  ➢Zonal flood management performance score (Number) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                               Mar/2029
0                                                                                      50
  ➢Utility enhancement program score (Number) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                               Mar/2029
0                                                                                      100
  ➢Leaking machine-holes in the SWDs fixed (Text) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                               Mar/2026
Incomplete                                                                             Completed
Office childcare provision provided (Number)
Jun/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      3
Number of women who enrolled their children in newly established childcare centers to save time (Number)
Jun/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      120
Behavior change campaign launched (Yes/No)
Jun/2025                                                                               Dec/2030


                                                                                                              Page 28


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


No                                                                                    Yes
Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented (Yes/No)
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2030
No                                                                                    Yes
  ➢Karnataka Climate and Multi-Hazard & Risk Information System launched (Yes/No) (Yes/No)
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2027
No                                                                                    Yes
  ➢KSDMA operational program established (Yes/No)
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2026
No                                                                                    Yes
  ➢Center of excellence established (Yes/No)
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2028
No                                                                                    Yes
  ➢Mitigation project pipeline created (Amount(USD))
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2029
0                                                                                     50,000,000
  ➢Energy efficiency performance enhancement score (Number)
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2030
0                                                                                     100
Comprehensive water security plan completed (Yes/No)
Jun/2025                                                                              Dec/2030
No                                                                                    Yes
Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions
Own source revenues, financial reporting and transparency improved (Yes/No) DLI
Aug/2024                                                                              Dec/2030
No                                                                                    Yes
  ➢Own Source Revenues of BBMP improved (Percentage) DLI
Aug/2024                                                                              Jun/2025
0                                                                                     45
  ➢Municipal financial reporting and transparency score (Number) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2026
0                                                                                     100
  ➢Own Source Revenue of BWSSB improved (Percentage) DLI
Jun/2025                                                                              Mar/2026
0                                                                                     30
BWSSB’s financial and operational efficiency improved (Yes/No) DLI


                                                                                                      Page 29


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


   Aug/2024                                                                                    Mar/2029
   No                                                                                          Yes
     ➢PPP transaction advisor report completed (Yes/No) DLI
   Aug/2024                                                                                    Jun/2025
   No                                                                                          Yes
     ➢BWSSB has executed energy efficiency investment at Cauvery river (Yes/No) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Mar/2026
   No                                                                                          Yes
     ➢BWSSB has executed performance-based contracts for non revenue water reduction (Yes/No) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Mar/2027
   No                                                                                          Yes
     ➢BWSSB has obtained ISO 50001 certification on energy management (Yes/No) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Mar/2028
   No                                                                                          Yes
     ➢BWSSB has signed a PPP contract (Number) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Mar/2029
   0                                                                                           1
   Financing for addressing disaster and climate risks enhanced (Text) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
   Not started                                                                                 Financing enhanced
     ➢Institutional mechanism for financing disaster and climate risks established (Yes/No) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Mar/2027
   No                                                                                          Yes
     ➢Funds mobilized using market-based disaster risk financing instruments (Amount(USD)) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Mar/2028
   0                                                                                           18,750,000
     ➢Funds mobilized from non-government sources (Amount(USD)) DLI
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Mar/2029
   0                                                                                           18,750,000
   Integrated Financial Management System operationalized (Yes/No)
   Jun/2025                                                                                    Nov/2030
   No                                                                                          Yes



Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI)



                                                                                                                       Page 30


                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)




Period                                                                                    Period Definition
Prior Results                                                                             Prior results
Period 1                                                                                  Year 1
Period 2                                                                                  Year 2
Period 3                                                                                  Year 3
Period 4                                                                                  Year 4
Period 5                                                                                  Year 5



Baseline                   Prior Results            Period 1              Period 2                   Period 3                  Period 4   Period 5
1:Integrated flood management system strengthened (Number )
0                          0                        0                     8                          8                          0         0
0.00                       0.00                     22,000,000.00         31,000,000.00              31,000,000.00              0.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      84,000,000.00                                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation       10.87%
   ➢ 1.1:Institutional enhancement of social and environmental management (Yes/No )
No                         No                       Yes                   No                         No                         No        No
0.00                       0.00                     22,000,000.00         0.00                       0.00                       0.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      22,000,000.00                                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation       2.85%
   ➢ 1.2:Zonal nature based solutions completed (Number )
0                          0                        0                     4                          4                          0         0
0.00                       0.00                     0.00                  12,000,000.00              12,000,000.00              0.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      24,000,000.00                                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation       3.11%
   ➢ 1.3:Lakes able to receive treated water from Bengaluru (Number )
0                          0                        0                     20                         20                         0         0
0.00                       0.00                     0.00                  5,000,000.00               5,000,000.00               0.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      10,000,000.00                                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation       1.29%
   ➢ 1.4:Integrated flood management system completed (Number )
0                          0                        0                     8                          8                          0         0
0.00                       0.00                     0.00                  14,000,000.00              14,000,000.00              0.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      28,000,000.00                                    As a % of Total DLI Allocation       3.62%



                                                                                                                                                        Page 31


                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


2:Circular economy operationalized (Number )
0                        0                         0                     0               9                          0                 10
0.00                     32,000,000.00             1,000,000.00          1,000,000.00    5,500,000.00               0.00              500,000.00
DLI allocation                                     40,000,000.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation               5.18%
  ➢ 2.1:Circular economy sites completed (Number )
0                        0                         0                     0               9                          0                 1
0.00                     0.00                      0.00                  0.00            4,500,000.00               0.00              500,000.00
DLI allocation                                     5,000,000.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.65%
  ➢ 2.2:Household sewer connections (Number )
0                        100,000                   0                     0               0                          0                 0
0.00                     30,000,000.00             0.00                  0.00            0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                     30,000,000.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation               3.88%
  ➢ 2.3:Increase in wastewater reuse (Percentage )
0                        40                        60                    80              100                        0                 0
0.00                     2,000,000.00              1,000,000.00          1,000,000.00    1,000,000.00               0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                     5,000,000.00                          As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.65%
3:Water security system enhanced (Yes/No )
No                       No                        No                    Yes             Yes                        Yes               Yes
0.00                     0.00                      0.00                  35,935,000.00   0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                     35,935,000.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation               4.65%
  ➢ 3.1:Digital water governance system operationalized (Yes/No )
No                       No                        No                    Yes             No                         No                No
0.00                     0.00                      0.00                  15,935,000.00   0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                     15,935,000.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation               2.06%
  ➢ 3.2:Integration of advanced storm water modelling (Yes/No )
No                       No                        No                    Yes             No                         No                No
0.00                     0.00                      0.00                  20,000,000.00   0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                     20,000,000.00                         As a % of Total DLI Allocation               2.59%
4:Municipal O&M institutions integrated and professionalized (Yes/No )
No                       0                         0                     8               8                         O&M institutions   0
                                                                                                                   professionalized
0.00                    0.00                     16,000,000.00           9,000,000.00    9,000,000.00              29,000,000.00      0.00



                                                                                                                                                      Page 32


                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


DLI allocation                                     63,000,000.00                              As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  8.15%
  ➢ 4.1:Zonal flood management performance score (Number )
0                        0                         50                     50                  50                         50                   0
0.00                     0.00                      9,000,000.00           9,000,000.00        9,000,000.00               9,000,000.00         0.00
DLI allocation                                     36,000,000.00                              As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  4.66%
  ➢ 4.2:Utility enhancement program score (Number )
0                        0                         0                      0                   0                          100                  0
0.00                     0.00                      0.00                   0.00                0.00                       20,000,000.00        0.00
DLI allocation                                     20,000,000.00                              As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  2.59%
  ➢ 4.3:Leaking machine-holes in the SWDs fixed (Text )
Incomplete               0                         Completed              0                   0                          0                    0
0.00                     0.00                      7,000,000.00           0.00                0.00                       0.00                 0.00
DLI allocation                                     7,000,000.00                               As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  0.91%
5:Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented (Text )
Not started              0                         KSDMA operational      KCHRIS data model   CoE established            Mitigation project   Energy efficiency in
                                                   program established    established                                    pipeline created     irrigation enhanced
0.00                     0.00                      15,000,000.00          20,000,000.00       17,000,000.00              5,000,000.00         20,000,000.00
DLI allocation                                     77,000,000.00                              As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  9.96%
6:Own source revenues, financial reporting and transparency improved (Yes/No )
No                       Yes                       Yes                    No                  No                         No                   No
0.00                     45,000,000.00             45,000,000.00          0.00                0.00                       0.00                 0.00
DLI allocation                                     90,000,000.00                              As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  11.64%
  ➢ 6.1:Own Source Revenues of BBMP improved (Percentage )
0                        45                        0                      0                   0                          0                    0
0.00                     45,000,000.00             0.00                   0.00                0.00                       0.00                 0.00
DLI allocation                                     45,000,000.00                              As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  5.82%
  ➢ 6.2:Own Source Revenue of BWSSB improved (Percentage )
0                        0                         30                     0                   0                          0                    0
0.00                     0.00                      30,000,000.00          0.00                0.00                       0.00                 0.00
DLI allocation                                     30,000,000.00                              As a % of Total DLI Allocation                  3.88%
  ➢ 6.3:Municipal financial reporting and transparency score (Number )
0                        0                         100                    0                   0                         0                     0



                                                                                                                                                                     Page 33


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


0.00                     0.00                       15,000,000.00             0.00               0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                      15,000,000.00                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation               1.94%
7:BWSSB’s financial and operational efficiency improved (Yes/No )
No                       PPP transaction            Energy efficiency         NRW reduction.     ISO 50001                  PPP concession    0
                         advisor report             investment                                   Certification              awarded
0.00                     6,000,000.00               5,000,000.00              6,000,000.00       3,000,000.00               5,000,000.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      25,000,000.00                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation               3.23%
  ➢ 7.1:BWSSB has executed energy efficiency investment at Cauvery river (Yes/No )
No                       No                         No                        Yes                No                         No                No
0.00                     0.00                       0.00                      6,000,000.00       0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                      6,000,000.00                                 As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.78%
  ➢ 7.2:BWSSB has executed performance-based contracts for non revenue water reduction (Yes/No )
No                       No                         Yes                       No                 No                         No                No
0.00                     0.00                       5,000,000.00              0.00               0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                      5,000,000.00                                 As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.65%
  ➢ 7.3:BWSSB has obtained ISO 50001 certification on energy management (Yes/No )
No                       No                         No                        No                 Yes                        No                No
0.00                     0.00                       0.00                      0.00               3,000,000.00               0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                      3,000,000.00                                 As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.39%
  ➢ 7.4:PPP transaction advisor report completed (Yes/No )
No                       Yes                        No                        No                 No                         No                No
0.00                     6,000,000.00               0.00                      0.00               0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                      6,000,000.00                                 As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.78%
  ➢ 7.5:BWSSB has signed a PPP contract (Number )
0                        0                          0                         0                  0                          1                 0
0.00                     0.00                       0.00                      0.00               0.00                       5,000,000.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      5,000,000.00                                 As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.65%
8:Financing for addressing disaster and climate risks enhanced (Text )
Not started              0                          0                         Funds mobilized    Funds mobilized            Funds mobilized
0.00                     0.00                       0.00                      2,500,000.00       3,750,000.00               3,750,000.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                      10,000,000.00                                As a % of Total DLI Allocation               1.29%
  ➢ 8.1:Institutional mechanism for financing disaster and climate risks established (Yes/No )



                                                                                                                                                         Page 34


                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


No                       0                       0                          Funds mobilized     0                          0                 0
0.00                     0.00                    0.00                       2,500,000.00        0.00                       0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                   2,500,000.00                                   As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.32%
  ➢ 8.2:Funds mobilized using market-based disaster risk financing instruments (Amount(USD) )
0                        0                       0                          0                   Funds mobilized                              0
0.00                     0.00                    0.00                       0.00                3,750,000.00               0.00              0.00
DLI allocation                                   3,750,000.00                                   As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.49%
  ➢ 8.3:Funds mobilized from non-government sources (Amount(USD) )
0                        0                       0                          0                   0                          Funds mobilized   0
0.00                     0.00                    0.00                       0.00                0.00                       3,750,000.00      0.00
DLI allocation                                   3,750,000.00                                   As a % of Total DLI Allocation               0.49%




                                                                                                                                                        Page 35


                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience
People provided with safely managed sanitation (Number of people) CRI
Description                          People provided with access to safely managed sanitation in the 110-village area of Bengaluru.
Frequency                            Annual measurement
Data source                          BWSSB and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using BWSSB’s M&E protocol.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
People provided with safely managed sanitation - Female (Number of people) CRI
Description                          Women provided with access to safely managed sanitation in the 110-village area of Bengaluru.
Frequency                            Annual measurement
Data source                          BWSSB and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using BWSSB’s M&E protocol.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
People provided with safely managed sanitation - Youth (Number of people) CRI
Description                          Youth provided with access to safely managed sanitation in the 110-village area of Bengaluru.
Frequency                            Annual measurement
Data source                          BWSSB and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using BWSSB’s M&E protocol.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
                                     People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure includes: (i) people provided with safely managed
Description
                                     sanitation; (ii) people benefiting from climate resilient storm water drains; (iii) people benefiting from NBS.
Frequency                            Annual measurement
Data source                          BWSSB, BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using BWSSB and BBMP’s M&E protocols.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and BBMP
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people) CRI
                                     Women benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure includes: (a) women provided with safely managed
Description
                                     sanitation, (b) from climate resilient SWDs; (c) women benefiting from NBS.
Frequency                            Annual measurement
Data source                          BWSSB, BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using BWSSB and BBMP’s M&E protocols.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and BBMP
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI
                                     Youth benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure includes: (a) youth provided with safely managed
Description
                                     sanitation, (b) climate resilient SWDs, and (c) NBS.
Frequency                            Annual measurement
Data source                          BWSSB, BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using BWSSB and BBMP’s M&E protocols.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and BBMP
Strengthening water security institutions
Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented (Percent) DLI
Description                          The disaster risk governance institutional reform program is described in DLI 6 and detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          KSDMA and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols for DLI 6 as detailed in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA


                                                                                                                                               Page 36


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions
Own source revenue increased
Description                          The average percent increase in own source revenue of BWSSB and BBMP from a 2024 baseline.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BWSSB and financial statements BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Quantitative data collection using BWSSB and BBMP revenue data.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and BBMP

Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Results Areas
Improving infrastructure and services for enhanced water security and resilience
Stormwater Drain Upgraded (Kilometers)
                                    This indicator measures the number of kilometers of SWD constructed with concrete-lined walls, or
Description                         rehabilitated with concrete-lined walls (or equivalent such as fortifying existing stone masonry storm water
                                    walls.
Frequency                           Annual measurement
Data source                         BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections by the IVA, and quantitative data collection using BBMP’s M&E protocols.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP
Lakes able to receive treated water from Bengaluru (Number) DLI
Description                         This indicator measures the completion of lakes rejuvenated and integrated as part of DLR 1.3.
Frequency                           Annual measurement
Data source                         MI and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections by the IVA, and quantitative data collection using BBMP’s M&E protocols.
Responsibility for Data Collection MI
Integrated flood management system completed (Number) DLI
Description                         This indicator measures the completion of the integrated flood management systems as per DLR 1.3.
Frequency                           Annual measurement
Data source                         BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections by the IVA, and quantitative data collection using BBMP’s M&E protocols.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP
Circular economy sites completed (Number) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the completion of the circular economy sites. This indicator relates directly to DLR
Description
                                    2.1 which is further detailed in the POM.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection   BWSSB and IVA
Institutional enhancement of social and environmental management (Yes/No) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the completion of the institutional enhancement of social and environmental
Description
                                    management as per DLR 1.1.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection   BBMP and IVA
Household sewer connections (Number) DLI
                                This indicator measures household sewer connections and relates directly to DLR 2.2 which is further
Description
                                detailed in the POM.
Frequency                       Annual


                                                                                                                                             Page 37


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Data source                          BWSSB and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and IVA
Zonal nature based solutions completed (Number) DLI
                                     This indicator measures the number of nature-based solutions implemented. This indicator relates directly to
Description
                                     DLR 1.2 which is detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP and IVA
Increase in wastewater reuse (Percentage) DLI
                                     This indicator measures the award of the circular economy sites awarded. This indicator relates directly to
Description
                                     DLR 2.3 which is further detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BWSSB and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection   BWSSB and IVA
Strengthening water security institutions
Municipal O&M institutions integrated and professionalized (Yes/No) DLI
Description                          This indicator measures the completion of the municipal O&M institutions integrated under DLI 4.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BBMP
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP and IVA
Integration of advanced storm water modelling (Yes/No) DLI
Description                          This indicator measures the completion of the Integration of advanced storm water modelling under DLR 3.2.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BBMP and KSDMA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP, KSDMA and IVA
Zonal flood management performance score (Number) DLI
Description                          This indicator measures the annual zonal flood management performance score under DLR 4.1.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BBMP
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP and IVA
Utility enhancement program score (Number) DLI
Description                          This indicator measures the utility enhancement program score under DLR 4.2.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and IVA
Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented (Yes/No)
Description                          This indicator is achieved when DLR 5.1, DLR 5.2, DLR 5.3 and DLR 5.4 have been achieved.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          KSDMA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA



                                                                                                                                          Page 38


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Karnataka Climate and Multi-Hazard and Risk Information System launched (Yes/No)
                                     This indicator measures the completion of DLR 5.2 involving the launch of the Karnataka Climate and Multi-
Description
                                     Hazard and Risk Information System.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          KSDMA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA
Mitigation project pipeline created (Amount(US$))
                                     This indicator measures the creation of a mitigation project investment pipieline as stipulated under DLR 5.4.
Description

Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          KSDMA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA
Energy efficiency performance enhancement score (Number)
                                     This indicator measures the completion of DLR 5.5 involving the energy efficiency performance
Description
                                     enhahncement for MI.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          MI
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection MI and IVA
Leaking machine-holes in the SWDs fixed (Number) DLI
                                     This indicator measures the reduction of machine-hole leakages. This indicator relates directly to DLR 4.3
Description
                                     which is detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and IVA
Comprehensive water security plan completed (Yes/No) DLI
                                     This indicator measures the completion of a comprehensive water security plan covering the Bengaluru
Description
                                     Development Authority Area. The specific requirements are detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Once, upon completion.
Data source                          BBMP and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative review
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP and IVA
Office childcare provision provided (Number)
                                     This indicator measures the establishment and provision of office childcare at BWSSB, BBMP and KSDMA
Description
                                     offices. The requirements for the childcare center are detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Upon completion
Data source                          BWSSB, BBMP and KSDMA
Methodology for Data Collection      Quantitative data collection
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB, BBMP and KSDMA
Women who enrolled their children in newly established childcare centers to save time (Number)
                                     This indicator will measure the number of women who enroll their children in the newly established
Description
                                     childcare centers to save their time.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BWSSB, BBMP and KSDMA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB, BBMP and KSDMA


                                                                                                                                             Page 39


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


Behavior change campaign launched (Yes/No)
Description                          This indicator measures the development and launch of a behavior change campaign as detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Upon launch
Data source                          BWSSB and BBMP
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative review
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and BBMP
Digital water governance system operationalized (Yes/No) DLI
                                     This indicator measures the operationalization of the digital water governance system as per DLR 3.1 and as
Description
                                     detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Once, upon completion
Data source                          BBMP
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP
KSDMA operational program established (Yes/No)
                                     This indicator measures when the KSDMA operational program is established. The requirements are detailed
Description
                                     in the POM.
Frequency                            Upon center being established
Data source                          KSDMA and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections collection using the verification protocols in the POM
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA
KSDMA’s center of excellence established (Yes/No)
Description                          This indicator measures the establishment of the DRM center of excellence, as detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Upon unit being established
Data source                          KSDMA and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections collection using the verification protocols in the POM
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA
Enhancing financial capabilities and resources of key institutions
Municipal Own source revenues improved (Percentage) DLI
Description                          This indicator measures the OSR increase for BBMP as per DLR 6.1 and as detailed in the POM.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BBMP financial statements
Methodology for Data Collection      Quantitative data collection
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP
Own source revenue, financial reporting and transparency improved (Yes/No) DLI
                                     This indicator measures the specific activities to improve municipal financial reporting and transparency as
Description                          specified under DLR 6.3 and as detailed in the POM. The indicator is achieved (Yes) when all the activities
                                     under DLR 6 have been achieved.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BBMP
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP
BWSSB has signed a PPP contract (Number)
Description                          This indicator measures the number of PPP concessions awarded as specified under DLI 7.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection      Qualitative inspections using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
Financing for addressing disaster and climate risks enhanced (Yes/No) DLI
Description                          This indicator measures the specific activities to improve disaster risk and climate adaptation financing


                                                                                                                                           Page 40


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


                                    capacities as specified under DLI 8 and as detailed in the POM. The indicator is achieved (Yes) when all the
                                    activities under DLI 8 have been achieved.
Frequency                           Upon unit being fucntional
Data source                         KSDMA and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA
Own Source Revenue of BWSSB improved (Percentage) DLI
Description                         BWSSB's revenue increased by 30 percent as detailed in DLR 6.2.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection     Quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
BWSSB’s financial and operational efficiency improved (Text) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the improvement of BWSSB’s financial and operational efficiency as specified under
Description                         DLI 7 and as detailed in the POM. The indicator is achieved when all the activities under DLI 7 have been
                                    achieved.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
Funds mobilized from non-GoK sources (Amount (US$))
Description                         This indicator measures the amount of non-GoK capital mobilized, specifically private sector capital.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB and KSDMA
Methodology for Data Collection     Quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB and KSDMA
Municipal financial reporting and transparency score (Number) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the completion of DLR 6.3 involving activities to improve municipal financial
Description
                                    reporting and transparency.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BBMP
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP
PPP transaction advisor report completed (Yes/No) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the completion of DLR 7.4 involving the completion of the PPP transaction advisor
Description
                                    report.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
BWSSB has executed energy efficiency investment at Cauvery river (Yes/No) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the completion of DLR 7.1 involving the execution of the energy efficiency
Description
                                    investment at Cauvery river.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
BWSSB has executed performance-based contracts for non revenue water reduction (Yes/No) DLI
Description                         This indicator measures the completion of DLR 7.2 involving the execution of the performance-based



                                                                                                                                           Page 41


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Water Security and Resilience Program (P506272)


                                    contracts for non revenue water reduction.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
BWSSB has obtained ISO 50001 certification on energy management (Yes/No) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the completion of DLR 7.3 involving the ISO 50001 certification on energy
Description
                                    management.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BWSSB
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BWSSB
Institutional mechanism for financing disaster and climate risks established (Yes/No) DLI
                                    This indicator measures the completion of DLR 8.1 involving the establishment of the institutional
Description
                                    mechanism for financing disaster and climate risks as detailed in the POM.
Frequency                           Upon unit being fucntional
Data source                         KSDMA and IVA
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection KSDMA and IVA
Integrated Financial Management System operationalized (Yes/No)
                                    This indicator measures the operationalization of an integrated financial management system as detailed in
Description
                                    the POM.
Frequency                           Annual
Data source                         BBMP
Methodology for Data Collection     Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification protocols in the POM.
Responsibility for Data Collection BBMP




                                                                                                                                         Page 42


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Verification Protocol Table: Disbursement Linked Indicators (US$ amounts are indicative)

 DLI 1: Integrated flood management system stengthened

                       DLI 1: Total allocation US$84 million
                       DLR 1.1|BBMP|US$2,750,000 per zone (8) achieving institutional enhancement of social and
                       environmental management
 Formula
                       DLR 1.2|BBMP|US$3,000,000 per zone (8) with completed Nature Based Solutions.
                       DLR 1.3|MI|US$250,000 per MI lake (40) able to receive treated water from Bengaluru.
                       DLR 1.4|BBMP|US$1,750,000 upon completion of 16 integrated flood management systems.


                       Definition of scalable: The DLI is scalable, meaning disbursements against partial achievement of results
                       are allowed; consequently, the DLI can pay for the achievement against activities in each watershed or
                       each of the eight zones independently. The DLI includes four DLRs:

                       DLR 1.1|BBMP|US$22 million| Scalable| Institutional Enhancement of Social and Environmental
                       Management| US$2,750,000 per zone achieving compliance with social and environmental criteria
                       including impacts on livelihood, vulnerable populations, community health and safety, construction zone
                       management plan, and appointment of requisite staff.

                       DLR 1.2|BBMP|US$24 million|Nature based solutions competed |Scalable|US$3,000,000 per zone with
                       completed NBS system intervention covering a sub-hydraulic section in each of the 8 zones (scalable). The
                       eight nature based- and other water retention interventions have to be optimized using modelling and
 Description
                       contribute to flood management and/or groundwater recharge. The DLR requires that the total
                       investment on the NBS interventions in all eight zones is at least US$12 million.

                       DLR 1.3|MI|US$10 million|Lakes able to receive treated water from Bengaluru|Scalable|US$250,000
                       per lake in Doddaballapura and Nelamangala areas that receives diverted treated water from Bengaluru.
                       A total of 40 lakes are eligible under DLR 1.3.

                       DLR 1.4|BBMP| US$28 million|Scalable|US$1,750,000 upon completion of the integrated flood
                       management system across 16 distinct areas of Bengaluru. The integration under DLR 1.4 includes
                       concrete lining of 173 km of SWD and rehabilitation of 80 km SWDs, lakes development and integrated of
                       SWDs and lakes. Lake integration includes flood management control measures such as diversion
                       structures, sluice gates, and sensors.


 Data source/
                       BBMP and MI
 Agency


 Verification Entity   Externally hired IVA

                       DLR 1.1: The IVA will conduct desk review and field verification where necessary.
 Procedure             DLR 1.2: The IVA will conduct field verification in each of the completed NBS schemes.
                       DLR 1.3: The IVA will conduct field verification in each of the completed lakes.
                       DLR 1.4: The IVA will conduct field verification.




                                                                                                                             Page 43


                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
DLI 2: Circular economy operationalized
                      DLI 2: Total allocation US$40 million
                      DLR 2.1|BWSSB|US$500,000 per circular economy site completed.
Formula               DLR 2.2|BWSSB|US$300 per new household sewer connection in the 110-village area.
                      DLR 2.3|BWSSB|US$50,000 per percentage point increase in volume (m 3) of reuse of BWSSB’s total
                      treated wastewater over baseline (15 million liter per day)
                      The DLI disburses against circular economy investments which include nine STPs with a combined capacity
                      of 148 MLD and one advanced water treatment plant (5 MLD). Among the STPs, reuse of tertiary treated
                      wastewater, methane capture and biogas generation, solar sludge dryers and long O&M design-build-
                      operate contracts will be demonstrated as stipulated in the verification protocol of the POM. The DLI
                      includes three scalable DLRs:
                      DLR 2.1|Allocation US$5 million|Scalable|US$500,000 per circular economy site completed as per the
                      planned specifications further detailed in the POM. The completion requires that a sludge management
Description           plan is developed for the STPs. There is a total of 10 sites.
                    DLR 2.2|Allocation US$30 million|Scalable|US$300 per new household sewer connection in the 110-
                    village area. The sewer connection will be connected to an operational STP. Target: 100,000 household
                    connections.
                    DLR 2.3|Allocation US$5 million|Scalable|US$50,000 per 1 percent increase in volume of wastewater
                    reuse for commercial and industry purposes over the baseline of 15 MLD as of August 2024. DLR 2.3
                    targets a 100 percent increase in volume of wastewater reused to 30 MLD.
Data source/ Agency BWSSB
Verification Entity Externally hired IVA
                    DLR 2.1: IVA to review available data and conduct sites visits to all 10 sites.
Procedure           DLR 2.2: IVA to conduct field verifiacition of 2-5 percent of the household sewer connections.
                    DLR 2.3: IVA to review wastewater reuse volume and contracts.

DLI 3: Water security system enhanced
                      DLI 3: Total allocation US$36 million
                      DLR 3.1|BBMP|US$16,000,000 (indicative) upon the operationalization of the digital environment and
Formula               water governance system.
                      DLR 3.2|BBMP|US$20,000,000 upon operationalization and integration of advanced stormwater
                      modelling.
                      DLR 3.1|BBMP|Allocation US$16 million| Digital environment and water governance system |
                      US$16,000,000 upon the operationalization of the digital environment and water governance system that
                      includes: (a) streamlining environment and water procedures, such as monitoring, permitting, and
                      inspections; (b) development of industrial wastewater pollution monitoring system; (c) development of a
                      public-facing lake health index; (d) institutionalizing third-party audits and inspections. Required agencies:
                      BBMP, BWSSB, KSPCB.
Description           DLR 3.2|BBMP|Allocation US$20 million|Integrated advanced stormwater modelling |US$20,000,000
                      for operationalization and integration of advanced stormwater modelling. The model is considered
                      operationalized and integrated when it meets the following criteria: (a) the model includes hydrologic and
                      hydraulic models with fine-scale datasets obtained from observations and weather research and
                      forecasting simulations, identification of flood vulnerable areas, the development of flood risk maps for
                      Bengaluru, groundwater trends, and additional urban climate resilience elements; and (b) an interagency
                      modelling unit is established with representation from the police department, BBMP, and KSDMA.
Data source           BBMP
Verification Entity   Externally hired IVA
                      DLR 3.1. Desk review of functionality.
Procedure
                      DLR 3.2: Review of model and modelling unit.

                                                                                                                                 Page 44


                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
DLI 4: Municipal O&M institutions integrated and professionalized

                      DLI 4: Total allocation US$63 million
                      DLR 4.1|BBMP|US$36,000,0000. Each of the eight zones will receive an annual zonal flood management
                      professional score between 1 and 100 based on a zonal performance criteria for BBMP. The annual zonal
Formula               score is equivalent to US$180,000 per point and will be awarded annually for 4 years.
                      DLR 4.2|BWSSB|Utility enhancement program score|US$20,000,000. DLR 4.2 disburses against the
                      progressive achievement of the utility enhacement program score.
                      DLR 4.3|BWSSB|US$7,000,000 upon fixing leaking machine-holes in the SWDs.

                      This DLI applies to all of 860 km of BBMP’s SWDs and 183 lakes. This DLI will disburse against the following
                      three DLRs:
                      DLR 4.1|BBMP|Total allocation US$36 million| Scalable| Zonal Flood Management Professional Score|
                      Each zone receives an annual score of between 1 and 100 to rate the zonal performance on the following
                      key factors: (a) zonal action plan developed by staffed joint coordination cell (weighted score 35 percent);
                      (b) SWD asset management system operational (25 percent); (c) SWD solid waste management action
                      plan (15 percent); (d) zonal operationalization of advanced flood modeling (15 percent); and (e) zonal
                      institutionalization and implementation of the lake health index (10 percent).

                      The DLR applies to all 860 km of BBMP’s SWDs across the city’s eight (8) zones. The annual performance
                      score will pay US$1,125,000 per zone for a score of 50. The annual joint zonal O&M plans will be developed
                      jointly by all concerned agencies and include the planned works linked to available maintenance budgets
                      of BBMP and BWSSB. The scope of the plans includes O&M contracts for solid waste and silt removal in
                      all SWDs and lakes, maintenance of machine-holes and trunklines in the SWDs, and monitoring of
Description           wastewater effluent from STPs and industry and residential buildings along with a follow-up action plan.
                      The specific requirements to the zonal O&M plans will be further specified in the POM.

                      DLR 4.2|BWSSB|US$20 million| Utility enhancement program score| Scalable| The DLR disburses
                      against progress on the utility enhancement program, which includes joint planning (10 percent),
                      customer satisfaction surveys (10 percent), STP effluence assessment of apartment buildings (20 percent),
                      and wastewater treatment efficiency and monitoring (60 percent).

                      DLR 4.3|BWSSB|US$7 million| Fixing machine-hole leakages | US$7,000,000 upon fixing leaking
                      machine-holes located in the 110-village area of the city to stop leakage from machine-holes entering in
                      SWDs in this area.

                      A coordinated O&M approach for all SWDs in Bengaluru is important from a flood management and water
                      scarcity perspective as explained in paragraphs 4, 5 and 7. DLI 4 will institutionalize the O&M approach
                      for SWD for its continued maintenance and upkeep and thus improve the climate adaptation of the city.

Data source           BBMP, BWSSB

Verification Entity   Externally hired IVA

Procedure             DLR 4.1 and DLR 4.2: Desk verification by IVA.
                      DLR 4.3: Field verification by IVA.




                                                                                                                               Page 45


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
DLI 5: Disaster risk governance institutional reform program implemented

                      DLI 5: Total allocation US$77 million
                      DLR 5.1|KSDMA|US$15,000,000 upon establishment of KSDMA operational program.
                      DLR 5.2|KSDMA|US$20,000,000 upon launch of the KCHRIS data model.
Formula
                      DLR 5.3|KSDMA|US$17,000,000 upon the establishment of the Center of Excellence (CoE).
                      DLR 5.4|KSDMA|US$100,000 for each US$1,000,000 of mitigation project pipeline created (scalable up
                      to US$5 million).
                      DLR 5.5|MI|US$20,000,000 against an energy efficiency performance enhancement score.

                      To be eligible for disbursement under DLI 5, KSDMA will demonstrate achievements towards the agreed
                      disaster risk governance reform program which contains the following five DLRs:

                      DLR 5.1|KSDMA|US$15,000,000 upon the establishment of KSDMA’s operational program which include
                      organizational policies, staffing, and budget lines.

                      DLR 5.2|KSDMA|US$20,000,000 upon the launch of the KCHRIS data model.

                      DLR 5.3|KSDMA|US$17,000,000 upon the establishment of the CoE and allied facilities with
Description           infrastructure, organizational policies, staffing, and budget lines.

                      DLR 5.4|KSDMA|US$5,000,000|Scalable|US$100,000 for each US$1,000,000 of mitigation project
                      pipeline created. Under DLR 5.4, the establishment of the KSDMA Mitigation Unit and the development
                      of mitigation project pipeline for US$50 million are prerequisites for the disbursement which is scalable
                      up to US$5 million.

                      DLR 5.5|MI|US$20,000,000| Energy efficiency in irrigation| against the energy efficiency performance
                      score weighted across the following factors: ISO 50001 energy management certification (70 percent),
                      and energy demand flexibility (30 percent).

Data source/
                      RD and KSDMA; MID
Agency


Verification Entity   Externally hired IVA


                      DLR 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3: Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection using the verification
Procedure             protocols in the POM.

                      DLR 5.4: Quantitative data collection of the reported results.

                      DLR 5.5. Desk verification by IVA.




                                                                                                                               Page 46


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
DLI 6: Own source revenues, financial reporting and transparency improved
                      DLI 6: Total allocation US$90 million
                      DLR 6.1|BBMP|US$1,000,000 per percentage point over BBMP’s revenue baseline.
                      Target: 45 percent revenue increase.
Formula               DLR 6.2|BWSSB|US$1,000,000 per percentage point over BWSSB revenue baseline (scalable). Target: 30
                      percent revenue increase.
                      DLR 6.3|BBMP|US$15,000,000 against a municipal financial reporting and transparency score.


                      The GoK issued Notification No. FD 18 SAD 2021 on March 10, 2022, making FBM for BBMP. DLI 6 will
                      incentivize BBMP to comply with certain sections of the rules to improve OSRs, financial reporting, and
                      transparency. The DLI will include three DLRs.

                      DLR 6.1|BBMP|US$45 million| Scalable| Improved Own Source Revenues|US$45,000,000 will disburse
                      against the incremental increase in BBMPs OSR receipts. The DLR is scalable up to the targeted 45 percent
                      increase over the FY2023/24 baseline. Definition of BBMP’s OSR for the purpose of measuring DLR 6.1
                      includes: (a) property tax excluding cess payable including interest and penalty, (b) advertisement taxes
                      or fee, (c) entertainment tax, (d) non-tax revenues, and (e) other revenue receipts (excluding any grants
                      or transfers from state and central governments).

Description           DLR 6.2|BWSSB|US$30 million|Scalable|Improved Own Source Revenue|US$30,000,000 will disburse
                      against the incremental increase in BWSSB’s OSR receipts collected (excluding state and central grants)
                      provided that cost recovery ratio is equal to or greater than 1. The DLR is scalable up to the targeted 30
                      percent increase over the FY2023/24 baseline. Definition of BWSSB’s OSR for purpose of disbursement
                      will be all operating revenue from water and sewer-related charges such as tariffs, inflation indexation,
                      improved collection, revenue from sale of treated water.

                      DLR 6.3|BBMP|US$15 million|Scalable|US$15,000,000 against a financial reporting and transparency
                      score. The DLR is scalable and disburses against BBMP improving financial reporting as per the FBM rules
                      6 and 8, that is asset register and maintenance plan (40 percent), and publishing annual reports covering
                      management discussion and analysis, annual performance review, and audited financial statements (60
                      percent).

Data source/
                      BBMP and BWSSB financial statements and IVA
Agency

Verification Entity   Externally hired IVA

Procedure
                      Desk review of the reported evidence.

DLI 7: BWSSB’s financial and operational efficiency improved
                      DLI 7: Total allocation US$25 million distributed across five DLRs.
                      DLR 7.1|BWSSB|US$6,000,000 upon executing the Performance Based Contracts for NRW reduction.
                      DLR 7.2|BWSSB|US$5,000,000 upon executing the energy efficiency investment at river Cauvery.
Formula               DLR 7.3|BWSSB|US$3,000,000 upon obtaining ISO 50001 certification on energy management.
                      DLR 7.4|BWSSB|US$6,000,000 upon completion of the PPP transaction advisor’s project feasibility
                      report.
                      DLR 7.5|BWSSB|US$5,000,000 upon signing a PPP contract.
Description           DLI 7 includes the following five DLRs:

                                                                                                                             Page 47


                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                      DLR 7.1|BWSSB|US$6 million| Disburses against BWSSB executing performance based contracts for
                      NRW reduction. The contracts will cover at least 100 km of pipeline.
                      DLR 7.2| BWSSB|US$5 million| Disburses against BWSSB executing energy efficiency investment at
                      river Cauvery.
                      DLR 7.3| BWSSB|US$3 million| Disburses against BWSSB obtaining ISO 50001 certification on energy
                      management. BWSSB will be the first in the country to meet the ISO certification.
                      DLR 7.4| BWSSB|US$6 million|Disburses against BWSSB official completion of the PPP transaction
                      advisor’s project feasibility report.
                      DLR 7.5| BWSSB|US$5 million|Disburses against BWSSB signing a PPP contract.
Data source/
                      BWSSB
Agency
Verification Entity   Externally hired IVA

Procedure             Desk review and field verification of the reported results.

DLI 8: Financing for addressing disaster and climate risks enhanced
                      DLI 8: Total allocation US$10 million distributed across three DLRs.
                      DLR 8.1|KSDMA|US$2,500,000 upon establishment of institutional mechanism for financing disaster
                      and climate risks.
Formula               DLR 8.2|KSDMA|US$200,000 for each US$1,000,000 mobilized using market-based disaster risk
                      financing instruments.
                      DLR 8.3|KSDMA|US$200,000 for each US$1,000,000 mobilized from non-GoK sources to the blended
                      finance facility.
                      DLI 8 includes the following three DLRs:
                      DLR 8.1|KSDMA|US$2,500,000 will be disbursed when KSDMA has established institutional mechanism
                      for financing disaster and climate risks.
Description           DLR 8.2|KSDMA|US$3,750,000|US$200,000 for each US$1,000,000 mobilized using market-based
                      disaster risk financing instruments to complement the State Disaster Risk Management Fund.
                      DLR 8.3|KSDMA|US$3,750,000|US$200,000 for each US$1,000,000 mobilized from various non-GoK
                      sources to the blended finance facility.
Data source/
                      KSDMA
Agency
Verification Entity   Externally hired IVA
                      DLR 8.1: Qualitative inspections and quantitative data collection as per the POM’s verification protocols.
Procedure
                      DLR 8.2, 8.3: Quantitative data collection of the reported results.




                                                                                                                              Page 48


                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
