Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 08/20/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05118




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 29, 2025                                                                                              Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P506027                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      NSCSIPH                      2026

                     Operation Name            Incentivizing Nutrition-Sensitive and Climate-Smart Investments among Poor Households

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Angola                    Angola                                  EASTERN AND                  Social Protection & Jobs
                                                                                       SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       FAS Local Development Institute (FAS-   30-Jan-2026
                                               IDL)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     13-May-2025               2,755,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Improve access to nutrition services and climate-smart income generating activities amongst social safety net program
                     beneficiaries, and generate evidence of the suitability of these measures for scale-up.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project will finance the design and piloting of an incentive scheme for select Kwenda cash transfer program
                     beneficiaries living in climate-vulnerable areas with poor child nutrition outcomes. The first component will focus on
                     financial incentives to promote the adoption of nutrition-sensitive services in the context of maternal, newborn, and
                     child health. The second component will support the development of income-generating activities centered around
                     reducing community exposure to climate risks. The project will help design and test cost-effective and scalable incentive
                     models for these interventions, and develop operational tools to facilitate their integration into the broader Kwenda
                     program.

                    Aug 29, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)




                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Project will be implemented in urban and rural areas for at least 3,000 poor and vulnerable households identified
                     under the Kwenda Projects (P169779) and (P181495) areas in the provinces of Huambo and Cunene, equivalent to
                     approximately 15,000 individuals, elected among existing or potential Kwenda recipient. However, at this stage, the
                     specific location of project activities has yet to be defined. Given its national coverage, environmental and social (E&S)
                     contexts will differ among the specific project locations and subprojects.
                     Although Angola has a similar GDP per capita to lower-middle-income countries (LMICs), its poverty rates and labor
                     market indicators are closer to low-income countries. Angola’s wealth has minimally benefitted its population, with
                     32.3% of the 30.8 million population (around 10 million) characterized as poor in 2018-19. This is particularly true for
                     rural areas where poverty rates (54.7%) are almost three times higher than in urban areas (17.8%). The poor and
                     vulnerable, especially women, are primarily engaged in self-employment in urban and rural areas. Gender inequality is a
                     crucial driver of poverty and vulnerability in Angola.
                     Chronic malnutrition among children under five years is the fourth highest in Africa, evidenced by a stunting rate of 43.2
                     percent. Uptake of positive family practices is another major challenge: Only 25 percent of births are registered, 52
                     percent of mothers do not initiate breastfeeding early, and only 11 percent of children benefit from early childhood
                     education. In addition, only 58 percent and 52 percent of children have access to basic drinking water and basic
                     sanitation, respectively. In this context, the main cause of death in children under five in Angola are diarrheal diseases.
                     Maternal and child mortality rates at 44 and 68 respectively per 1,000 live births are double the LMIC average.
                     Immunization rates are also alarmingly low: 40 percent of children have never been immunized.



Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by FAS Local Development Institute (FAS-IDL). FAS-IDL will implement all activities
                     related to Components 1, 2 and 3. FAS-IDL, a semi-autonomous government institute under the supervision of MAT, is
                     currently leading the implementation of the Kwenda project (P169779) and the recently approved project P181495-
                     Enhancing the Social Protection System for Human Capital and Resilience Project, both under the World Bank's ESF,
                     whose E&S risk is rated as Moderate. The E&S performance of Kwenda has been consistently rated as Satisfactory since
                     March 2021. Since 2020, FAS E&S team has been institutionalized and is transversal to all projects/programs
                     implemented by this institution. Currently, FAS-IDL E&S team includes one social specialist, one social assistant and one
                     environmental assistant. Regarding the environmental specialist, FAS holds a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) of
                     partnership and technical support with other World Bank's financed project (P166805, Electricity Sector Improvement
                     and Access Project) under Ministry of Energy and Water (MINEA) that has been supporting the ongoing activities of
                     Kwenda. For the recently approved project P181495 there is the provision in ESCP of one Environmental Technical
                     Assistant, one Social Specialist, one Social Technical Assistant and one full-time Health and Safety Specialist located at
                     FAS-IDL. The FAS E&S team presents a growing capacity to implement projects following the Bank's environmental and
                     social standards (ESSs), namely developing and implementing E&S risk management plans, supervising small-scale works
                     for the rehabilitation of CASIs, engaging with relevant stakeholders, particularly vulnerable groups (including
                     ethnolinguistic minorities), and developing and implementing a robust GRM. Comprehensive support to FAS for
                     institutional capacity at all levels will be included in the ESCP, building on the ongoing support provided by the Bank in
                     the scope of the Kwenda’s project.




                    Aug 29, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)



                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                          Low
                     The environmental risk rating for the Project is considered low at this stage, given that Project activities are not
                     expected to result in significant impacts on the environment. The Project will pilot the provision of cash transfer top-
                     ups (i.e., increasing the amount of transfers) for Kwenda IBRD financed project P169779 - Strengthening the National
                     Social Protection System Project (Cash Transfer and its continuing project P181495 - Enhancing the Social Protection
                     System for Human Capital and Resilience, beneficiary households, focused on pregnant women, lactating mothers,
                     and children under the age of five, who follow a set of positive health and nutrition practices, such as regular health
                     care appointments, vaccination, and dietary diversity for kids. The project will also include pilot activities to support
                     the development of climate-friendly income-generating activities (IGAs) that can both generate revenues for poor
                     households, while reducing community exposure to climate risks. For this activities the package of support will
                     include a combination of: (i) technical and business skills trainings, (ii) financing to launch the new activity, (iii)
                     coaching and mentoring, and (iv) facilitation of savings groups. A key component it is also planned on cover the cost
                     of consultants for effective project management and monitoring of activities of the project. The Project will not
                     finance any type of civil works or, direct finance infrastructure investments. Technical assistance activities will
                     consider the elements of the ESF as applicable. All activities will be implemented by FAS-IDL PIU that has a strong
                     reputation for successfully implementing Kwenda since 2020, strong leadership in ESF aspects.




Public Disclosure
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating for the Project is considered Moderate (M) at this stage, given that Project activities are not
                     expected to result in significant adverse impacts on the social context. It could be revised during implementation, if
                     needed. Social risks and impacts could include (1) localized conflicts over cash transfers and project benefits (e.g.,
                     between eligible and ineligible persons or within households); (2) GBV/SEA/SH risks and impacts including potential
                     requests for sex in exchange for inclusion as beneficiaries, and intra-household conflict over payments leading to
                     GBV; (3) socio-cultural issues arising from implementing the program in IP/SSAHUTL communities; (4) risk of elite-
                     capture of benefits, particularly if eligibility criteria are not disseminated in a transparent way; (5) risk of potential
                     exclusion from project benefits due to lack of access to identification documents (particularly in rural areas) and (6)
                     there may be security risks associated with beneficiaries being robbed. The IP/SSAHUTL communities in southern
                     Angola are amongst the most marginalized and vulnerable populations in the country, and the impacts of drought in
                     recent years have exacerbated the vulnerability of such communities. With the focus on drought-prone areas and
                     measures to protect vulnerable households from climate shocks, the project will be operating in communities that are
                     marginalized and where provision of services is constrained due to remote locations and limited infrastructure.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant



                    Aug 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)



                      For the P181495 project, FAS-IDL will prepare a Generic Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the
                      project, including, as annexes, a Labor Management Plan (LMP) and a GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan (AP). This plan will also
                      include a procedure to determine the eligibility of activities and subprojects for financing under the project using
                      criteria excluding high and substantial-risk activities or subprojects. The ESMP shall be finalized no later than one
                      month after the Effective Date. Considering the nature of activities for the proposed project the same instruments
                      produced for and by the P181495 project shall be used. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and a
                      updated Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared and disclosed by Appraisal. The SEP outlines means of
                      consulting stakeholders, sharing information, and describing a GRM.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The project will adopt a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), based on the one developed and updated for the
                      existing P181495 approved in May 24, which will be updated and adapted for the new project to ensure continuous,
                      inclusive and meaningful stakeholder engagement (including with vulnerable groups). The SEP will include
                      differentiated measures to allow the effective participation of those identified as disadvantaged or vulnerable (e.g.,
                      the elderly, persons with disabilities, female-headed households, members of IP communities, and other vulnerable
                      groups). The PIU will carry out stakeholder engagement activities during project preparation, which will be reflected
                      in the updated SEP to be disclosed prior to Appraisal. The SEP will also include an outline for the ongoing
                      implementation of the Kwenda project’s GM. The GM also includes a specific GBV and SEA/SH grievance procedure to
                      address potential GBV and SEA/SH cases in a confidential manner and adopt a survivor-centered approach.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      The project will involve direct, contracted, primary supply and community workers. To ensure fair labor practices and
                      adequate health and safety conditions for the project workers during the implementation of the project P181495, the
                      borrower will prepare Labor Management Procedures as an Annex to the Project’s Generic ESMP, which shall be
                      finalized no later than one month after the Effective Date and will be used for this project (P506027) . The LMP will
                      address labor requirements applicable to all workers in line with Angolan regulation and ESS2, detail how workers will
                      be managed throughout the project life cycle, include guidelines for a worker's GRM and provide details on the
                      selection process for the community workers. The GBV/SEA/SH AP prepared for the project will ensure that any risks
                      in the labor context are adequately addressed. A CoC on SEA/SH for all workers is expected to be in place.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The activities financed under this project will require water and energy consumption. The required resource amounts
                      are unknown at the current stage but are anticipated to be reduced. The activities financed under the project may
                      generate minimal quantities of non-hazardous waste similar to domestic waste. The P181495 Project’s Generic ESMP
                      will include measures to optimize energy use, avoid or minimize water usage and manage nonhazardous wastes in an
                      environmentally sound and safe manner, as specified in the WBG Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines and
                      will be applicable to the current project as needed.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Cash transfer and productive inclusion activities entail potential community H&S risks. Main risks include potential
                      increase in GBV around the receipt of cash transfers by women (within households or at payment points), SEA/SH


                    Aug 29, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)



                      risks linked to sexual favors in exchange for registration, and risks related to the use of armed forces (police) to
                      ensure security during cash transfers (these are expected to be minor considering the experience with Kwenda). The
                      SEA/SH risks are exacerbated in the context of communities affected by drought, where there are reports of women
                      engaging in survival sex. The project will address the SEA/SH risks according to the level of risk, including an
                      accountability and response framework to handle allegations of SEA/SH and disciplinary actions for violations of the
                      CoC by project workers. The measures to manage the risks associated with SEA/SH and the use of armed forces will
                      be included in the Project’s Generic ESMP. The PIU is prepared to monitor such risk

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                     Not Currently Relevant

                      The project is not expected to involve land acquisition leading to economic or physical displacement, nor access
                      restrictions associated with land use. No productive inclusion activity will be approved if it should involve economic or
                      physical displacement (land acquisition/land take) or if there are any grievances about land currently being filed or
                      unresolved. Should there be a situation where land acquisition results in economic or physical displacement, then the
                      project will prepare, consult upon and disclose Resettlement Plans (RPs) including a livelihoods restoration plan
                      developed in accordance with ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                      Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project does not anticipate financing any activities that might interfere with or result in the loss of biodiversity
                      values or living natural resources.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The project will be implemented in Cunene province aiming to reach the poorest and most vulnerable households.
                      IP/SSAHUTLCs, such as the San and other minority indigenous groups present primarily in this province, may be
                      registered and eligible for the cash transfers and productive inclusion activities. The project will also screen for other
                      groups that may meet the requirements of ESS7. Special arrangements will be developed and integrated into an IPP
                      which will be updated for this project (based on the P169779, which already has an IPPF/IPP being implemented). The
                      project GM will be culturally appropriate and accessible to these groups. Once the presence of IP/SSAHUTLCs is
                      confirmed in specific areas of intervention of the project, IPPs - or equivalent - will be prepared, consulted upon,
                      cleared by the Bank and disclosed. Additional measures steam from the upcoming IP Overview Assessment, along
                      with agreed measures from national IP workshop action plan will add to monitoring of it.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                           Not Currently Relevant

                      The activities financed under the project are not expected to interfere with cultural heritage values or sites.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The Project is not expected to involve Financial Intermediaries.




                    Aug 29, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       Currently, the use of the Borrower E&S framework is not anticipated. During project implementation, an assessment
                       of the Borrower framework will be conducted to identify areas where its requirements are not materially different
                       from the ESSs, aiming to transition to reliance on such a framework.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       The use of common approach is not expected under the proposed Trust Fund.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     This project will use the E&S instruments prepared for P181495 project considering that the activities are similar and
                     complementary and do not pose additional E&S risks.



Public Disclosure
                     An ESCP and updated SEP, including a GM, will be prepared, consulted, and disclosed by Appraisal.

                     A Project’s Generic ESMP including, as annexes, a LMP, a GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan is being prepared, and will be
                     consulted and disclosed no later than one (1) month after the Effective Date of the P181495 project. An Indigenous
                     Peoples Plan (IPP) prepared (based on the IPP under implementation for Kwenda project P169779), consulted upon,
                     and disclosed once the presence of IP/SSAHUTLCs is confirmed in specific areas of intervention of the project.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Alex Kamurase                          Title:          Senior Social Protection Specialist

                      Email:                  akamurase@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Guillaume Kroll                        Job Title:      Social Protection Specialist

                      Email:                  gkroll@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Aylin Isik-Dikmelik                    Job Title:      Senior Economist



                    Aug 29, 2025                                                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Incentivizing Nutrition-sensitive And Climate-smart Investments Among Poor Households (P506027)



                      Email:                  aisikdikmelik@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                           Alex Kamurase, Guillaume Kroll, Aylin Isik-Dikmelik

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Flavia Gabriela Oyo Franca

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava




Public Disclosure




                    Aug 29, 2025                                                                                                 Page 8 of 8
