Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized      Phase 1 of the Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (MPA)
                               Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa
                                                           Region
                                                           P506439




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                            Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                                                    Appraisal Version
                                                         July 2025
Contents
List of Tables............................................................................................................................... ii
List of Acronyms......................................................................................................................... iii
1. Introduction and Project Description ....................................................................................... 1
2. Objective/Description of SEP ................................................................................................. 2
3. Stakeholder identification and analysis ................................................................................... 2
   3.1 Methodology ..................................................................................................................... 2
   3.2. Affected parties and other interested parties ................................................................... 2
   3.3. Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups .............................................................. 6
4. Stakeholder Engagement Program ........................................................................................ 8
   4.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation ........................... 8
   4.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools, and techniques for stakeholder
   engagement ........................................................................................................................... 9
   4.3. Stakeholder engagement plan ......................................................................................... 9
   4.4. Reporting back to stakeholders.......................................................................................12
5. Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities ...........12
   5.1. Resources ......................................................................................................................12
   5.2. Management functions and responsibilities.....................................................................15
6. Grievance Mechanism...........................................................................................................15
   6.1. Description of GM ...........................................................................................................16
7. Monitoring and Reporting ......................................................................................................19
   7.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported ...........................19
   7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups.............................................................................19
Annexes I ..................................................................................................................................21




                                                                                                                                               i
                                                   List of Tables
Table 1. List of identified stakeholders and potential interests in the project ............................... 3
Table 2. List vulnerable group that may be interested or affected by the project......................... 7
Table 3. Stakeholder engagement plan .....................................................................................10
Table 4. Costing of stakeholder engagement activities ..............................................................13
Table 5. Stakeholder engagement indicators ............................................................................19
Table 6. Summary of Stakeholder Consultation Minutes ...........................................................21




                                                                                                                          ii
                              List of Acronyms
AFE          Eastern and Southern Africa

AfDB         African Development Bank

AfWASA       African Water and Sanitation Association

AIP          African Water Investment Partnership

AMCOW        African Ministers Council on Water

AUDA-NEPAD   African Union Development Agency - New Partnership for Africa’s
             Development

CEO          Chief Executive Officer

ESAWAS       Eastern and Southern Africa Water and Sanitation Regulators Association

ESF          Environmental and Social Framework

ESS          Environmental and Social Safeguards

GM           Grievance Mechanism

GWP SA       Global Water Partnership Southern Africa

HR           Human Resources

IGAD         Intergovernmental Agency for Development

M&E          Monitoring and Evaluation

MPA          Multi Phased Approach

PASA         Pan African Sanitation Association

PIU          Project Implementation Unit

SADC GMI     Southern African Ground Water Management Institute

SEAH         Sexual Exploitation and Harassment

TOC          Theory of Change

UNEP         United Nations Environmental Programme

UNFPA        United Nations Fund for Population Agency

UNHABITAT    United Nations Human Settlements Programme


                                                                                       iii
UNICEF   United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund

WASH     Water Sanitation and Health

WHO      World Health Organization




                                                                  iv
                              1. Introduction and Project Description

African states have recorded some positive achievements in addressing Water Sanitation and
Hygiene (WASH) issues and making progress towards the water sanitation and hygiene related
Sustainable Development Goals and Agenda 20631 targets. Despite these achievements,
universal access to clean water and adequate sanitation remains a challenge for many African
citizens. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) and United Nations International
Children’s (UNICEF), approximately 400 million people in Sub-Saharan Africa lack access to
basic drinking water services, and 779 million lack basic sanitation facilities including about 208
million that still practice open defecation2. Efforts to realize universal access for all face
numerous challenges. Key among these are the large financial gaps to meet the investment
requirements, the capacity of service providers and the efficiency, quality and reliability of
services and limited participation of some actors.

The level of investment required to achieve the Africa Water Vision 2025 was estimated at USD
64 billion per year, or around USD 50 per capita per year3. Generally, it is difficult to attract
investments in water and sanitation infrastructure in Africa because of the high perceived risks
in the sector. Strengthening governance and institutional capacities is a critical step in
addressing part of the challenge to attract investments in the sector and cost effectively and
efficiently deliver services. The Regional Phase of the Accelerating Access to WASH in the
Eastern and Southern Africa Region (P506439) aims to improve governance, institutional
capacities and resource mobilization for water and sanitation service delivery in the Eastern and
Southern Africa (AFE) region.

The Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region Project
comprises the following components:
   1. Strengthening Platforms to Accelerate Access to WASH
   2. Advancing Reforms, Governance and Regulation
   3. Improving Service Delivery Performance
   4. Leveraging financing for climate-resilient WASH investments

The project development objective is to improve governance, institutional capacities and resource
mobilization for climate-resilient water and sanitation service delivery in the AFE region.
Specifically, the project will be implemented in the following countries that participate in the MPA,
namely Angola, Burundi, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Somalia, South Sudan,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Union of the Comoros Islands, Tanzania, and Zambia,
and for selected activities other Eastern and Southern African countries that may express interest
to participate in the project.



1
  https://au.int/en/agenda2063/overview
2
  UNICEF and WHO. 2022. Progress on drinking water, sanitation and hygiene in Africa 2000-2020: Five years into
the SDGs, Accessed from https://www.unicef.org/media/147516/file/Africa-WASH-regional-snapshot-2022.pdf on
2nd July, 2025.
3
  Farnault, A. and Sarr, K. 2024. Diversifying sources of finance for water in Africa, Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development Environment Directorate, Accessed from
https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2024/08/diversifying-sources-of-finance-for-
water-in-africa_2b308e53/114791fd-en.pdf on 2nd July, 2025.

                                                                                                                   1
The Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region is being prepared
under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF). Per Environmental and
Social Standard ESS10 on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, the
implementing agencies should provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and
accessible information, and consult with them in a culturally appropriate manner, which is free of
manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, or intimidation.



                              2. Objective/Description of SEP

The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including
public information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP
outlines the ways in which the project team will communicate with stakeholders and includes a
mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about
project activities or any activities related to the project.

                        3. Stakeholder identification and analysis
3.1 Methodology
In order to meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for
stakeholder engagement:
• Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the project will be arranged during
  the whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference,
  coercion, or intimidation.
• Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed
  among all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating
  stakeholder feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns.
• Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
  communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects is
  inclusive. All stakeholders at all times are encouraged to be involved in the consultation process.
  Equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is
  the key principle underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special attention is given to
  vulnerable groups that may be at risk of being left out of project benefits, particularly women,
  the elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers and communities,
  and the cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.
• Flexibility: Due to cost and time constraints, face-to-face consultations will be complemented by
  various forms of internet or phone-based consultations.

3.2. Affected parties and other interested parties 1
Affected parties include local communities, community members, and other parties that may be
subject to direct impacts from the Project. Specifically, the following individuals and groups fall
within this category (Table 1):




                                                                                                   2
Table 1. List of identified stakeholders and potential interests in the project


 No.            Stakeholder category                            Stakeholder interests

     1. Ministries responsible for Finance,          •   Efficient allocation and disbursement of
        infrastructure and WASH in MPA                   public funds for WASH infrastructure
        countries                                    •   Public-private partnerships and mobilisation
                                                         of WASH investments
                                                     •   WASH infrastructure development and
                                                         national economic growth
                                                     •   Alignment of the project outcomes with
                                                         national development plans and WASH
                                                         strategies
                                                     •   Cost      recovery,    affordability, financial
                                                         sustainability of services and lowering risk of
                                                         WASH investments
                                                     •   Credit worthiness of public utilities and
                                                         operators
                                                     •   Compliance with national legislation and
                                                         international    financial    standards    and
                                                         frameworks
                                                     •   Fiscal impact and returns on investment
                                                     •   Provision of water and sanitation services to
                                                         underserved and non serviced rural and
                                                         growing urban and peri-urban populations
                                                     •   Revenue generation and cost-effective and
                                                         efficient service delivery
                                                     •   WASH emergency preparedness
                                                     •   Public health
                                                     •   Groundwater protection and management
                                                     •   Addressing non-serviced, rural and informal
                                                         settlements service coverage gaps
                                                     •   Sustainable and resilient WASH systems
     2. Regional and national associations of        •   Service delivery efficiency and quality
        water and sanitation service providers,          assurance
        utilities and regulators                     •   Access to finance and infrastructure
                                                         upgrades
                                                     •   Tariff setting and cost recovery mechanisms
                                                     •   Regulatory compliance and enforcement
                                                     •   Institutional capacity building and technical
                                                         support
                                                     •   Data and performance monitoring
                                                     •   Stakeholder engagement and accountability
                                                     •   Innovation and technology adoption
     3. Regional Economic Communities                •   Alignment with regional priorities
        (RECs) and bodies (IGAD, EAC, SADC           •   Regional    policy    harmonization        and
        and COMESA)                                      integration
                                                     •   Transboundary water management             and
                                                         cooperation



                                                                                                           3
No.         Stakeholder category                        Stakeholder interests

                                             •    Facilitation of investment in regional WASH
                                                 infrastructure
                                             •   Knowledge         sharing     and     capacity
                                                 development
                                             •   Monitoring and tracking of regional goals,
                                                 continental Agenda 2063 targets and SDGs
                                             •   Coordination between member states for joint
                                                 WASH initiatives and regional studies
                                             •   Mobilization of resources for regional
                                                 programs and priorities
  4. Organs of the African Union             •   Alignment to continental and regional policies
                                                 and integration priorities
                                             •   Promoting peace, security, and development
                                                 through equitable access to water
                                             •   Supporting regional integration through
                                                 infrastructure and service connectivity and
                                                 policy alignment and coherency
                                             •   - Capacity building of African Union member
                                                 states
                                             •   Advocacy for increased WASH financing at
                                                 continental and global levels
                                             •   Transboundary water governance and
                                                 collaboration
                                             •   Facilitation of investment in regional WASH
                                                 infrastructure
                                             •   Regional knowledge sharing and capacity
                                                 development
                                             •   Monitoring and tracking of global, continental
                                                 and regional WASH goals and facilitating
                                                 data sharing at a continental level
                                             •   Coordination between member states for joint
                                                 WASH initiatives
                                             •   Mobilization of resources for regional
                                                 programs, projects and priorities

  5. United     Nations   Agencies    and    •   Supporting national and regional efforts to
     Multilateral Development Banks (World       achieve SDG 6
     Health Organisation (WHO), UNICEF,      •   Promoting rights-based approaches and
     United       Nations   Environmental        inclusion in WASH programming
     Programme (UNEP), United Nations        •   Policy guidance, and capacity building
     Fund for Population Agency (UNFPA),     •   Facilitating access to international funding
     United Nations Human Settlements            and partnerships
     Programme (UNHABITAT), African          •   Strengthening data systems and supporting
     Development Bank (AfDB))                    monitoring and evaluation
                                             •   Advocating for gender equality, child welfare,
                                                 and environmental sustainability




                                                                                                  4
No.          Stakeholder category                        Stakeholder interests

                                              •   Supporting integrated water resources
                                                  management    and    climate adaptation
                                                  strategies

  6. Transboundary water authorities, basin   •   Equitable and sustainable use of shared
     management       organizations    and        water resources
     corridor agencies                        •   Development        and     implementation     of
                                                  integrated basin and transboundary aquifer
                                                  management plans
                                              •   Shared surface and ground water resources
                                                  protection and preservation of ecosystem
                                                  services
                                              •   Coordination        across     countries     for
                                                  infrastructure and service delivery
                                              •   Implementing        transboundary      projects,
                                                  mobilizing finance managing investments in
                                                  regional WASH projects and programs
                                              •   Facilitating data sharing and joint progress
                                                  monitoring between member states
                                              •   Development of legal and institutional
                                                  framework       for     transboundary     water
                                                  cooperation

  7. Rural and peri-urban water operators     •   Access to funding, technology, and training
     and community       WASH service         •   Sustainable and affordable business and
     providers                                    investment models
                                              •   Broad participation in planning and decision-
                                                  making
                                              •   Capacity building and training to maintain and
                                                  manage small-scale systems
                                              •   Inclusion in policy development and
                                                  protection from prohibitive regulation
                                              •   Inclusion in national and regional WASH
                                                  frameworks and participation in WASH
                                                  platforms

  8. Local authorities and municipalities     •   Provision of water and sanitation services to
                                                  underserved and non serviced rural and
                                                  growing urban and peri-urban populations
                                              •   Revenue generation and cost recovery
                                              •    Resource efficient and cost-effective service
                                                  delivery
                                              •   Integration of WASH into local development
                                                  and land-use planning
                                              •   -Staff and institutional capacity development
                                                  for service delivery
                                              •   Emergency preparedness and response to
                                                  droughts and floods



                                                                                                     5
 No.           Stakeholder category                          Stakeholder interests

                                                  •   Citizen engagement and participatory
                                                      planning
                                                  •   Addressing WASH issues in informal
                                                      settlements and service coverage gaps

    9. WASH civil society organizations           •   Equitable and inclusive access to WASH
                                                      Promotion of hygiene behavioral change and
                                                      WASH awareness and education
                                                  •   Citizen engagement and participatory
                                                      planning
                                                  •   Capacity building of rural and community
                                                      operators
                                                  •   Monitoring policy implementation and service
                                                      performance
                                                  •   Welfare of vulnerable groups including
                                                      people with disabilities, women, children and
                                                      the elderly
                                                  •   Collaboration with governments, private
                                                      sector, local governments and leadership and
                                                      other actors on service delivery

        Private sector WASH operators and         •   Access to WASH markets
        service providers                         •   Clear      regulatory     frameworks        and
                                                      environment
                                                  •   Appropriate and relevant incentives and
                                                      public-private partnership frameworks
                                                  •   Cost recovery and profitability of services
                                                  •   Risk mitigation and investment security
                                                  •   Access to innovation and blended financing
                                                  •   Non-prohibitive and restrictive participation in
                                                      tenders and procurement processes
                                                  •   Clear standard setting and quality control of
                                                      WASH services




The project’s stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities,
including the following stakeholder groups and will seek to address their respectively identified
interests.


3.3. Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups2
Within the Project, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include but are not limited to as per
below. While the project might not engage with these groups immediately, the technical
assistance provided to the WASH institutions in the countries may indirectly impact such groups
at country level. The following are some of the identified vulnerable that may be interested or
affected by the project (Table 2).


                                                                                                         6
Table 2. List vulnerable group that may be interested or affected by the project


 No.               Vulnerable Group                               Interest and concerns

     1. Children                                       •   Access to proximate and safe WASH facilities
                                                           and services
                                                       •   - Protection from health hazards
                                                       •   - Inclusion of WASH in school environments
                                                       •   -Participation in WASH education
     2. Elderly                                        •   Reliable and accessible proximate WASH
                                                           services, facilities and infrastructure
                                                       •   Representation during the stakeholder
                                                           consultations
                                                       •   Addressing WASH related vulnerability of the
                                                           elderly
     3. People with disabilities                       •   Inclusive and accessible WASH delivery and
                                                           services
                                                       •   Communication of consultation outcomes in
                                                           accessible formats including channels of the
                                                           grievance mechanism
                                                       •   Protection of WASH access rights for people
                                                           living with disabilities
     4. Indigenous, ethnic         and   pastoral
        communities                                 Policy considerations and governance as a result of
                                                    the project to ensure:
                                                       •   Recognition of traditional water rights and
                                                           uses
                                                       •   Protection of cultural and spiritual sites
                                                       •   Meaningful participation while considering
                                                           free, prior and informed consent
                                                       •   Respect for customary governance of surface
                                                           and ground water resources

     5. Rural, urban and peri-urban (including         •   Affordability of and access to reliable WASH
        unplanned settlements) low-income                  services
        households                                     •   Social safety nets and subsidies
                                                       •   Transparent communication and inclusive
                                                           grievance mechanisms
                                                       •   Protection from indirect project-induced
                                                           displacements or service losses
                                                       •   Inclusion in WASH planning and service
                                                           provision
                                                       •   Recognition in spatial planning and inclusion
                                                           in service delivery

     6. Youths                                         •   Participation in WASH platforms
                                                       •   Job creation and skills training through both
                                                           intended and unintended WASH outcomes of
                                                           the project


                                                                                                           7
 No.               Vulnerable Group                            Interest and concerns

                                                    •   Access WASH education and behavioral
                                                        change awareness services
                                                    •   Inclusion in WASH governance and decision
                                                        making

       7. Pastoral communities and peasant          •   Equitable access to WASH services including
          households                                    mobile and flexible water solutions
                                                    •   Inclusion in transboundary and seasonal
                                                        water resource management initiatives
                                                    •   Cultural and livelihood considerations in
                                                        water policies
                                                    •   Information and knowledge services relevant
                                                        to seasonal migration

       8. Medium, small and micro enterprises       •   Access to project WASH grants
                                                    •   Reliable, affordable, and predictable water
                                                        supply
                                                    •   Inclusion in water infrastructure development
                                                        and consultation
                                                    •   Capacity building and support to adopt
                                                        sustainable       WASH       practices    and
                                                        participation in the WASH value chain
                                                    •   Protection from regulatory burdens that
                                                        disproportionately affect small businesses


Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the Project may be added, further
confirmed, and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate. Description of the methods
of engagement that will be undertaken by the project is provided in the following sections.

                            4. Stakeholder Engagement Program
4.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation
Initial stakeholder consultations were conducted as part of the initial project preparatory activities
and included the participation of AfWASA, ESAWAS, GWP-SA, IGAD, PASA and SADC GMI.
Further, stakeholder consultation meetings were conducted virtually on 14th and 17th July 2025 to:

   •     Present the draft design of the AFE WASH Regional Project, including objectives,
         components, results framework, and implementation arrangements.
   •     Solicit stakeholder feedback on proposed activities, roles, and expected outcomes to
         ensure alignment with country priorities and partner mandates.
   •     Validate and strengthen collaboration mechanisms, including coordination between
         countries, RECs, regulators, and sector institutions.
   •     Fulfil consultation requirements under the World Bank ESS regulations as part of project
         preparation.

Key takeaways and resolutions of the stakeholder consultation meetings and outcomes are
summarise in table 5 in the Annex. Stakeholders welcomed the proponent projects and suggested
recommendation that will enhance the effective execution and relevance of the project.
                                                                                                        8
The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan will be disclosed through a presentation of the
environmental and social commitment plan. Feedback received during consultations will be
reported and taken into account in the updated versions of this SEP and subsequent versions of
the environmental and social commitment plan. A summary of the main recommendations
received will be recorded according to the summary as provided in Annex table 5.

4.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools, and techniques for
stakeholder engagement
Different engagement methods will be employed during the stakeholder engagement process and
will include formal meetings, virtual discussions, stakeholder consultations tailored to stakeholder
needs, administered and online surveys, interviews, site visits and formal responses to specific,
stakeholder requests, clarifications and complaints. The stakeholder engagement process must
be inclusive and in view of the detailed aforementioned stakeholder characterisation and
description, the stakeholder engagement for this project will be conducted throughout the lifecycle
of the project in a flexible manner that ensures inclusivity of all interested and affected parties.
The following presents a strategy and anticipated periods when project stakeholders will be
engaged. Initial engagements were conducted as part of the preparation missions that involved
the participation of the Pan African Sanitation Association (PASA), the African Ministers' Council
on Water (AMCOW), Global Water Partnership – Southern Africa/AIP Secretariat, African Water
and Sanitation Association (AfWASA), the Eastern and Southern African Water and Sanitation
Regulators Association (ESAWAS), the Southern African Development Community Ground
Water Management Institute (SADC-GMI) and the Intergovernmental Agency for Development
(IGAD) that globally represent a broader share of stakeholder interests. Beyond the scope of
stakeholders already engaged, in addition to the governments and relevant agencies from the
MPA participating countries, AUDA-NEPAD during the project preparation phase will identify and
consult stakeholders representing the elderly, children, women, girls, people living with
disabilities, youth, micro, small and medium enterprises and the private sector among others. The
stakeholders will be kept informed on the progress of the project and any emerging developments
of interest or concern through various channels that will remain publicly accessible. Information
that will be disclosed publicly will include:
    i.   The objectives, scope and expected outcomes
   ii.   The timeframes of the overall project and specific main project activities and milestones
  iii.   Potential risks and both positive and negative anticipated impacts of the project on local
         economy, communities and WASH operators and utilities while identifying specific
         requisite mitigation measures
  iv.    The proposed stakeholder engagement process highlights how stakeholders will
         participate in the engagement process and activities
   v.    The stage of the project when the stakeholder engagement activities, targeted period of
         the engagement, theme of the consultation, method of consultation and engagement and
         the entity responsible for the engagement.

All participants representing the interests and concerns of all identified and emerging stakeholders
will be timely notified about the meeting. All meeting proceedings will be recorded, reported and
summaries shared according to the needs of the interested and affected parties.

4.3. Stakeholder engagement plan
The stakeholder engagement will be conducted according to the plan outlined in Table 3 below.



                                                                                                  9
Table 3. Stakeholder engagement plan

 Project Stage    Estimated        Topic of           Method Used         Target         Responsibilities
                  Date/Time      Consultation/                         Stakeholders
                   Period          Message

 Pre-appraisal,   Until          1. Alignment of      Presentations    African Union     AUDA-NEPAD in
 appraisal and    August            project           at the African   Commission,       collaboration with
 implementation   2025 and          activities to     Union summit,    African Union     AMCOW
                  onwards           continental       African Water    Development
                                    initiatives and   Investments      Agency,
                                    activities,       Partnership      African
                                    mobilise          (AIP) summit     Ministerial
                                    regional and      and high-level   Council on
                                    national          panel            Water
                                    support at the    meetings,        (AMCOW)
                                    ministerial       formal
                                    level.            briefings and
                                 2. Establishment     emails.
                                    of the
                                    Advisory
                                    Project
                                    Committee
 Pre-appraisal    7th July    Project objectives,     Workshop and     Country           AUDA-NEPAD,
 stage            2025        activities and          written          coordination      AMCOW
                              expected outcomes.      submissions      teams/
                                                                       Ministries of
                                                                       water,
                                                                       sanitation,
                                                                       finance and
                                                                       planning,
                                                                       regulatory
                                                                       authorities/
                                                                       agencies and
                                                                       sanitation
                                                                       councils in the
                                                                       MPA
                                                                       countries,
                                                                       Regional
                                                                       Economic
                                                                       Communities
                                                                       (RECs)
 Implementation   October     To facilitate local     Virtual and      Regulatory        AUDA-NEPAD,
                  2025        implementation,         physical         agencies,         ESAWAS,
                              gather feedback, and    meetings         utility           AfWASA, PASA
                              discuss capacity                         companies,
                              building needs                           local
                                                                       governments,
                                                                       authorities
                                                                       and/or
                                                                       municipalities


                                                                                                     10
Project Stage    Estimated         Topic of        Method Used      Target         Responsibilities
                 Date/Time       Consultation/                   Stakeholders
                  Period           Message

                                                                 and regional
                                                                 and local
                                                                 WASH
                                                                 associations
                                                                 and interest
                                                                 groups
                                                                 (including
                                                                 those
                                                                 representing
                                                                 the interest of
                                                                 the vulnerable
                                                                 groups)
Pre-appraisal,   July to     Consultations on      Virtual and   WASH              SADC-GMI and
appraisal and    October     aquifer assessments   physical      regulatory        IGAD
implementation   2025 and    and studies           meetings      agencies
                 onwards
Implementation   November    Aligning the grants   Emails and    Water and         AUDA-NEPAD
                 2025        programme to the      surveys       sanitation
                             private sector and                  regulators,
                             utility finance                     utility
                             requirements                        companies
                                                                 and the
                                                                 private sector
Implementation   November    Mobilizing finance    Virtual and   Multilateral      AUDA-NEPAD
                 2025        and investments for   physical      Development
                             WASH                  meetings      Banks,
                                                                 Development
                                                                 Partners and
                                                                 Climate
                                                                 Funds
Appraisal and    October     Technical inputs on   Virtual       Research and      SADC-GMI and
implementation   2025        the aquifer           workshop      higher            IGAD
                             prioritization and                  learning
                             assessment                          institutions,
                             methodologies.                      basin
                                                                 commissions
                                                                 and
                                                                 transboundary
                                                                 water
                                                                 resource
                                                                 management
                                                                 agencies to
                                                                 include
                                                                 ORASECOM,
                                                                 Nile Basin



                                                                                             11
 Project Stage     Estimated         Topic of            Method Used         Target       Responsibilities
                   Date/Time       Consultation/                          Stakeholders
                    Period           Message

                                                                          Initiative,
                                                                          ICPAC, IWMI)
 Pre-appraisal,    July to     Consultations on          Virtual and      NGOs and        SADC GMI and
 appraisal and     October     aquifer assessments       physical         civil society   IGAD
 implementation    2025        and studies               meetings         organisations
                                                                          involved in
                                                                          WASH and
                                                                          groundwater
                                                                          resources
                                                                          management
                                                                          (WaterAid,
                                                                          WWF)
 Pre-appraisal     30th June   Definition of the civil   Meetings and     Associations    AUDA-NEPAD,
                   2025        society programme         emails           or advocacy     PASA and
                                                                          groups for      AFWASA
                                                                          people living
                                                                          with
                                                                          disabilities,
                                                                          gender,
                                                                          women and
                                                                          Indigenous
                                                                          people rights
 Implementation    October     Mid project perception    Online survey,   All             AUDA-NEPAD
                   2029        survey                    interviews       stakeholders
                                                         and/or
                                                         administered
                                                         questionnaires
 Project closure   September   End of project            Online survey,   All             AUDA-NEPAD
                   2029        perception survey         interviews       stakeholder
                                                         and/or
                                                         administered
                                                         questionnaires
I
4.4. Reporting back to stakeholders
Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops, including reporting on project
environmental and social performance and implementation of the stakeholder engagement plan
and Grievance Mechanism, and on the project’s overall implementation progress.
  5. Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement
                                   activities
5.1. Resources

The budget (Table 4) for the SEP is USD 641,550 and is included in Component 1 (pillar 1) of
the project: Strengthening Platforms to Accelerate WASH Access.


                                                                                                    12
Table 4. Costing of stakeholder engagement activities


     Budget Category            Quantity    Unit    Times/Years       Total             Remarks
                                           Costs                      Costs


 1. Estimated staff salaries*
 and related expenses                                             25,000


 1a. Environmental and                                                        Accounted for under PIU
 Social Specialist              1                                 -           budget. The specialist will
                                                                              dedicate 25% of staff time to
                                                                              stakeholder engagement and
                                                                              thus constitute only 25% of
                                                                              their total staff costs.


 1b. Communication and                                                        Accounted for under PIU
 Stakeholder Engagement         1                                 -           budget.
 Specialist                                                                   50% of the staff time dedicated
                                                                              to the activity


 1c. PIU staff travel for
 Stakeholder engagement         2          2,500    5             25,000
 related meetings


 2. Events
                                                                  150,000


 2a. Pre-launch Regional        2                                             These are virtual meetings with
 consultative workshop                     -        1             -           no direct cost implication on
                                                                              the project


 2b. Regional consultative                                                    Three (3) workshops over the
 workshop                       1          50,000   3             150,000     project lifespan. One at
                                                                              inception and one at midterm,
                                                                              and one before closure.


 3. Communication
 campaigns                                                        65,000


 3a. Posters, flyers and                                                      one communication campaign
 other communication            1          12,500   4             50,000      per year over 4 years
 related documents,
 materials and activities


 3b. Social media                                                             When required at any time
 campaigns                      3          1,000    5             15,000      during the implementation of
                                                                              the project




                                                                                                              13
   Budget Category           Quantity    Unit   Times/Years       Total              Remarks
                                        Costs                     Costs


4. Trainings
                                                              45,000


4a. Training on                                                            Once off training
environmental and social     15         3,000   1             45,000
issues including gender,
inclusion and sexual
exploitation and
harassment for PIU staff,
sub-grantees and
consultants


5. Beneficiary surveys
                                                              -


5a. Mid-project perception                                                 To be conducted as part of
survey                       1                  1             -            Monitoring and Evaluation
                                                                           (M&E) activities


5b. End-of-project                                                         To be conducted as part of
perception survey            1                  1             -            M&E activities


6. Grievance Mechanism
                                                              25,500


6a. Training of the PIU
staff, appeals panel,        6          2,500   1             15,000
Human Resources (HR)
and focal persons on the
grievance mechanism


6b. Grievance website on
the GM and online            1          1,500   3             4,500
grievance submission form


6c. Grievance panel
meetings                     2          1,000   3             6,000


7. Contingency
                                                              31,050


8. CSO Capacity Building                                      300,000      Support to CSOs as part of
Activities                                                    (estimate)   regional CSO WASH forum
                                                                           and ongoing TA to national
                                                                           CSO organizations in terms of
                                                                           capacity building (the currently
                                                                           indicated budget is estimate)



                                                                                                          14
    Budget Category        Quantity    Unit   Times/Years     Total             Remarks
                                      Costs                   Costs


 Total
                                                             641,550




5.2. Management functions and responsibilities
The entities responsible for carrying out stakeholder engagement activities are the PIU on behalf
of AUDA-NEPAD with strong involvement of the African Union Commission, Global Water
Partnership Southern Africa (GWP SA), Pan-African Sanitation Association (PASA), African
Water and Sanitation Association (AfWASA), Eastern and Southern African Water Association
(ESAWAS) and the African Council of Ministers on Water (AMCOW).

The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through minutes or record of
stakeholder engagement activities (see Table 5 in Annex I), monthly and quarterly reports and
summaries, mission reports and grievance case reports and tracking logs, stakeholder feedback
and written communication.

                                  6. Grievance Mechanism
Grievances will be handled specifically according to the grievance redress procedures of the
Agency. All grievances pertaining to the general activities of AUDA-NEPAD are received by the
office of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Agency. Specific grievances pertaining to staff
matters are received and addressed to the Human Resources Division while procurement related
complaints are addressed to the office of the CEO and the Internal Audit Division.

The main objective of a GM is to assist to resolve complaints and grievances in a timely, effective,
and efficient manner that satisfies all parties involved. This GM as a cost-effective tool for
receiving, recording and addressing any complaints, concerns or reports of misconduct and
prohibited practices during implementation of the project. It will provide a mechanism for
accurately registering grievances and their timely resolution and feedback to the concerned
and/or affected party.in an efficient, transparent and inclusive manner. The grievance redress
process will be easily accessible through the aforesaid stakeholder engagement channels to
facilitate timely decisions on grievances. The PIU will implement this grievance mechanism in an
adaptive manner to practicality respond and address grievances according to the needs of the
interested and affected parties and the realisation during implementation of the project. This
grievance redress mechanism will be administered in line with the African Union Development
Agencies staff rules and regulations and the World Bank’s grievance redress policy and
procedures where not provided for in the African Union policies and procedures. The PIU shall
make all interested and affected parties aware of the grievance redress process through all
available AUDA-NEPAD and sub-grantee communication channels




                                                                                                 15
6.1. Description of GM

      Step                                 Description of Process                                Time Frame   Responsibility

 GM               Grievances shall be addressed internally for all staff related grievances
 implementation   and follow according to the AU and subgrantee staff rules and
 structure        regulations while grievance relating to non-staff related issues will be
                  addressed according to the World Bank policies and procedures.
                  Therefore, in view of this there will be two separate channels to receive
                  grievances. This mechanism shall be implemented according to the
                  African Union staff rules and regulations for staff related grievances. In
                  accordance with Rule 63 Grievance Handling and Procedure, all staff
                  grievances resulting from inter-personal relationships and the
                  application of conditions of employment other than matters arising out
                  of disciplinary action, shall be raised in the first instance with the staff
                  member’s supervisor and the supervisor, in this case the Project
                  Coordinator, shall make every effort to settle the matter at his/her level
                  unless where the complaint is about the supervisor. Where complaints
                  concern the supervise, such will be raised with the Human Resources
                  Division and adjudicated upon by the Grievance panel. Internally
                  unresolved grievances and appeals to decisions of the grievance panel
                  shall be presented to the Chief Executive Officer and if the remain
                  unresolved to the African Union Commission’s grievance appeals panel
                  or the Ombudsperson for mediation. General non-staff-related
                  grievances will be received by the Environmental and Social Specialist
                  and directed to the appropriate staff member, including the Project
                  Manager, Procurement Officer or Human Resources Officer, for further
                  review and resolution. Unresolved matters shall be presented to the
                  Bank for a resolution or other appropriate action. Staff related
                  grievances pertaining to the activities implemented by the sub-grantee
                  will be dealt with in accordance with their regulations and staff rules and
                  policies. At the National level grievances will be received by the national
                  focal points and transmitted to AUDA-NEPAD for action. Grievance
                  shall be received physically in writing or through an online form at
                  www.WASH Grievances.auda-nepad.org sending grievances to email
                  WASHGrievances@AUDA-NEPAD.org or calling +27 11 256 3600 with
                  complainants indicating their preference to non-anonymously or
                  anonymously submitting the grievance. Online and written grievances
                  will be submitted using the form presented in Annex Table 2.

                                                                                                                               16
      Step                                 Description of Process                                Time Frame               Responsibility


Grievance uptake   Grievances can be submitted via the following channels:
                   • Phone line
                   • WASHGrievances@AUDA-NEPAD.org
                   • Letter to Grievance focal points at local facilities
                   • Complaint form to be lodged via any of the above channels or
                       directly at http//WASHGrievances.AUDA-NEPAD.org
                   • Walk-ins may register a complaint in a grievance logbook at a
                       facility or suggestion box
Sorting,           Any complaint received will be forwarded to WASHGrievances@AUDA-              Upon receipt    Local grievance focal points and
processing         NEPAD.org or directly to the Project Coordinator, logged in the               of complaint    Environmental and Social
                   grievance case log, and categorized according to the following                                Specialist
                   complaint types:
                       • Project design and implementation concerns
                       • SEAH
                       • Economic and livelihood related impacts of the project
                       • Rights violations
                       • Employment related grievances
Acknowledgment     Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged to the complainant by email          Within 2 days   Local grievance focal points and
and follow-up      or letter.                                                                    of receipt      Environmental and Social
                                                                                                                 Specialist
Verification,      Investigation of the complaint is led by the Project Coordinator or           Within ten      Grievance Appeals Panel
investigation,     Chairperson of the Grievance Appeals Panel A proposed resolution is           (10) working    comprising of AUDA-NEPAD
action             formulated by Project Coordinator or Chairperson of the Grievance             days            staff appointed by the Chief
                   Appeals Panel and communicated to the complainant by the Project                              Executive Officer.
                   Coordinator or the Director of Infrastructure, Industrialisation, Trade and
                   Regional Integration depending on the nature of the case.
Monitoring and     Data on complaints are collected in a grievance case monitoring matrix          Monthly          Environmental and Social
evaluation         and reported internally at AUDA-NEPAD and to the World Bank every                             Specialist and the Monitoring and
                   month.                                                                                         Evaluation Division of AUDA-
                                                                                                                              NEPAD




                                                                                                                                                17
       Step                               Description of Process                            Time Frame                Responsibility

 Provision of      Feedback from complainants regarding their satisfaction with complaint     Within ten      Project Coordinator/ Director of
 feedback          resolution is collected when the case is closed.                          (10) working     Infrastructure, Industrialisation,
                                                                                            days after the    Trade and Regional Integration
                                                                                             complainant
                                                                                             is notified of
                                                                                            the outcome.
 Training          Training needs for staff/consultants in the PIU, Contractors, and         Immediately       AUDA-NEPAD/ World Bank
                   Supervision Consultants are as follows:                                       after
                        • Environmental and social issues including gender, inclusion       recruitment or
                            and sexual exploitation issues and harassment                   establishment
                        • Grievance redress mechanisms                                      of the PIU for
                                                                                             internal staff
Note: A grievance redress website and email address will be established before the commencement of the implementation of project
activities.

The GM will provide an appeals process if the complainant is not satisfied with the proposed resolution of the complaint. Once all
possible means to resolve the complaint have been proposed and if the complainant is still not satisfied, then they should be advised
of their right to legal recourse.

When relevant, the project will have other measures in place to handle sensitive and confidential complaints, including those related
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment (SEA/SH) in line with the World Bank ESF Good Practice Note on SEA/SH. Insert
description if relevant

The World Bank and the grant recipient do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against project stakeholders who share their views
about Bank-financed projects.




                                                                                                                                              18
                                  7. Monitoring and Reporting
7.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported
The implementation of the SEP will be monitored as part of the monitoring and evaluation
activities. Implementation of the SEP will be tracked by the Environmental and Social Specialist.
Monthly and quarterly engagement reports will be prepared and presented to the Project
Coordinator and the African Union Development Agency Director of Infrastructure
Industrialisation, Trade and Regional Integration. The following stakeholder engagement
indicators will be monitored during the implementation of the project (Table 5).

Table 5. Stakeholder engagement indicators

       Description                     Type                  Target         Means of verification

 Proportion of identified     Percentage            75%                   Meeting records and
 stakeholders engaged                                                     monthly and quarterly
                                                                          summaries,     quarterly
                                                                          stakeholder engagement
                                                                          and mission reports
 Stakeholder engagement       Number                4 per year            Meeting minutes and
 meetings to gather key                                                   stakeholder engagement
 stakeholder views                                                        reports
 Average duration taken to    Days                  2 days                Feedback    emails to
 provide feedback on and                                                  stakeholders and case
 respond to stakeholder                                                   logs
 requests and complaints
 Written      notifications   Number                4 per year            Correspondence        to
 communicated            to                                               stakeholders
 stakeholders
 Stakeholder access      to   Percentage            75                    Stakeholder   perception
 project information                                                      surveys
 Vulnerable        groups     Percentage            5%                    Stakeholder engagement
 engaged                                                                  meeting records
 Number of languages          Number                2                     Meeting        minutes,
 used in meetings with                                                    stakeholder engagement
 multilingual participants                                                reports and perception
                                                                          surveys



7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups

The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary during project implementation.
Quarterly and bi-annual summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries, and
related incidents, together with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventive
actions, will be collated by responsible staff and referred to the senior management of the project.
The bi-annual summaries will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and nature of
complaints and requests for information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a
timely and effective manner. Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the

                                                                                                    19
Project during the year may be conveyed to the stakeholders in various ways including the
following:
     • Quarterly and bi-annual reports outlining received grievances and their status
     • Presentations to the advisory panel and other stakeholder meetings
     • Grievance information and case status summaries on the project specific grievance site
        to be created
     • Direct communication to interested and affected parties




                                                                                          20
                                                                          Annexes I

Table 6. Summary of Stakeholder Consultation Minutes

 Stakeholder (Group         Dates of         Summary of Feedback                   Response of Project                    Follow-up              Timetable/ Date to
 or Individual)           Consultations                                           Implementation Team                Action(s)/Next Steps       Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                                     Action(s)
 Raghava Neti, World      14th July 2025   Can you clarify if all countries   It is flexible for countries to join   N/A                        N/A
 Bank, Somalia.                            should be present in both          both sessions.
                                           sessions?
 Richard M. Kangwa,       14th July 2025   Is there a detailed schedule       The process will be two-staged         A specific presentation    The presentation was
 Ministry    of  Water                     on how a country will be           with an initial invitation for         on the grant process to    made on 17th July
 Development        and                    expected to express their          expressions of interest that will      be     presented      to   2025.
 Sanitation, Zambia                        interests in response to the       be followed by an invitation to        stakeholders.
                                           grant call?                        shortlisted             applicants
                                                                              segmented in small, medium
                                                                              and large sized grants provided
                                                                              for both the public and private
                                                                              sector for various interventions
                                                                              including feasibility studies and
                                                                              project structuring. Both private
                                                                              and public sector actors will be
                                                                              eligible to apply though the
                                                                              private sector will be expected
                                                                              to provide matching grants.

                                                                              There will be a publicly
                                                                              accessible grant document. It is
                                                                              envisaged that this will be
                                                                              accessible through a dedicated
                                                                              platform after the launch
                                                                              through which countries and
                                                                              other eligible stakeholders will
                                                                              submit their applications. The
                                                                              system     will   provide    for
                                                                              submission of vital information
                                                                              required     to   support   the
                                                                              evaluation of their proposals.
                                                                              Decisions will be made based
                                                                              on the set grant criteria and

                                                                                                                                                                  21
Stakeholder (Group        Dates of         Summary of Feedback                  Response of Project                  Follow-up                Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)          Consultations                                          Implementation Team              Action(s)/Next Steps         Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                                  Action(s)
                                                                           availability of the resources
                                                                           (financial resource constraints).
                                                                           Considerations will be made to
                                                                           take into account the country
                                                                           and sub-sector balance.
Ahmed        Hassan,    14th July 2025   A clarification was requested     The main project component will      To consider adjusting        Prior to completion of
Director  of   Water                     for on Component 2 on             include sub-components on            the budgets.                 the appraisal process.
Resources                                governance to understand the      WASH analytics to support
Development, Ministry                    focus of the activities to be     generation of reports. The
of   Hydrology   and                     implemented by member             knowledge       products     and
Water      Resources                     states. Will it be limited to     outputs of this component will
Development, Somalia                     data collection or facilitation   be demand driven and will range
                                         of involvement of the private     from setting up regulatory tools,
                                         sector?                           training in governance or
                                                                           regulatory instruments. The role
                                         For the consideration of the      of the countries is to clearly
                                         project implementing entity,      outline the demand, make
                                         regulation is a very a critical   specific requests for advisory
                                         issue and allocation of the       services and mobilise high level
                                         budget does not seem match        support and formulation of
                                         the demand of the countries.      WASH policies.
                                         The      available   financial
                                         resources should not be
                                         limited to the 12 MPA
                                         countries.

                                         For components 2 and 3,
                                         there is also need to consider
                                         and provide clear activities to
                                         support countries with a
                                         federal governance structure
                                         as the federal structures are
                                         focusing on policy, strategy,
                                         regulatory,          guidance,
                                         resources mobilization and
                                         interstate coordination related
                                         issues while federal states
                                         focus on service delivery,
Raghava Neti, World     14th July 2025   Some countries will be            Countries will be engaged to         Documents soliciting         Prior    to     the
Bank, Somalia.                           coming on board at a later        propose detailed activities of the   for priority activities to   announcement of the


                                                                                                                                                                 22
Stakeholder (Group        Dates of         Summary of Feedback                  Response of Project                   Follow-up            Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)          Consultations                                          Implementation Team               Action(s)/Next Steps     Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                               Action(s)
                                         stage. Will it be possible for    project. A document of demand         be circulated to the     grant     call       for
                                         countries that will come on       driven    activities    will    be    member states.           expressions of interest.
                                         board at a letter stage to        circulated to countries to
                                         access funds?                     propose      activities      under
                                                                           component 1.
Chola      Mambilima,   14th July 2025   Will    outlined      proposed    As part of the project, we are        To revisit component 1   Prior to finalization of
National Water and                       governance related activities     proposing to have an initiative       budget.                  the appraisal process.
Sanitation   Council,                    adequately     address      the   that will identify Head of State
Zambia                                   governance challenges? The        WASH         Champions          and
                                         main issue in some of our         establish a Presidential WASH
                                         countries is acquisition of       Championship initiative. Efforts
                                         data to inform decision           will be made to advocate
                                         making. The activity should       through the African Union for
                                         focus on acquisition of data      heads of state and government
                                         and not limited to the            to advocate for WASH and to
                                         generation of the reports. The    position it as a strategic agenda
                                         budgetary allocation does not     at the national level. This is what
                                         reflect   governance       and    is targeted at, in addition to the
                                         regulation activities as a key    high-level dialogue that is
                                         component.                        planned. Issues pertaining to
                                                                           data cut across all the
                                         Policy makers do not have the     components of the project.
                                         dedication to ensure WASH is      There is provision to support
                                         prioritised   in    terms   of    data collection. Data generation
                                         financing                 and     in the first component will be
                                         implementation. How do we         leveraged towards the data to
                                         ensure          that       the    be collected for the report. This
                                         pronouncement         at   the    component is an intermediate
                                         continental level actually        activity to component 1 and 3.
                                         happens at the national level?    We will revisit the budget to
                                                                           address any shortfalls in the
                                                                           design of the component.

                                                                           The water scorecard under the
                                                                           African    Water     Investment
                                                                           Partnership (AIP) will track
                                                                           financing in the water sector.
                                                                           Apart      from        financing,
                                                                           Information is also collected on
                                                                           WASH services, and this is


                                                                                                                                                                23
Stakeholder (Group         Dates of         Summary of Feedback                Response of Project                  Follow-up          Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)           Consultations                                        Implementation Team              Action(s)/Next Steps   Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                           Action(s)
                                                                          envisaged to be used for the
                                                                          data collection.

                                                                          Training was delivered to the
                                                                          countries on the scorecard that
                                                                          have not embarked on data
                                                                          collection  through      relevant
                                                                          government agencies. There is
                                                                          a need to review the scorecard
                                                                          to    ensure     that     it    is
                                                                          comprehensive enough and
                                                                          fully    meets      the      data
                                                                          requirements for adequate
                                                                          access to water. The first step
                                                                          will be to check the level of
                                                                          comprehensiveness of the tool
                                                                          and ensure that data is collected
                                                                          continuously throughout the
                                                                          year.
Tamiru Gedefa, LEO of    14th July 2025   Was a background situational    The presented theory of change       N/A                    N/A
Water Supply, Ministry                    analysis conducted during the   is for the broader programme
of Energy and Water,                      preparation of the project      and the outcomes outlined are
Ethiopia                                  proposal documents? Were        not only those expected to result
                                          there assessments done or       from the interventions of the
                                          submissions     from      the   regional phase of the project.
                                          countries?                      Provision of grants to a tune
                                                                          USD 20 million can leverage
                                          Do you have indicative          more investments into the
                                          investments for each of the     sector. If the grants can trigger
                                          countries as a breakdown in     or      catalyse      downstream
                                          relation to the expected        investments can lead to
                                          outcomes stated in the theory   infrastructure investments and
                                          of change (TOC)?                ultimately, access to WASH. For
                                                                          this project, focus is more on the
                                          How will high level decision    outputs and the impact that is
                                          makers such as the ministers    expected       to    trigger   the
                                          of finance and health be        realisation of the intermediate
                                          involved?                       outcomes.

                                          How can the private sector be   Conceptualisation of the project
                                          involved in the capacity        was informed by ongoing work

                                                                                                                                                        24
Stakeholder (Group         Dates of         Summary of Feedback                    Response of Project                  Follow-up              Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)           Consultations                                            Implementation Team              Action(s)/Next Steps       Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                                   Action(s)
                                          building   activities   of   this   of the World Bank within the
                                          project?                            member countries and other
                                                                              existing     interventions   and
                                          We propose organising a             knowledge of the sector.
                                          workshop                    and     Furthermore, with the objective
                                          communicating          through      of eliciting more inputs to align
                                          letters to advise the ministries    the project to the current
                                          of finance, WASH and energy         situations in the countries, the
                                          notifying them about the            consultation also aims to identify
                                          workshop as a way to involve        any other interventions not
                                          them and secure high level          aligned with the current country
                                          buy in.                             contexts. The demand and
                                                                              needs of the countries will
                                                                              determine the final design of the
                                                                              programmatic interventions.

                                                                              Grants will be provided to the
                                                                              private sector to help them with
                                                                              their    investments     in   the
                                                                              provision of water and sanitation
                                                                              services. Prioritising dialogues
                                                                              with the private sector. The
                                                                              technical             assistance
                                                                              requirements will be proposed
                                                                              by the individual participating
                                                                              countries. Specifically, this
                                                                              could help, for example, to
                                                                              identify viable business models
                                                                              that the private sector can
                                                                              adopt.

Chut     Isaac   Chol,   14th July 2025   We support the organising of                                             To      engage       the   To invite the other
Director General Water                    a workshop and inviting the                                              ministries responsible     relevant ministries to
Supply and Sanitation,                    relevant     ministries.    We                                           for WASH and the           the consultations on
South Sudan                               suggest that this should be                                              ministries of finance.     17th July 2025 and
                                          done in two stages by holding                                                                       engage the ministries
                                          the first meetings with                                                                             of finance prior to the
                                          technical ministerial officials                                                                     completion     of   the
                                          from the ministries of finance                                                                      project       appraisal
                                          because they have a critical                                                                        process.
                                          role in resource allocation and

                                                                                                                                                                   25
Stakeholder (Group          Dates of         Summary of Feedback                  Response of Project                   Follow-up            Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)            Consultations                                          Implementation Team               Action(s)/Next Steps     Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                                 Action(s)
                                           advocating for finance for the
                                           WASH sector and the second
                                           with the line ministries
                                           responsible for WASH.
Girukwishaka Nestor,      14th July 2025   Would this be the opportunity     The project will provide grants       N/A                      N/A
Director    General,                       for the countries to access       on a competitive basis to
Drinking Water and                         funds         for     WASH        countries        to     implement
Basic      Sanitation,                     infrastructure??                  upstream       interventions    for
Burundi                                                                      feasibility studies or structuring
                                                                             of the projects to make them
                                                                             investment ready and thus help
                                                                             countries to access funds for
                                                                             WASH infrastructure.
Najeb     Ahmed    Ali,   14th July 2025   How are we going to secure        To secure high level political        Organise a high-level    August 2025
Ministry of Energy and                     high level support.               commitment from the prime             event at the AIP water
Water Somalia                                                                ministers and the presidents, we      investment aimed at
                                                                             must bring and present the            securing high level
                                                                             Water Agenda at the high level,       political commitment.
                                                                             and this can be done through
                                                                             the ministries of energy and
                                                                             water to be used as entry points,
                                                                             to organise high level events
                                                                             involving ministries of planning,
                                                                             finance and the office of the
                                                                             prime minister or president.
                                                                             Currently exploring possibilities
                                                                             of having African heads of state
                                                                             to advocate for water which has
                                                                             proven to work on other issues.
                                                                             Securing country ownership.
Ulanda     Nyirenda,      14th July 2025   Zambia is currently in the        The call for expression of            To       make        a   The presentation of the
Assistant,  Director,                      process of developing a           interest to access grants will be     presentation on the      grant component was
Water and Sanitation,                      separate policy on sanitation     announced by AUDA-NEPAD.              grant component of the   made on 17th July 2025
Zambia                                     and this project presents an                                            project.
                                           opportunity   to    have    a
                                           separate standalone policy on
                                           sanitation and hygiene. It will
                                           also help us to prepare
                                           project proposals for project
                                           preparation. We welcome this

                                                                                                                                                                 26
Stakeholder (Group          Dates of         Summary of Feedback                    Response of Project                Follow-up          Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)            Consultations                                            Implementation Team            Action(s)/Next Steps   Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                              Action(s)
                                           project would like to know
                                           when and where can we
                                           access funds?
Prince Muleta, Director   14th July 2025   We are delighted to learn         N/A                                  N/A                    N/A
of      Water      and                     about     the   project    and
Sanitation, Malawi                         especially      the       grant
                                           component.       Malawi      is
                                           currently developing a one
                                           WASH programme to be
                                           coordinated      under     one
                                           national porgramme. This
                                           framework will help assist
                                           with the design of the urgently
                                           needed one wash programme
                                           coordinated centrally using a
                                           single approach.
Mbumba        Ndanda      14th July 2025   What we expect from this          This is in alignment with the        N/A                    N/A
Yves,       Democratic                     project is assistance in          design of the project. The
Republic of Congo                          developing a policy that will     country activities. Interventions
                                           make the sector attractive to     will depend on the country’s
                                           the private sector.               priorities and needs, taking into
                                                                             account each of the countries’
                                           We agree and with the             policies and focusing on the
                                           proposal to engage decision       countries’ specific needs.
                                           makers at country level using
                                           letters to line ministries of
                                           water and finance as well as
                                           technical    meetings     and
                                           ministerial workshops
Kitka Goyal, Regional     17th July 2025   It will be good to have a look    UNICEF is welcome to provide         To share the TOC and   Immediately after the
Advisor for Wash in                        at the programme logic and        the comments. In response it         other documents for    consultation meeting.
Eastern and Southern                       provide comments if still open    was mentioned by AUDA-               comments         and
Africa, UNICEF                             for comments. UNICEF is           NEPAD, however, that the             feedback.
                                           available to support the          scope of the TOC extends
                                           country         during      the   beyond the regional phase of
                                           preparation of proposals in       the project. Depending on the
                                           response to the expressions       country of intervention, having a
                                           of interest through the country   platform      for    engagement
                                           WASH teams.                       through which the institutions
                                                                             can jointly support the in-country

                                                                                                                                                            27
Stakeholder (Group         Dates of         Summary of Feedback                   Response of Project                  Follow-up          Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)           Consultations                                           Implementation Team              Action(s)/Next Steps   Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                              Action(s)
                                                                             efforts will be useful. AUDA-
                                                                             NEPAD can support multi-
                                                                             country platforms to build
                                                                             greater synergies.
Chut     Isaac   Chol,   17th July 2025   We have a concern on               Countries will participate in the    N/A                    N/A
Director General Water                    component 3 pertaining to the      grant   component       of    the
Supply and Sanitation,                    diagnostic       to     support    programme. Countries will take
South Sudan                               sanitation. The approach that      ownership of the application
                                          the project is going to adopt to   process. Our role is to monitor
                                          support the countries is not       the execution of the grant, but
                                          clear. How will the countries      the execution will be the sole
                                          benefit from the project?          responsibility of the countries
                                                                             hence the need to have a strong
                                          On             implementation      coordination team.
                                          arrangements,       it     was
                                          mentioned that the PIU will be     The actual constitution of the
                                          formed by the executing            PIU will include coordination,
                                          entity, but the rest of the        engagement and water and
                                          details are not clear, such as     sanitation functions. At the
                                          how the countries will benefit     country level, it will depend on
                                          from the project and the           the countries and whether they
                                          channels      for     providing    would, for example, want to and
                                          feedback.                          decide to involve the ministry of
                                          Can you elaborate more on          finance or the regulators to
                                          the            implementation      enable them to effectively
                                          arrangements? We need to           originate the demand for
                                          understand the focal person        technical assistance and the
                                          in the countries. This should      grants as well as align the
                                          be clear.                          interventions with the country’s
                                                                             priorities.   The      PIU    will
                                          We propose that the process        coordinate the execution of the
                                          of establishment of the            grants including technical and
                                          country coordination team          financial execution.
                                          should     have    terms    of
                                          reference for guiding the          Each of the countries will be
                                          process and clearly state the      engaged separately on country
                                          kind of members that will          coordination.
                                          constitute     the     country
                                          coordination team.



                                                                                                                                                           28
Stakeholder (Group          Dates of          Summary of Feedback                   Response of Project                    Follow-up            Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)            Consultations                                            Implementation Team                Action(s)/Next Steps     Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                                    Action(s)
Ali      M’lanaoindrou    17th July 2025   The aspect of research did          Scientific research processes          All documents will be    Before circulation of
Maoulida,      Director                    not adequately come out in          will       employ        scientific    translated and shared    the documents.
General of Energy,                         the presentation. Research          approaches and involve the             in English, French and
Mines and Water,                           on WASH is very important           scientific           community.        Portuguese.
Union of the Comoros                       and should be considered in         Participation in civil society
Islands.                                   WASH         projects.      The     platforms will also involve
                                           Comoros is an island and has        research.     Improvement         of
                                           specific contexts and needs         governance systems will also
                                           for this type of project. We        involve research depending on
                                           have both ground and surface        what will be adopted for the
                                           water sources with different        countries. At the level of the first
                                           requirements.          Scientific   component        on       regional
                                           research regarding these            reporting will involve scientific
                                           different sources of water will     research methods. There is no
                                           help in providing better            specific part to be clearly
                                           hygiene services and quality        pointed out, but we can assure
                                           water without posing any risk       the Union of the Comoros
                                           to public health.                   Islands that research and
                                                                               scientific principles will be
                                           It is important for countries to    employed in the project.
                                           outline the needs. The
                                           Comoros just celebrated the         The proposal submission will be
                                           50th anniversary. There was         a     guided    process,    and
                                           no      independent ministry        templates will be made available
                                           dedicated to water and              to the countries.
                                           sanitation and it was only
                                           established four years ago. In      All the documents presented,
                                           this regard, there are a            and the minutes will be
                                           number of needs to be               translated and shared in
                                           addressed       for    practical    English,     French     and
                                           implementation because it is        Portuguese.
                                           a ministry in its formative
                                           years. The Ministry has
                                           numerous needs. We have
                                           tried to establish the priorities
                                           of our ministries, but this has
                                           not        been      sufficiently
                                           addressed. We are very
                                           excited to participate in the
                                           regional project to set up the
                                           foundation of our ministry.

                                                                                                                                                                  29
Stakeholder (Group         Dates of          Summary of Feedback                   Response of Project                  Follow-up           Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)           Consultations                                            Implementation Team              Action(s)/Next Steps    Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                                                Action(s)
                                          The regulatory agency was
                                          created last month. The
                                          capacity of this agency has to
                                          be built so that it can support
                                          the decision making of the
                                          sector. Institutionally, in terms
                                          of government and financial
                                          resource wise there are
                                          existent needs.

                                          Will there be a grant
                                          application template that will
                                          be shared?

                                          Minutes of the meeting were
                                          received in English only.
                                          These should be shared in all
                                          the official languages of the
                                          project.
Justin       Leornard    17th July 2025   We are currently reforming          In the case of decentralised         N/A                     N/A
Ngondomba,      HOD,                      the water sector. A new law         regulation there will be a need to
Secretary     General                     was recently passed in the          conduct an inventory of the
Ministry  of   Water                      Democratic    Republic    of        country’s        needs.       And
Resources DRC                             Congo. Provincial regulatory        specifically for the Democratic
                                          bodies will be established.         Republic of Congo there will be
                                          The grants could help the           need to even go further beyond
                                          provincial  governors     to        the province up to the municipal
                                          implement the institutional         level. This project takes these
                                          reforms.                            aspects     into    consideration
                                                                              because it takes into account of
                                                                              all jurisdictions including the
                                                                              rural needs.
Juvenal Ntirandekura,    17th July 2025   What will be the contribution       The      contributions of  the       N/A                     N/A
Ministry of     Water,                    of the countries                    countries will be the national
Environment,     Land                                                         commitment and dedication of
Management        and                                                         the country to deliver those
Urban        Planning,                                                        activities.
Burundi
Max    Wengawenga,       17th July 2025   When will the call for              The grant manual will be             To      email     the   Immediately
Deputy Director of                        submissions be announced?           launched in late 2025 and the        presentation on   the

                                                                                                                                                             30
Stakeholder (Group      Dates of      Summary of Feedback        Response of Project                 Follow-up            Timetable/ Date to
or Individual)        Consultations                             Implementation Team             Action(s)/Next Steps     Complete Follow-up
                                                                                                                              Action(s)
Policy and Planning                                         call for proposals is expected to   grant component to all
and            WASH                                         be announced in the first quarter   participants.
Programme                                                   of 2021.
Coordinator, Malawi




                                                                                                                                           31
Table 2. Grievance reporting form




                                   GRIEVANCE REPORTING FORM
 Note: AUDA-NEPAD is committed to privacy and all information received through this form will be strictly
 kept confidential

 Complainant details (First name Surname):

 Country involving the complaint:

 Organisation/    Person filing complaint
 (Complainant     may choose to remain
 anonymous)

 Gender:                                            Male☐ Female ☐ Do not wish to mention☐

                                                    Other (Please state below):



 Email address:

 Telephone or mobile phone number:

 Country of residence of the person reporting
 the case

 Address (for feedback purposes only)

 Is this being reported on behalf of the Yes ☐                No ☐
 affected parties

 Do you want this case to be treated
 confidential?

 What is the component of the WASH project
 involving this complaint (if known)?

 What is the location of the activity on which
 you are reporting?

 What is the institution associated to this
 complaint if known?

 How have you or people that you are
 representing been or will be affected by the
 project activities?

                                                                                                       32
Is this the first time that this case is being
reported? If yes, please provide details.



Do you confirm that AUDA-NEPAD should Yes ☐      No ☐
register this case and commence with
redress process?

Please provide additional information or
provide documents (if any) as attachments.




                                                        33
Endnotes

1 For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project(s) can be divided into the following

core categories:
• Affected Parties: Persons, groups, and other entities within the Project Area of Influence (PAI) that are directly influenced
    (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified as most susceptible to change associated with the project,
    and who need to be closely engaged in identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation
    and management measures.
• Other Interested Parties: Individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts from the Project but who
    consider or perceive their interests as being affected by the project and/or who could affect the project and the process of its
    implementation in some way.
• Vulnerable Groups: Persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the project(s) compared
    with any other groups due to their vulnerable status, and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure their equal
    representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated with the project.
• It is important to note that sometimes projects have different components with very different sets of stakeholders for each
    component. Those different stakeholders should be considered in preparing the SEP.
2 It is particularly important to understand whether project impacts may disproportionately fall on disadvantaged or vulnerable

individuals or groups, who often do not have a voice to express their concerns or understand the impacts of a project, and to
ensure that awareness raising and stakeholder engagement be adapted to take into account such groups’ or individuals’ particular
sensitivities, concerns, and cultural sensitivities and to ensure a full understanding of project activities and benefits. Engagement
with vulnerable groups and individuals often requires the application of specific measures and assistance aimed at the facilitation
of their participation in the project-related decision making so that their awareness of and input into the overall process are
commensurate with those of other stakeholders.




                                                                                                                                 34
