Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 07/01/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04351




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 09, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P506340                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     MRDP                         2026

                     Operation Name            Maharashtra Resilience Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     India                     India                                  SOUTH ASIA                   Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                   Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Government of India       Maharashtra Institution for            09-Jun-2025                  07-Oct-2025
                                               Transformation (MITRA)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     17-Mar-2025               620,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To strengthen multi-hazard climate and disaster risk management and institutional capacity for Maharashtra's resilient
                     development.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project will strengthen multi-hazard climate and disaster risk management and institutional capacity for
                     Maharashtra's resilient development. The planned components include the following: i) Climate-informed Flood Risk
                     Management, ii) Multi-Hazard Resilience Building in Districts and Cities, iii) Upgrading Emergency Management
                     Capacities, iv) Private Capital Mobilization for Risk Financing, and v) Implementation Support and Knowledge
                     Management.




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (MRDP) will be implemented in the state of Maharashtra, which is the
                     third largest state in India (in terms of area) after Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, covering an area of 307,713 sq.km.
                     The population of the State was 11.24 crore (112 million approx.) as per the Census 2011, which was 9.3 percent of
                     India's total population, making it the second most populous state in the country after Uttar Pradesh. The population
                     density is 365 per sq.km, which is less than the national average. It is third most urbanized state and contributes 14
                     percent to the national Gross Domestic Product.

                     While the proposed project includes interventions to strengthen overall emergency management capacity and risk
                     financing across all districts of Maharashtra, the flood hazard reduction activities will be carried out in the Upper Krishna
                     River sub-basin. In addition, specific multi-hazard reduction interventions will be carried out in the cities of Kolhapur,
                     Sangli, and Ichalkaranji, which are a part of the Upper Krishna River sub-basin.

                     Maharashtra is one of India’s economic growth engines aiming for a US$1 trillion economy by 2027–28, while also facing
                     increased frequency of extreme weather events. Located on the Arabian Sea coast, the state of Maharashtra is prone to
                     various disasters like droughts, floods, rainfall, cyclones, earthquake, and accidents. The State’s economic growth is
                     threatened by high vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. There have been flooding events in the State almost
                     every year since 2019 with 1,246 lives lost during 2019 to 2022. This period has also witnessed landslides, unseasonal
                     rainfall, dry spells, droughts, heatwaves, lightning strikes, and rising frequency of Arabian Sea cyclones impacting the
                     State.




Public Disclosure
                     Climate projections indicate the expected increasing impact of catastrophic events such as the 2019 floods, when the
                     districts of Kolhapur and Sangli received 1,918 mm of rainfall during a fortnight in August (6 - 18 times the normal). The
                     estimated damage of 2019 flood was US$153 million in Sangli and US$359 million in Kolhapur. The majority (61 percent)
                     of losses in Sangli resulted from damages to public infrastructure (roads and bridges) and 23 percent to urban facilities,
                     whereas in Kolhapur, 50 percent of damage was attributable to crop and land damage and 28 percent to public
                     infrastructure (roads and bridges) damages. The Upper Krishna River sub-basin located in Kolhapur and Sangli districts is
                     likely to experience increased frequency and intensity of extreme hydro-meteorological events in the coming years as
                     well.

                     The Upper Krishna River sub-basin falls into three major agro-climatic zones. Major part of the sub-basin (70.65 percent)
                     is covered with agricultural area while forests account for 12.35 percent and water bodies cover 4 percent of the total
                     area. The sub-basin boasts a rich biodiversity, particularly in its forested areas within the Western Ghats, which are
                     home to diverse flora and fauna and encompass part of Sahyadri Tiger Reserve, Koyana Wildlife Sanctuary and Chandoli
                     National Park.

                     Apart from these widespread challenges, urban flooding has become a frequent and damaging climate change-related
                     hazard in Maharashtra, disrupting lives and economic activity in cities. Many urban areas are increasingly vulnerable to
                     floods due to climate change, unplanned and unregulated development, inadequate river management, insufficient or
                     absent stormwater drainage, and encroachments on water bodies and flood zones. Smaller cities such as Kolhapur,
                     Sangli, and Ichalkaranji - located along rivers and experiencing significant population growth - are increasingly impacted.



                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     Both Sangli and Kolhapur districts are relatively well-developed compared to other parts of the state but lack adequate
                     risk management capacity. The districts rank low in poverty and high in human development indicators, compared to
                     other regions in Maharashtra. Less than 1 percent of the total population in these districts is tribal. However, despite
                     their limited presence, these tribal communities remain vulnerable to socio-economic marginalization, exclusion from
                     government welfare schemes, and are at greater risks from floods, landslides and droughts. Their low numbers and lack
                     of targeted support also means they often face greater challenges in accessing disaster related relief and rehabilitation
                     support, highlighting the need for focused interventions to address their vulnerabilities.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Govt. of Maharashtra has prior and substantial experience with safeguard requirements of the World Bank through
                     various national and state level projects covering sectors like Urban Transport, Technical Education, Vocational
                     Education, Skills Development, Disaster Management, Water Supply and Agriculture. However, this is the first operation
                     to use ESF along with Maharashtra Strengthening Institutional Capabilities in Districts for Enabling Growth
                     (MahaSTRIDE) (P181463), which was recently approved by the Bank's Board and has a IPF component to support the
                     Program-for-Results (PforR).

                     The proposed implementation set-up for MRDP involves establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) and five
                     Project Implementation Units (PIUs). The PMU will be set-up at Maharashtra Institute of Transformation (MITRA) and
                     will include a high-level Steering Committee for regular monitoring and coordination. PIUs will be set-up within a)
                     Maharashtra Krishna Valley Development Corporation (MKVDC) under Water Resources Department (WRD) for
                     Component 1; b) one each at Municipal Corporations of Sangli-Miraj-Kupwad City, Kolhapur and Ichalkaranji for




Public Disclosure
                     Component 2a; c) the Disaster Management, Relief and Rehabilitation Department (DMR&RD) for activities under
                     Component 2b and Component 3. MITRA/PMU will be responsible for the implementation of Component 4.

                     The PMU as well as the PIUs lack institutional experience and technical expertise on Environment and Social Risk
                     Assessment and Management that is needed to meet the requirements of Environment and Social Standards (ESSs)
                     under the ESF for a high risk project. While both WRD and R&R do have some prior experience of externally aided
                     projects (including those funded by the Bank), their over-all capacity to assess and mitigate E&S risks, consistent with
                     ESF requirements is inadequate. The E&S documents/instruments are being prepared by a team of young professionals
                     (not having prior experience of working on environment and social risk management), under guidance from Bank's task
                     team.

                     The PMU and all PIUs have made provisions for engaging E&S specialists but required (experienced and qualified)
                     staffing is currently not in place. in addition, the PIUs have or are in the process of hiring consulting firms for preparing
                     feasibility studies and DPRs for investments. These firms include E&S Specialists who will be preparing sub-project-level
                     E&S instruments (two such teams - one for storm water drainage works at Kolhapur and Sangli and the other for
                     Feasibility Study of flood mitigation works in Upper Krishna Basin are in-place).

                     A comprehensive Institutional Strategy for Environment and Social Risk Management has been included in the ESMF,
                     given the risk and complexity of MRDP interventions, and the inadequate implementation capacity on environment and
                     social risk management. This strategy involves: (i) establishing dedicated E&S cell with qualified experts within
                     MITRA/PMU; (ii) designation of Nodal E&S officers in each of the PIUs for oversight and coordination within the
                     department, with PMU and other agencies involved in the project; (iii) appointment of experts in the PIU set-up to


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     manage environmental and social risks effectively; (iv) preparation of first-year capacity building plan for immediate/
                     short-term needs; (v) preparation of a Comprehensive Capacity Building Plan for medium-and long-term needs, based
                     on needs assessment; (vi) organizing ESF training programs for PMU/PIU staff, DPR consultants and contractors to
                     enhance their capacity on E&S risk management (including through use of Nodal Learning Centers such as
                     Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Wildlife Institute of India (WII) and National Environmental Engineering
                     Research Institute (NEERI) recognized by the Bank under E&S Client Capacity Development Plan for India) and; (vii)
                     integrating E&S risk mitigation/measures in project design/Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and bidding/contract
                     documents. The strategy also includes the development and implementation of Environmental and Social Management
                     Framework (ESMF) and associated instruments to guide the risk assessment process and management across different
                     stages of the project. In addition, given MITRA’s strategic mandate, the project will also explore supporting the
                     development of capacity and systems under Component 5, extending beyond the requirements of MRDP.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                         High
                     Risk categorization was revised from 'substantial' (at concept) to 'high' (at appraisal) following the assessment carried
                     out during pre-appraisal mission in January 2025. The change in ESRC was warranted after considering results from
                     preliminary hydrodynamic modeling exercise, which indicated need for potentially high-risk activities towards flood
                     risk mitigation under Component 1. Based on early estimates, specific interventions under consideration for inclusion



Public Disclosure
                     in the project may include: (i) enhancing Reservoir Operations and Flood Forecasting; (ii) river training for Krishna and
                     Panchganga with cross section restoration/river widening, removal of obstructions from river bed, and embankment
                     reinforcement, iii) replacement of old weirs with modern infrastructure, iv) rejuvenation of existing natural drainage
                     to enhance flood retention capacity, v) installation of sluice gates or inflatable rubber dams at confluence to prevent
                     backflow in tributaries, vi) replacement of spillway gates of Radhanagari Dam (has heritage value), vii) restoration of
                     minor irrigation tanks to capture flood discharge from catchment and, viii) implementation of nature-based solutions,
                     (to be identified separately through specific scoping study). While investments and designs under Component 1 are
                     yet to be finalized, environmental impacts are likely to include: i) adverse impacts on ecology and natural habitats –
                     both aquatic and riparian; ii) impact on vegetation, plantations and forest areas due to site clearance, tree felling
                     (limited number) and possible diversion of forest land strips; iii) impact on flows, water quality and river morphology
                     affecting hydrological/ecological cycles; iv) dam safety issues for downstream population, v) pressure on natural
                     resources (large quantity of stone required for protection works); vi) delays in obtaining regulatory permits and
                     slippages in compliance to conditions therein; vii) disruption to services due to utility shifting; viii) Occupational
                     Health and Safety issues, including work in/around water and construction vehicles/machinery, ix) construction stage
                     issues (such as air/dust, water and noise pollution) and, x) issues with management and disposal of dredged
                     materials. Potential risks/impacts from interventions under Component 2 include: i) loss of trees/vegetation; ii) OHS
                     risks to workers, including risk from falling debris during landslide mitigation works and handling wastes during
                     drainage works; iii) health and safety risks for public around work zones (specifically around sensitive receptors, in
                     congested urban areas and areas with high footfall); iv) improper handling and disposal of solid wastes/construction
                     wastes/debris and possibly contaminated silt from drains; v) increase in air/dust, soil, water and noise pollution
                     during construction; vi) disruption of services due to utility shifting and associated issues and, vii) issues associated


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     with tree/vegetation plantation works, including risk of choosing non-native species, mono culture, inefficient water
                     management, improper pest management practices and insufficient attention to survival rates, protection works and
                     maintenance. For works under Component 3, primary issues/risks are associated with: i) e-waste management, ii)
                     managing energy footprint and, iii) life and fire safety risks. Potential risks/impacts due to activities under Component
                     4 are not likely to be significant and can be managed with screening and mechanisms developed under guidelines for
                     the roll out and monitoring of said activities. For activities under Retroactive Financing, which will primarily include
                     studies/consultancy, no direct or substantial impacts are envisaged but possible downstream risks, emanating from
                     implementation of outputs/deliverables, will have to be checked and managed. Inadequate environment
                     management capacity of PMU and PIUs for managing EHS risks/impacts and coordination with wide range of
                     stakeholders are additional challenges.
                                                                                                                                           High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating at raised to High (at appraisal) from Substantial (at concept). The key social risks and impacts
                     relate to Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement impacts involved with the proposed flood hazard mitigation
                     works on Krishna and Panchganga rivers, especially restoration and widening of river cross section, construction of
                     levees, flood banks, diversion channels. The proposed flood mitigation and river training works along the Krishna and
                     Panchganga rivers aim to protect approximately 161,000 people in 110 villages through river restoration, widening,
                     embankment reinforcement, and related infrastructure. While accurate estimates of land requirements will be
                     available only after detailed designs are finalized, preliminary estimates suggest that about 215 hectares of adjacent
                     public (75 ha), and private agricultural lands (140 ha), will be needed, and about 120 land title holders (598 people)
                     could potentially be affected. However, no permanent or temporary relocation on impact on structures is expected.




Public Disclosure
                     Upgrading of storm water drainage network, culverts, and desilting measures in Kolhapur, Sangli, and Ichalkaranji
                     cities will affect about 85 non-title holders (340 project affected persons). These households will likely lose some part
                     of their residential and commercial structures which will also impact their livelihoods. Physical relocation is not
                     expected. Large number of common properties and public utilities will be affected such as electricity, gas, telecom,
                     water and sanitation lines and access roads. Community Health and Safety risks and impacts will be substantial, given
                     that large number of construction sites/labor camps will be in densely populated urban settlements. Managing
                     expectations, entitlements, grievances and concerns of project stakeholders, especially project beneficiaries,
                     adversely impacted groups, local governments and community groups/leaders will be critical for effective stakeholder
                     management. Gram Panchayats along the river sites as well as Urban Local Bodies in urban settlements will need to
                     be engaged in design and implementation phase. Collective impacts on tribal people are expected to be negligible,
                     given their low presence in the project area (less than 1 percent). Lack of adequate technical and operational
                     expertise in PMU and PIUs in assessing, mitigating and managing E&S risks and impacts consistent with applicable
                     ESSs is an additional risk factor, in addition to weak coordination. Likely direct and indirect impacts on cultural
                     heritage are also anticipated from selected project interventions under Component 1 and 2.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      To manage the identified environment and social risks/issues, the MITRA/PMU has prepared an Environment and
                      Social Management Framework (ESMF), given the involvement of multiple Project Implementation Units (PIUs) with
                      diverse typology of investments across different levels (state, river basin, city and Micro, Small, and Medium
                      Enterprises/ Household Level) with varying risks/potential impacts and differential timelines for design and
                      implementation. For this reason, MRDP requires a comprehensive but adaptive approach to E&S risk management.
                      The ESMF: (a) identifies the key E&S risks envisaged from different types and magnitude of proposed project
                      interventions; (b) lays-out procedures for environment and social screening, sub-project level impact assessments,
                      and management/mitigation plan preparation; (c) provides guidance on environment and social management
                      (including on cumulative effects/impact assessment required at river basin level), (d) preparation of specific
                      instruments required in case particular triggers/ situations (such as biodiversity or cultural heritage management) are
                      identified in specific sub-projects and; (e) guides monitoring and reporting requirements. It also covers
                      implementation arrangements, including staffing and means for strengthening capacity on E&S risk management. The
                      ESMF is guided by WBG's EHS Guidelines and Good Practice Notes and includes a short Indigenous Peoples Planning
                      Framework (IPPF). In addition, to deal anticipated ESHS risks/impacts and inadequate capacity, specific requirements
                      on implementation arrangements, including creation of E&S Cell at MITRA/PMU, staffing and capacity development
                      (for both immediate/short and long term needs) have been included in the ESMF and ESCP. In addition to ESMF,
                      other project level Environment and Social instruments that have been prepared for MRDP include: (a) Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP), (b) Labour Management Procedures (LMP), (c) Environment and Social Commitment Plan
                      (ESCP) and, (d) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Updated drafts of ESCP and SEP along with the A-ESRS will be
                      disclosed by Appraisal. Revised drafts of the remaining three project level instruments (ESMF, LMP and RPF) will be
                      disclosed by MITRA/PMU by/before the Board date along with the translation of executive summaries (of all




Public Disclosure
                      documents) in vernacular. The documents will also be disclosed at Bank's end on the project portal once MITRA has
                      completed disclosure. For priority investments to meet the readiness criteria of Govt. of India (Department of
                      Economic Affairs), sub-project level ESIA and ESMP have been prepared for Storm Water Drainage Improvement
                      Works of Kolhapur and Sangli. These instruments will be disclosed before the project is presented for World Bank
                      Board’s consideration. In addition, any potential downstream E&S risks from Technical Assistance (TA) activities (such
                      as Feasibility Studies, Analytics, Mapping, Modelling etc.) will be managed and mitigated by ensuring the Terms of
                      Reference and final deliverables, comply with relevant requirements stated in ESSs 1 to 10. To manage potential
                      risks/issues related to any work and/or activity under retroactive financing (primarily covering consulting services and
                      studies), due diligence will be conducted to ensure that such activities meet the requirements of the ESF/ESSs and
                      project level E&S instruments (ESMF, SEP, LMP, RPF, and ESCP). The findings from such exercise/s shall be reflected in
                      an Environment and Social Due Diligence Report (ESDD) and specific actions/measures will be undertaken before
                      disbursement under retroactive financing is considered. These requirements have been integrated in the ESCP and
                      the project's ESMF. Cumulative E&S impacts at river basin level have been integrated in the Terms of Reference for
                      the Integrated Basin Level Master Plan preparation under Component 1, which is expected to be ready by the end of
                      first year of project implementation. All these requirements have been integrated in the ESMF and ESCP.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      MRDP is expected to benefit approximately 100 million people living in the State, including: (a) people, farmers and
                      business owners living along the Krishna and Panchganga rivers that benefit from flood hazard reduction measures;
                      (b) residents of Ichalkaranji, Kolhapur, and Sangli with reduced flood risk exposure due to improved storm water
                      management; (c) citizens of Maharashtra benefiting from enhanced emergency operations and, (d) owners and


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      employees of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and households with increased access to insurance and
                      credit products. Project affected persons include people losing land, structures and livelihoods from river works and
                      urban stormwater works and those who may get exposed to construction stages issues (dust, traffic diversion etc)
                      during execution of civil works. Vulnerable and Disadvantaged households are primarily non-titleholders, squatters
                      and encroachers living along the drains in the cities, as well as Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes, women-headed,
                      differently abled, and senior citizens. In addition, key stakeholders include officials of government departments
                      involved, officials and staff of three Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) of Kolhapur, Sangli and Ichalkaranji, consultants,
                      contractors, suppliers of construction materials and Other Interested Groups. The composition may change
                      depending on the specific geographical areas where additional sub-projects will be located, which are not known at
                      the appraisal stage. It is necessary to ensure that a consistent, comprehensive, coordinated, and culturally
                      appropriate approach is taken for stakeholder engagement and project related information is disclosed in a timely,
                      clear and relevant manner. To guide this process, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared. It: (i)
                      Identifies different categories of stakeholders, (ii) lays down guidance for meaningful and timely stakeholder
                      engagement, (iii) puts forth the differentiated stakeholder engagement needs or requirements, (iv) identifies
                      effective methods, timing and structures through which project information can be shared with and opportunity to
                      participate and influence project/sub-project planning and design, (v) defines clear roles and responsibilities for the
                      implementation of the SEP and (vi) establishes/strengthens formal grievance/resolution mechanisms. The revised
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan will be disclosed by appraisal completion and will be updated, as necessary, to capture
                      information when additional sub-projects/activities are identified and prepared going forward. At the sub-project
                      level, MITRA/PMU, MKVDC and ULBs are actively seeking feedback from stakeholders and taking measures to
                      incorporate relevant inputs into the design of project and sub-projects. Details of such exercises are being/will be




Public Disclosure
                      presented in the sub-project specific Environment and Social Impact Assessment Reports (ESIAs) and Resettlement
                      Action Plans (RAPs). This includes targeted consultations with women and other vulnerable groups. Meetings and
                      field interactions have been held in Kolhapur and Sangli with residents, community leaders, elected representatives
                      and government officials at various points of time between December 2024 and March 2025. These consultations
                      engaged with stakeholders to understand their issues and challenges with respect to floods and disasters and are
                      specifically soliciting their feedback and concerns (if any) on proposed MRDP interventions. These consultations
                      focused on flood-affected and project influence areas along the Upper Krishna River Basin. The team engaged with
                      residents from identified hotspots through public meetings, focus group discussions (FGDs), and household surveys -
                      with special attention to vulnerable groups such as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, non-title holders, informal
                      settlers, and street vendors. The objective was to gather feedback on proposed project interventions, likely
                      environment and social benefits and impacts, including those related to environmental health, construction work,
                      land and livelihoods to ensure inclusive planning for investments under MRDP. Community responses were
                      documented and integrated into the ESIAs and Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), with a grievance redressal
                      mechanism established for addressing any concerns. Further engagement with stakeholders will include web
                      disclosure/redisclosure of E&S documents; consultations during design process of sub-projects, including while
                      conducting surveys and studies; meetings with experts and communities for discussion on specific topics; information
                      dissemination through various channels/medium on the project and sub-projects, including through social media.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      The proposed project involves: a) Direct workers employed by the PMU and PIUs, including individual consultants
                      hired for technical, fiduciary, environment, social and project management roles; b) Contracted Workers hired


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      through contractors for construction works, and Consultants involved in design/Detailed Project Report preparation,
                      supervision services, various studies, surveys and audits and; c) Primary Suppliers of construction materials,
                      equipment’s, IT systems, disaster management related gear etc. Involvement of community workers and risks related
                      to child/forced labor are not anticipated, given the nature of works and past experience in the state of Maharashtra.
                      However, potential for inadequate wage practices, and sub-standard living conditions in worker accommodation does
                      exist. Given the possible participation of women in works and proximity to habitations, moderate risks of gender-
                      based violence, sexual abuse, ill-treatment and exploitation exist. Based on experience, poor functioning of grievance
                      redressal mechanisms for workers is also an anticipated risk. Construction will involve workers from both within and
                      outside Maharashtra, depending on contractor's strategy and skill set requirements. Labor related risks arise from
                      establishment of labor camps and presence of migrant workers, which can lead to community tensions and
                      integration challenges. Occupational health and safety challenges from heavy machinery movement, work in/near
                      water, slippery conditions, dredging, excavation, falling debris (during landslide mitigation works), snake/insect bites,
                      and handling solid wastes/silt (which could possibly be contaminated) are key risks requiring careful mitigation and
                      close monitoring. Labor Management Procedures (LMP) for the project have been prepared in line with ESS 2 and ESS
                      4, ensuring fair treatment, non-discrimination, and protection of vulnerable groups such as women, and migrant
                      workers. The LMP establishes a code of conduct, requires strict adherence to labor laws, and explicitly prohibits child
                      and forced labor. It mandates safe and healthy working conditions, and provides accessible grievance redressal
                      mechanisms for workers. Contractors are required to develop and implement C-ESMPs that include labour welfare
                      and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) requirements in accordance with the World Bank Group’s Environmental
                      Health and Safety Guidelines and national/state regulations. ESHS requirements have been reflected in the Labor
                      Management Procedures and Environmental and Social Commitment Plan and will be integrated into bidding




Public Disclosure
                      documents, ensuring that all stakeholders address both labour welfare and occupation health and safety risks,
                      including minimizing exposure to hazards and communicable diseases, and maintaining effective emergency response
                      arrangements. A functional GRM will be established accessible to all direct, contracted and migrant workers to raise
                      workplace related concerns.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      On resource efficiency, the project interventions are/will be considering: a) improving water management, b)
                      enhancing energy efficiency, c) utilization and reuse of construction debris/dredged materials from river
                      widening/desilting works (following required testing protocols to ascertain safety for handlers/workers and general
                      public) and, d) use of alternative/local materials. In addition, resource efficiency requirements are also needed for
                      nature-based solutions, which require plants, soils, and mulch. Native plant species will be used to ensure
                      compatibility with the local ecosystem and minimize maintenance requirements. Soil, mulch, and other materials
                      would be sourced sustainably to avoid depletion of local natural resources and measures for erosion control/loss of
                      soils would be integrated into designs. For this, bulk of the materials, including stone, will be sourced from
                      local/adjoining areas/existing approved quarries to reduce transport footprint and keep construction costs in check.
                      In addition, national/state regulations and codal provisions associated with sourcing of construction materials will be
                      followed, which specify where and how materials can be excavated, transported and used (with permits/consents,
                      fees, testing, etc). For pollution management, focus is/will be on: a) construction waste management; b) silt control
                      at work sites to prevent sedimentation; c) preventing contamination of water sources, including from construction
                      activities; d) measures for dust and noise pollution control; e) management of hazardous wastes if any, which are
                      being/will be ascertained as part of sub-project level impact assessment studies, f) storage and management of


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      construction materials to prevent ground/soil contamination. Among other considerations, measures to maintain or
                      improve water quality (including temperature, dissolved oxygen, odor prevention etc. will be promoted. Resource
                      efficiency and pollution management measures will apply both to grey and green/nature-based solutions. The
                      considerations also include use of appropriate construction technologies/methodology, sequencing and timing of
                      works. Moreover, institutional capacity of MKVDC and Urban Local Bodies on resource efficient, green and resilient
                      construction methods will be created by integrating appropriate approaches into designs and work procedures in
                      addition to promoting the use of nature based solutions (NbS).

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      The interventions under MRDP - particularly river training, flood mitigation works, and urban drainage improvement -
                      involve heavy machinery movement, excavation, and transportation of silt and soil aggregates in Kolhapur and Sangli
                      districts. These activities are likely to increase the risks of accidents and injuries for workers and nearby communities,
                      especially vulnerable groups such as children and the elderly. Residents living close to construction sites, specifically
                      in the three urban centers (Kolhapur, Sangli and Ichalkaranji) are likely to get exposed to dust, noise, and vibrations
                      from construction equipment/machinery and material transport. Dust emissions from excavation and soil handling
                      can potentially cause respiratory issues and increase safety risks due to reduced visibility. The influx of temporary
                      workers may raise the risk of communicable diseases within labor camps and among local communities. The siting of
                      labor camps in/near settlements makes communities, especially women and children vulnerable to GBV, SEA/SH
                      risks. Additionally, deep excavation and works related to landslide mitigation in certain areas could destabilize slopes
                      and soil and threaten nearby structures and communities. To address these risks, the Environmental and Social
                      Impact Assessments (ESIAs) will identify and assess community health and safety impacts during the project's



Public Disclosure
                      lifecycle. The ESMPs and bidding documents will include specific actions and requirements on Traffic Management
                      Plans, material storage and transport, SEA/SH risk mitigation, awareness campaigns, separate safe facilities for men
                      and women at worksites and labor camps, grievance redressal, GBV risk prevention measures and other Community
                      Health and Safety measures. Monitoring systems will be created to check compliance of these measures. The ESIAs
                      for storm water improvement works of Kolhapur and Sangli have assessed CHS risks and included requisite measures
                      in the ESMPs and Bidding Documents. In addition green/nature-based solutions for flood (urban wetlands and
                      floodable parks) and landslide risk mitigation works under Component 2, can lead to negative environmental impacts
                      and major nuances (safety hazards, competing land demands, vector breeding grounds etc.) if not carefully planned,
                      used and maintained. Measures will include access control during flooding events, preventing mosquito breeding,
                      clear communication for communities, emergency response arrangements etc. The PIUs will ensure that the traffic
                      management, construction and site plans allow safe passage to communities to their properties and common
                      amenities. The proposed rehabilitation work for Radhanagari Dam under Component 1 requires application of ESS 4
                      Annex 1: Safety of Dams, for which the Borrower will arrange an independent dam safety assessment, satisfactory to
                      the Bank for review and no objection (the terms of refence for that assessment and the CV of the selected expert will
                      be approved by the Bank). The Borrower shall arrange for an independent panel of experts, for which the Bank will
                      review and provide no objection to the composition, the terms of refence for the Panel, and to the proposed
                      individual experts. The Borrower shall arrange for the preparation of the Dam Safety Reports in accordance with the
                      requirements of ESS 4 with further guidance from the Good Practice Note on Dam Safety. These requirements include
                      a preparation of Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance (CSQAP), Instrumentation Plan (IP), an Operation
                      and Maintenance (O&M) plan (O&MP) and an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP), timelines for which have been
                      stated in the ESCP. To meet these requirements for MRDP, PMU/MITRA and MKVDC are tapping into


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      instruments/documents, systems and human resources (including the panel of experts) already approved by the Bank
                      under the on-going Second Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (P170873), in which Maharashtra is a
                      participating state. The independent panel of experts is already in place and the dam safety assessment will be
                      completed prior to invitation of the Bids for the said work. Following this, the Borrower is arranging for the detailed
                      design and bidding documents for the new spillway installation and associated civil works to be reviewed by the Panel
                      and Bank. The project will not finance civil works beyond the scope of the spillway installation and associated civil
                      works. However, the Borrower shall commit to financing and providing any critical remedial measures in the
                      timeframe acceptable to the Bank (within that of the project, should any safety issues be identified).

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      The proposed flood mitigation and river training works on Krishna (17 kilometers; width 20-40 meters) and
                      Panchganga rivers (40 kms; 10-20 meters) will provide direct flood protection to about 1.61 lakh population in 110
                      villages. The works involve restoration, widening of river cross section, construction of flood bypass, reinforcement of
                      embankments, dumping ground etc. As per preliminary estimates, this will require 215 ha of land, of which 75 ha is
                      expected to be government land and 140 ha private land. Land will be purchased or acquired from an 120 title
                      holders (598 project affected persons). Given that this will be agricultural land along the rivers which is prone to
                      flooding and erosion without any settlements, no permanent/temporary relocation and/or loss of private structures
                      is expected. These numbers may change based on the detailed modelling exercise and feasibility study and
                      thereafter, preparation of DPRs/design for selected interventions. Acquisition of private agricultural land is likely to
                      cause loss of income from agriculture, especially for small and marginal farmers, and will require compensation for
                      loss of land along with livelihood assistance. Temporary restrictions on river access during construction/dredging and



Public Disclosure
                      reduced downstream flow could disrupt fishing, sand mining, farming along riverbanks as well as damages to standing
                      crops. Temporary loss of income for small-scale farmers and fishers is also anticipated. Additionally, works related to
                      the KT Weir and Radhanagari Dam could result in changes to water flow, reduced downstream flows could impact
                      irrigation access for some. The key mitigation measures include providing compensation for lost assets or crops (as
                      per ESS 5) and implementing livelihood restoration programs for affected groups. Urban flood management and
                      drainage works - including the upgrading of storm water drainage networks, culverts, and desilting measures in
                      Kolhapur, Sangli, and Ichalkaranji cities - are likely to cause temporary relocation of about 56 shopkeepers. In Sangli,
                      one land parcel would need to be acquired. During construction, about 37 residential structures and 49 commercial
                      structures will be impacted. 31 small shops will be impacted with temporary relocation. In Kolhapur, there will be
                      temporary relocation for 25 small shops (NTH) due to shifting during construction. Large number of common
                      properties and public utilities will be affected such as electricity, gas, telecom, water and sanitation lines and access
                      roads. Additional impacts may be from land requirements of pumping stations, restoration of natural drains and
                      minor tanks. Changes in flood management practices could impact livelihoods downstream. The extent of land
                      acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation impacts as well as downstream livelihood impacts are yet to be
                      determined. In line with ESS 5, the project will be preparing livelihood assistance plans for the PAPs of storm water
                      subprojects in Sangli and Kolhapur. These will include compensation provisions and resettlement support measures
                      along with detailed timelines and budget. For other subprojects that will be prepared later, an RPF has been prepared
                      which will guide preparation of RAPs for subsequent investments. As per the RPF, the Project shall not commence any
                      construction work that would lead to displacement of any PAP unless a Bank-approved RAP has been implemented.
                      The RPF will prioritize the use of negotiated purchase method, as is being done in the state. Key measures included in
                      the RPF are: a) provision for conducting Social Impact Assessment (SIA); b) Recognition to non- titleholders (informal


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      occupants) using public/ government lands c) R&R assistances for transition period, resettlement allowance, shifting
                      allowance for those displaced and other support measures d) cut-off-date for non-titleholders; e) additional R&R
                      provisions for identified vulnerable households beyond scheduled tribe (ST) and scheduled caste (SC) categories.
                      Provision has been made for engagement of NGOs to assist with finalization of RAPs, validation of PAPs and socio-
                      economic baseline data included in RAPs, and delivery of compensation and livelihood assistance. Monitoring and
                      reporting of RPF will be carried out by the social experts of the Project Management and Technical Consultants
                      (PMTC). Actions related to ESS 5 are included in RPF, ESCP and ESMF.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      Krishna River Basin is home to rich diversity of flora and fauna, including some endemic and endangered species. It is
                      a major perennial river of northern Western Ghats, originating at Mahabaleshwar in Maharashtra, and traverses 290
                      km through Satara, Sangli, and Kolhapur districts of the state, before flowing into Karnataka. These districts have
                      protected areas/sensitive habitats, such as Chandoli National Park, Radhanagari Wildlife Sanctuary and Koyna Wildlife
                      Sanctuary. Based on the environment screening results for sub-projects identified so far, none of the proposed
                      interventions under MRDP are located in protected areas (such as National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuaries or Bird
                      Sanctuaries). Going forward, as additional sub-projects are identified/considered for inclusion under the project,
                      presence of a Protected Area will be flagged by applying a robust environment screening mechanism and if any such
                      sub-project is identified, it will be excluded from project’s scope. Requirements to this effect have been included both
                      in the ESMF and ESCP. For sub-project sites outside the protected domains, where environment screening identifies
                      potential risks and/or adverse impacts on biodiversity (including presence of critical habitats), a detailed Biodiversity



Public Disclosure
                      Assessment shall be conducted, and Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) with appropriate measures
                      (commensurate to the needs/findings of such a study) will be prepared, consistent with ESS 6 requirements and
                      guidance provided in the ESMF. Based on preliminary information, biodiversity assessment and management plan will
                      be required for works associated with Flood Risk Mitigation/Management under Component 1 and possibly for some
                      blue-green interventions under Component 2. The proposed interventions under Component 1 can potentially have
                      impact on riparian and aquatic habitats of Krishna river and its tributaries. However, the nature, magnitude and
                      typology of impacts can be determined after modelling and feasibility studies advance (these are currently underway)
                      and specific sub-project areas/locations are identified. Once the sub-projects/interventions are identified (or
                      early/indicative results are available), environment screening exercise will be conducted to determine areas/stretches
                      with biodiversity values. As part of detailed biodiversity assessment for such sites, mitigation hierarchy as per ESS 6
                      will be applied, consultations with subject experts will be conducted, and avoidance/ minimization/mitigation
                      measures will be worked out to ensure that there is no net loss and encourage possibly net gain through MRDP (like it
                      has been done in other Bank funded projects using a combination of engineering and non-engineering management
                      measures). Additionally, since the project interventions entail use of nature-based solutions, aspects like use of native
                      plant species, protecting/nurturing floodplain habitats (to the extent possible) and controlling invasive species will be
                      a part of environment management/mitigation strategy. In addition, sensitization and training of staff and
                      contractors from Govt. of India's established learning/research centers (such as Wildlife Institute of India, which has
                      also been identified as a Nodal Learning Centre under E&S Client Capacity Development Plan for India) will be carried
                      out. Further, cumulative effects/impact assessment as a part of the Integrated River Basin Master Plan for Upper
                      Krishna Basin under Component 1 of the project will cover biodiversity aspects and identify possible risks/impacts
                      due to activities at the larger landscape level (which may have interactions with works under MRDP).


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Less than 1 percent of the total population in Kolhapur and Sangli is tribal, and their collective presence in or
                      attachment to project area can't be ruled out. However, despite their limited presence, these tribal communities
                      remain vulnerable to socio-economic marginalization, exclusion from government welfare schemes, and are at
                      greater risks from floods, landslides and droughts. Their low numbers and lack of targeted support also means they
                      often face greater challenges in accessing disaster related relief and rehabilitation support, highlighting the need for
                      focused interventions to address their vulnerabilities. While individual, project affected persons could be scheduled
                      tribes, impacts on customary land, livelihoods and resources of tribal people are not anticipated. Based on the
                      stakeholder engagement and consultations during project preparation, MRDP has prepared a short Indigenous
                      People’s Planning Framework (IPPF) to mitigate any adverse impacts on tribal population and their lands, resources
                      and heritage – and included it in the ESMF. The IPPF outlines the principles and processes of mitigating the risks and
                      negative impacts of the project/sub-project on tribal population and is aligned with the requirements of ESS 7. The
                      IPPF includes i) screening checklist for identification of presence of Indigenous people while selecting sites for sub-
                      projects; ii) process of engagement, consultations and information disclosure; iii) mitigation measures to compensate
                      for loss of individual land, structures, crops and income; iv) establishment of grievance redressal mechanism and, v)
                      process for preparing simplified TDPs as part of RAP. FPIC is not applicable as MRDP will not be a) impacting lands,
                      cultural properties and natural resources traditionally owned or used by indigenous peoples; b) causing relocation of
                      indigenous peoples from their traditional lands or restrict their access to ancestral areas; and c) altering cultural sites
                      and/or disrupting traditional practices.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      Krishna River basin is endowed with rich history, built and natural heritage. At Appraisal, four sub-projects with
                      known heritage value have been identified. These are Radhanagari Dam (Component 1), KT Weir (Component 1),
                      Jyotiba Hill (Component 2b) and Panhala Fort (Component 2b), for which a Cultural Heritage Management Plan
                      (CHMP) will be prepared in accordance to requirements of ESS 8. This plan will be prepared concurrently with the
                      engineering design/Detailed Project Report (DPR) preparation, which has recently started for Radhanagri Dam and is
                      yet to commence for the other three works. Going forward, as more sub-projects are considered/ascertained for
                      inclusion under the project, cultural heritage implications will be identified early-on in the decision making cycle
                      through: a) environment and social screening and, b) consultations with stakeholders to identify any sensitive issues
                      related to tangible and/or intangible cultural resources. Sub-project level ESIAs will confirm existence of Cultural
                      Heritage elements and assess methods for avoiding possible adverse impacts. Suitable management plans/measures
                      commensurate to the requirements of the work and site characteristics will be finalized as part of the Cultural
                      Heritage Management Plan and implemented. Mitra/PMU, PIUs and Consultants will be sensitized on requirements
                      of ESS 8 to be included in the design/DPRs and ESIAs, including chance finds during site surveys and construction
                      work. This will include the process to notify relevant authorities, fencing off the site and hiring experts for advice.
                      Required procedures are being included in the ESMF and clauses will be integrated in Bidding Documents. These
                      requirements have been reflected in the ESCP as well.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 13 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      ESS 9 is not relevant as the program does not involve Financial Intermediaries. The loan rebates and insurance
                      subsidies will be paid by MITRA/PMU directly to beneficiaries for activities under Component 4.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part
                       The assessment on use of Borrower Framework heavily draws findings from the work carried out by Environment and
                       Social Teams for the India Over-view Assessment as part of E&S Client Capacity Development and Support Plan that
                       was executed between 2022 and 2024. In the light of this assessment and the long experience with Govt. of
                       Maharashtra on several Bank financed operations, partial application of Borrower’s Systems has been considered. This
                       covers selected/relevant aspects of ESS 1 (Assessment and Management of risks and impacts), ESS 2 (Labour and
                       Working Conditions), ESS 3 (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention), ESS 4 (Community Health and Safety), ESS 6
                       (Biodiversity Conservation), ESS 8 (Cultural Heritage) and ESS 10 (Stakeholder Engagement and Information
                       Disclosure), drawing upon country’s current regulatory frameworks (acts/laws, rules and codes). The
                       applicability/relevance will be determined in the specific context of a sub-project under MRDP and reflected in the
                       ESIA-ESMP or in the study report.



Public Disclosure
                       The key environmental aspects/thematic areas for which the Borrower Framework will be partially applied include
                       E&S risk identification, Occupational Health and Safety, resource efficiency, pollution prevention, biodiversity
                       conservation and management of tangible cultural heritage. The key social areas that would be covered include land
                       acquisition, resettlement, information sharing, labor and working conditions and grievance redressal.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       Not Applicable

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     A. At the project level, the following instruments have been prepared at Appraisal.

                     1. Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to guide screening, assessment and mitigation of E&S risks
                     and process/procedures for preparation of required
                        ESMPs/ESS specific plans. In addition, it includes a short IPPF.
                     2. Labour Management Procedures (LMP).
                     3. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                     4. Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
                     5. Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). It covers requirements pertaining to:

                          • Organizational structure and staffing to manage EHS and social risks/impacts.
                          •    Preparation of sub-project specific screening reports, ESIAs, ESMPs, RAPs, and other plans
                          •    Evidence-based reporting requirements, to facilitate real time tracking of ESHS management.
                          •    Worksite safety and labor management, including OHS aspects
                          •    Biodiversity Management
                          •    Cultural Heritage Protection/Management
                          • Implementation of SEP, GBV/SEA/SH risk prevention/mitigation plans, LMP and other instruments
                          •    Establishment and operationalization of GRMs.

                     Updated drafts of ESCP and SEP along with the A-ESRS will be disclosed by Appraisal. Revised drafts of the remaining
                     three project level instruments (ESMF, LMP and RPF) will be disclosed by MITRA/PMU by/before the Board date along
                     with the translation of executive summaries (of all documents) in vernacular. The documents will also be disclosed at
                     Bank's end on the project portal.

                     B. At the sub-project level, to meet Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Govt. of India's Readiness requirements for
                     negotiations, Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), including Environment and Social Management Plans
                     (ESMPs) for Storm Water Drainage Improvement Works for Sangli and Kolhapur cities have been prepared. The revised
                     documents will be disclosed in-country and on Bank's portal before/by Board date.




Public Disclosure
                     C. Project Documents where E&S requirements have been/are being/will be integrated include:

                         •     Terms of Reference for consultancies.
                         •     Bidding/Contract Documents.
                         •     Cumulative effects assessed as part of the Integrated River Basin Master Plan under Component 1.
                         •     Integration of ESHS aspects into relevant outputs/deliverables/studies carried out under the project.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Jolanta Kryspin-Watson                 Title:          Lead Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  jkryspin@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Anup Karanth                           Job Title:      Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  akaranth@worldbank.org



                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Maharashtra Resilience Development Project (P506340)



                      TTL Contact:            Yukio Tanaka                       Job Title:    Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                               Specialist

                      Email:                  ytanaka@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                        Jolanta Kryspin-Watson, Anup Karanth, Yukio Tanaka

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:               Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra

                     ADM Social Specialist:                      Varun Singh




Public Disclosure




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                         Page 16 of 16
