Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI01086




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                      ON A

                                                                              PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                                    IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 103,108,300
                                                                       (US$137 MILLION EQUIVALENT)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                       TO

                                                                                     NEPAL

                                                                                     FOR A

                                             MODERNIZATION OF RANI JAMARA KULARIYA IRRIGATION PROJECT - PHASE 3


                                                                                    MAY 6, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Water Global Practice
                                South Asia Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                (Exchange Rate Effective {March 31,2025})

                   Currency Unit = NEPALESE RUPEE (NPR)
                        NPR136.76 = US$1
                           US$1.33 = SDR 1

                                 FISCAL YEAR
                               July 16 - July 15




  Regional Vice President: Martin Raiser
Regional Practice Director: Dina Umali-Deininger
         Division Director: David N. Sislen
        Practice Manager: Josses Mugabi
      Task Team Leaders: Rubika Shrestha, Maha Ahmed
         ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACIU     Agriculture Component Implementation Unit
AM       Accountability Mechanism
CPF      Country Partnership Framework
CSA      Climate-Smart Agriculture
DoWRI    Department of Water Resources and Irrigation
DoA      Department of Agriculture
E&S      Environmental and Social
EIRR     Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESCP     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
FM       Financial Management
FMIS     Farmer-managed irrigation systems
FY       Fiscal year
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GHG      Greenhouse Gas
GoN      Government of Nepal
GRM      Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS      Grievance Redress Service
ha       hectares
IAs      Irrigation Agencies
IDA      International Development Association
IPF      Investment Project Financing
ISF      Irrigation Service Fee
IUFR     Interim Unaudited Financial Report
LRP      Livelihood Restoration Plan
MIS      Management Information System
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MoALD    Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development
MoEWRI   Ministry of Energy, Water Resources, and Irrigation
MoF      Ministry of Finance
MOM      Management, Operation, and Maintenance
NPV      Net Present Value
NRB      Nepal Rastra Bank
OAG      Office of the Auditor General
OHS      Occupational Health and Safety
PIM      Project Implementation Manual
PIO      Project Implementation Office
PDO      Project Development Objective
PSC      Project Steering Committee
RCP      Representative Concentration Pathway
RJK      Rani Jamara Kulariya
RJKIP    Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project
SDR      Special Drawing Rights
STEP     Systematic Tracking and Exchanges in Procurement
ToC      Theory of Change
US$      United States Dollar
WUA      Water User Association
The World Bank
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                                                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ..................................................................................................................................... i
I.     STRATEGIC CONTEXT ............................................................................................................. 1
      A. Project Strategic Context ....................................................................................................... 1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context........................................................................................... 2
II.    PROJECT DESCRIPTION .......................................................................................................... 4
      A. Project Development Objective (PDO) .................................................................................... 5
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators ..................................................................................... 5
      C. Project Beneficiaries .............................................................................................................. 5
      D. Project Components .............................................................................................................. 6
      E. Role of Partners ..................................................................................................................... 9
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ............................................................... 9
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION................................................................................................ 10
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ................................................................... 10
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements.............................................. 11
      C. Disbursement Arrangements ................................................................................................ 11
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ......................................................................................... 11
      A. Technical and Economic Analysis .......................................................................................... 11
      B. Fiduciary ............................................................................................................................. 14
      C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ............................................................. 16
V. KEY RISKS .............................................................................................................................. 17
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ............................................................................................... 19
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Nepal                     Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3
                                                      Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                      Classification
                         Investment Project
P507433                                               Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                       [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)

[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                     [ ] Fragile State(s)

[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                          [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                                [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country

[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                      [ ] Conflict

[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                            [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster

[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                   [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                  Expected Closing Date
29-May-2025                             17-Jul-2031
Bank/IFC Collaboration

No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve irrigation services and agricultural productivity in the target areas.


Components
 Component Name                                                                                             Cost (US$)


                                                                                                                         i
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


 Irrigation improvement and development                                                                         126.00
 Watershed management                                                                                            20.00
 Agriculture support services                                                                                    16.00
 Institutional Support and Project Management                                                                    13.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                      Nepal

 Contact                        Title                        Telephone No.         Email
 .. ..                          The Secretary of the         +977-1-4211164         fso@mof.gov.np
                                Ministry of Finance
 Implementing Agency:            Ministry of Energy Water Resources and Irrigation , Department of Agriculture,
                                Department of Water Resources and Irrigation , Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                Development
 Contact                        Title                        Telephone No.          Email
 .. .                           The Secretary of the         +977-1- 4211426        moewrai555@gmail.com
                                Ministry of Energy, Water
                                Resources and Irrigation
 .. .                           The Director General of      977-1-5421323          doa.agri2014@gmail.com
                                Department of Agriculture
 .. .                           The Director General of      +977-1-5437136         dg_pasection@dwri.gov.np
                                the Department of Water
                                Resources and Irrigation
 .. .                           The Secretary of the         +977-1-4211665         dccd.moald@gmail.com
                                Ministry of Agriculture and
                                Livestock Development



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          175.00

                                                                                                                       ii
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



 Total Financing                                                                                               175.00
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               137.00

 Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 137.00

     IDA Credit                                                                                                137.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Commercial Financing                                                                                          5.00

     Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                           5.00

   Counterpart Funding                                                                                          33.00

     Borrower/Recipient                                                                                         33.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                          Guarantee
                           Credit Amount      Grant Amount         SML Amount                             Total Amount
                                                                                            Amount

National
Performance-Based                  137.00               0.00                0.00               0.00             137.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                              137.00               0.00                0.00               0.00             137.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year              2025          2026        2027          2028         2029         2030         2031          2032

Annual            0.00          5.00        10.00        22.00         26.00        35.00        35.00          4.00
Cumulativ
e                 0.00          5.00        15.00        37.00         63.00        98.00        133.00        137.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate

                                                                                                                       iii
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas
Water                                                         Agriculture and Food

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Substantial
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No


                                                                                            iv
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                       Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                      Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                             Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                   Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                    Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                    Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement        Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                      Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                      Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                              Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                       Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall prepare and adopt a Project Implementation Manual (PIM) for the Project, no later than three (3)
months after the Effective Date, in form and substance satisfactory to the Association (FA, Schedule 2, Section I.B)
The Recipient shall: (a) ensure that the following expenditures are financed exclusively out of its own resources and not
out of the proceeds of the Financing; and (b) provide, promptly as needed, the resources needed for this purpose: (i) all
associated costs with land acquisition for the irrigation canal system; (ii) all associated costs with forest clearance; and
(iii) all associated costs with salaries and allowances of government staff in the PIO and ACIU (FA, Schedule 2, Section
IV)
Without limitation upon the provision of Section 3.01 of this Agreement and Section I.D of this Schedule, the PIO shall,
by not later than nine (9) months after the Effective Date, appoint an independent party, with terms of reference
satisfactory to the Association, for annual independent monitoring of environmental compliance and performance of
the Project (FA, Schedule 2, Section I.A.3 ).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
                                                                                                                          v
       The World Bank
       NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


Conditions
Type                          Citation                      Description                    Financing Source
                                                            Notwithstanding the
                                                            provisions of Part A of this
                                                            Section, no withdrawal
                                                            shall be made: (a) for
                                                            payments made prior to
                                                            the Signature Date; or (b)
                              FA, Schedule 2, Section
Disbursement                                                for Eligible Expenditures      IBRD/IDA
                              III.B.1
                                                            under Category (3) (i) and
                                                            (ii), until and unless the
                                                            Recipient has adopted the
                                                            PIM, in form and substance
                                                            to the Association (FA,
                                                            Schedule 2, Section III.B.1)




                                                                                                              vi
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



    I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT


    A. Project Strategic Context
1.       Nepal’s growth rate accelerated to 3.9 percent in Fiscal Year (FY) 24, up from 2 percent in FY23. The services
sector was a key driver, fueled by a surge in tourist arrivals that boosted activities in transportation, accommodation,
and food services sub-sectors. Paddy production, one of the three principal cereal crops in terms of area coverage,
increased by 4.3 percent, further supporting economic growth in FY24. On the demand side, high remittance inflows
bolstered private consumption while public investment remained subdued due to persistently low execution of the
capital spending budget. Average headline inflation moderated to 5.4 percent in FY24, down from 7.7 percent in FY23,
falling below the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB)’s ceiling of 6.5 percent.1 A drop in non-food and services inflation primarily
drove this decline. However, food prices remained elevated, driven by higher inflation in vegetables and cereals. The
current account balance turned positive in FY24 for the first time in eight years, leading to a significant accumulation of
foreign exchange reserves, enough for 13 months of imports, well above the policy threshold of 7 months.
2.        The fiscal deficit dropped sharply from 5.8 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in FY23 to 2.5 percent
of GDP in FY24 as spending contracted, while revenue stabilized at its lowest point in eight years. Government
spending decreased from 25.2 percent of GDP in FY23 to 21.9 percent in FY24, driven by a reduction in fiscal transfers
to the recurrent budget of provincial governments and local levels. In addition, lower-than-expected revenue collection
contributed to reduced capital spending, particularly in construction projects. The Government of Nepal’s revenue
(including grants) was almost stagnant at 19.4 percent of GDP in FY24. This stagnation reflected a decline in other
revenues, which offset the increase in income tax collection. Public debt decreased slightly to 42.7 percent of GDP in
FY24 from 42.9 percent in FY232, primarily due to the lower fiscal deficit and higher growth rate. According to the latest
joint International Monetary Fund-World Bank debt sustainability analysis (June 2024), Nepal remains at low risk of debt
distress for both external and overall public debt.
3.        Nepal’s growth is expected to rise to 4.5 percent in FY25, close to historical averages. Growth will continue to
be primarily driven by private consumption and services. In addition, Nepal's industrial sector is projected to grow,
driven by significant expansions in electricity and construction, with the government aiming to exceed 11,700 MW of
installed hydroelectricity capacity by FY29. The agriculture sector is also projected to grow over the medium term due
to increased paddy production. However, without targeted policies to unlock high-potential sectors such as tourism and
digital industries, Nepal risks continuing its pattern of slow structural transformation.
4.        Although Nepal’s medium-term growth outlook remains generally positive, it is subject to several downside
risks. Increased vulnerabilities in the financial system, such as a rise in non-performing loans, could curtail private-sector
credit. Policy discontinuity resulting from frequent changes in political administration, along with the short tenures of
officials, might deter investors. Delays in implementing capital expenditure could hinder infrastructure development,
negatively impacting growth. Externally, heightened global trade uncertainty could negatively affect growth through
lower remittances and tourist inflows. Natural disasters pose additional risks to sustaining welfare gains. However,
Nepal's robust track record of maintaining macroeconomic stability during periods of significant exogenous shocks
demonstrates its growing capacity to navigate future macroeconomic risks.
5.       Nepal’s political system is democratic and has a coalition-based government. Nepal has had four successive
coalition governments that took office since the federal and provincial elections held in November 2022. The current
coalition took over on July 14, 2024, led by the two largest parties in parliament. At the subnational level, funds,

1 NRB is the central bank of Nepal. Macroeconomic data are sourced from NRB, Ministry of Finance, National Statistics Office, and Financial Comptroller General
Office for historical data, and World Bank for projections.
2 This is based on the numbers reported by the authorities and, as such, do not account for the negative balance of the Treasur y Single Account. Other numbers are

as per the International Monetary Fund-World Bank joint Debt Sustainability Analysis.

                                                                                                                                                             Page 1
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


functions, and staff are managed by seven provinces and 753 local governments for which legislation, institutions, and
administrative procedures are in place as constitutionally prescribed, while the task of enacting new laws and amending
existing ones in line with the 2015 constitution is still in progress.
6.      Nepal is highly vulnerable to climate change. With a climate that varies considerably both seasonally and
geographically, warming in Nepal is projected to be higher than the global average. 3 Nepal ranked 10th in the world as
a country most affected by climate hazards between 2000 and 2019 according to the Climate Risk Index.4 With the
gradual increase in temperature and increases in the occurrence of erratic rainfall patterns, Nepal is facing challenges
from both rapid and slow-onset climate-change exacerbated hazards. The former includes floods, landslides, and
heatwaves, while the latter comprises mainly droughts. The Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project -
Phase 3, with its focus on climate-resilient irrigation and agriculture, is relevant not only to Nepal’s growth but also to
its capacity to adapt to climate change.
7.       The project contributes to outcome 3 (Green Planet and Resilient Populations) of the World Bank Country
Partnership Framework for Nepal for the FY25 to FY31 period (Report No. CPF0000022), to be discussed by the World
Bank Board of Executive Directors on May 29, 2025, concurrently with this project’s approval on absence of objection
basis. Specifically, the project would expand the year-round irrigation service, which is critical to increasing agricultural
productivity with enhanced resilience to climate risk.


    B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
8.      Agriculture is central to Nepal’s economy and integral to poverty reduction. Agriculture and livestock
contribute to over 21 percent of Nepal’s GDP, and agriculture employs 61 percent5 of the working population. But the
productivity and level of income from agriculture remain below potential because of underinvestment in critical
enablers, such as irrigation services, climate-smart agriculture, value chains, and watershed services. The result is
persistent food insecurity (3.8 million people as of 2022, which represents over 12 percent of the population)6 and rising
food imports (150 percent increase since 2014)7, while the population has increased by only 7 percent. Climate change
threatens the natural resources on which agriculture depends.
9.       The sector is characterized by conventional farming practices, a large share of smallholder farming, and
farmer-managed irrigation systems. It primarily produces food grains, livestock, and cash crops, but the share of higher-
value crops has been rising gradually. Post-harvest value-chain services, such as cold storage and market access, are
some of the key constraints to diversification. Further agricultural productivity growth requires reliable year-round
irrigation, climate-smart agricultural services, high-yielding varieties, improved fertilization, mechanization, and the
assurance among farmers that such investments are profitable.
10.      Irrigation systems in Nepal fall under four distinct categories: (1) traditional farmer-managed irrigation systems
(FMIS) developed and managed by the communities; (2) a range of small to large-scale surface systems developed with
full or partial support from the government; (3) government-developed tube-well/lift schemes; and (4) individually-
owned and operated tube wells and pumps, primarily utilizing shallow aquifers, streams, ponds, and dug wells.
11.     Nepal is rich in water resources but only uses about 10 percent of it due to inadequate infrastructure. Nepal
has a total of 3.55 million hectares (ha) of arable land, of which 2.53 million ha is irrigable arable land. About 62 percent

3 The annual mean temperature of Nepal is increasing at the rate of 0.28 °C per decade (Department of Hydrology and Meteorology, 2017), which is above the global
average of 0.2 °C per decade (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2018).
4
  Eckstein, D., Künzel, V. and Schäfer, L. (2021) Global Climate Risk Index 2021: Who Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events? Weather-related Loss Events in
2019 and 2000 to 2019. Berlin: Germanwatch.
5 International Labor Organization estimates, 2023.

6 Ministry of Health and Population, New ERA, and ICF International. 2023. Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2022.
7
  Derived from countries’ reporting to the United Nations Statistical Division (COMTRADE).

                                                                                                                                                           Page 2
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


of net irrigable land (about 1.56 million ha) is irrigated, of which less than 40 percent has access to year-round irrigation.8
Thus, Nepal’s agriculture productivity remains highly vulnerable to seasonal climate variability in addition to climate
extremes.
12.      Climate change will worsen the spatial and temporal variability of precipitation in Nepal, increasing
vulnerability. 9 The projected agricultural losses by 2050 under the high-emission scenario (Representative
Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5) are three times higher than in the low-emission scenario (RCP 4.5).10 Western
provinces face severe drought risks, threatening productivity. Often, farmers get unreliable rainfall, with both droughts
and floods occurring in the same season. Thus, transforming the agriculture sector requires expanding and upgrading
the irrigation systems to regulate supply. With reliable and equitable irrigation systems, farmers could then focus on
complementary inter-farm/farm-level investments such as improving agricultural techniques, inputs, and cropping
intensity.
13.      Rises in maximum and minimum temperatures are expected to be stronger than the rise in average
temperature. Temperature is projected to increase by 0.92-1.07 0C in the medium term (2016-2045) and 1.3-1.80C in
the long term (2036-2065) compared to the baseline period of 1981-2010. This will increase the risk of glacial lake
outburst floods and landslides in the short to medium run and cause significantly less dry-season streamflow in the
medium to long run once the glaciers recede, worsening the seasonal variability of water further.11 Drought frequency,
duration, and severity across Nepal increased between 1987–2017.12 The number of consecutive dry days is estimated
to be over 60 days in the project area, Kailali district, which has one of the highest drought-proneness in Nepal. It is at
risk of greater seasonal and agricultural drought under climate change and is expected to face moderate to extreme
droughts in the winter.13 The impacts of climate change in the water sector are worsened by the lack of adequate water
storage systems, low institutional capacity for adaptation, and improper land-use planning and development works,
such as road constructions that disrupt water sources and degrade watersheds.
14.      Evidence from similar regions in western Nepal shows that irrigation access is a key driver of food securit y.14
Studies across Asia confirm that poverty levels are lower in irrigated areas compared to rain-fed zones and that the
indirect economic benefits of irrigation often surpass the direct gains in crop productivity. However, investments in
irrigation are most effective when coupled with complementary agricultural support. A study comparing the productivity
gains in the project’s earlier Phases 1 and 2, which have agricultural components, to two other irrigation schemes in the
region without agricultural interventions highlights that integrating irrigation with agricultural interventions yields
higher productivity gains. Conserving forests and watersheds is crucial for maintaining a steady water supply for
irrigation, and this relationship is reciprocal; droughts and insufficient irrigation can, in turn, contribute to increased
deforestation and the encroachment of wetlands.
15.     Based on evidence from the region and beyond, there is a compelling case for financing the project. It seeks
to deliver essential infrastructure and services with significant capital requirements, ensuring equitable access to water
and agricultural services, where the market typically does not invest. It has the potential to reduce poverty and
inequality. Additionally, it seeks to mitigate environmental and climate risks, generating substantial positive externalities

8 Irrigation Master Plan 2019 (updated 2024).
9 Climate Change Scenarios for Nepal for National Adaptation Plan, Ministry of Forests and Environment, Government of Nepal.
10 World Bank. Nepal Country and Climate Development Report (2022).
11
   Bolch, T., J. M. Shea, S. Liu, F. M. Azam, Y. Gao, S. Gruber, W. W. Immerzeel, A. Kulkarni, H. Li, A. A. Tahir, G. Zhang, and Y. Zhang. 2019. “Status and Change of the
Cryosphere in the Extended Hindu Kush Himalaya Region.” In The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment, edited by P. Wester, A. Mishra, A. Mukherji, and A. Shrestha,
209–55. Switzerland: Springer, Cham.
12 Hamal, K., Sharma, S., Pokharel, B., Shrestha, D., Talchabhadel, R., Shrestha, A. and Khadka, N., 2021. Changing pattern of drought in Nepal and associated

atmospheric circulation. Atmospheric Research, 262, p.105798.
13 Vulnerability and risk assessment and identifying adaptation options: summary for policy makers. Ministry of Forests and Environment, Government of Nepal

(2021).
14 Pandey, R., and D. K. Bardsley. 2019. “An Application of the Household Food Insecurity Access Scale to Assess Food Security in Rural Communities of Nepal.” Asia

and the Pacific Policy Studies 6 (2): 130–50.

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3
              The World Bank
              NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


for the broader economy. By improving water resource management in an agricultural area without year-round
irrigation, the project will enhance the resilience of households that lack the means to cope with rainfall variability and
that face challenges in agricultural production, value addition, and access to markets.
16.      The Government of Nepal (GoN) has developed a new national irrigation policy and irrigation master plan in
2019 (updated 2024). The National Irrigation Policy 2023 aims for higher year-round irrigation. It has introduced
significant reforms for managing Joint Management Irrigation Systems, where the federal Irrigation Agencies (IAs) are
responsible for higher-order canals and Water User Associations (WUAs) for lower-order distribution networks.
Moreover, the policy makes a new provision for establishing an operational linkage with the respective local
governments for efficient management, operation, and maintenance (MOM) of irrigation systems, especially enabling
stronger enforcement of irrigation service fee (ISF) by linking its collection to the local land tax collection system. The
primary objective of these new policy provisions is to increase collection rates. However, the necessary acts and
regulations required to institutionalize the policy have yet to be finalized. Currently, there is significant variation in WUA
capacity for MOM. Traditionally, FMISs have outperformed agency-managed systems in terms of irrigation service
delivery, fee collection rates, and overall system maintenance. However, with increasing labor migration, many FMISs
suffer from lower participation in management and rehabilitation and need additional support from local governments
and IAs.
17.      The Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project (RJKIP) is one of the GoN’s national pride projects in Sudurpaschim
Province, which has the highest rate of poverty in Nepal (34.2 percent). 15 The Ministry of Energy, Water Resources,
and Irrigation (MoEWRI) oversees irrigation provision, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development
(MoALD) undertakes on-farm interventions and agricultural support services. Both ministries coordinated to implement
the RJKIP. The World Bank financed both Phase 1 (2012-2017) and Phase 2 (2018-2025) of RJKIP, modernizing the
irrigation infrastructure on 14,300 ha, building capacity of WUAs, enhancing flood and erosion control, providing
agricultural support services and improving rural roads and bridges for better connectivity and market access. The World
Bank’s support to RJKIP Phases 1 and 2 has benefited over 157,000 people. RJKIP Phase 3 will scale up the impact,
expanding year-round irrigation to another 17,500 ha, with complementary agricultural and watershed interventions,
reaching an additional 160,000 people.


 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

18.       The project is phase 3 of the IDA-financed RJKIP. Phase 1 closed in September 2017, and Phase 2 will close in
July 2025. Phase 1 focused on the modernization of the higher-order irrigation infrastructure (feeder and secondary
canals, main hydraulic structures, and related flood protection), enhancement of the capacity of WUAs for MOM, and
preparation and initiation of an agricultural development program. Phase 2 focused on : (i) modernization of the lower-
order irrigation systems of RJKIP; (ii) command area protection (flood and erosion control and environment protection);
(iii) rural infrastructure improvement, including roads and bridges; (iv) continuation of the WUA support program; and (v)
implementation of a comprehensive agricultural improvement program.
19.     RJKIP 3 will build on these achievements, expand access to irrigation services, increase farm productivity,
enhance climate resilience, and boost rural incomes in Kailali district, Sudurpaschim Province. The completion of the
water intake and the main canal has laid the groundwork for constructing the distribution network westward, along with
complementary investments in agriculture. The project scope will thus include the extension of the feeder canal and the
command area development, the continuation of the WUA support program, and the implementation of an agricultural
improvement program. It will also incorporate measures for resilience, such as building small storage facilities and

15
     National Statistics Office (2024). Nepal Living Standards Survey IV 2022/2023: Statistical Report. Government of Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal .

                                                                                                                                                  Page 4
             The World Bank
             NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


augmentation of existing small water bodies to reduce seasonal variability in water balance. The Phase 3 activities will
make the targeted area residents more resilient to climate change–exacerbated floods, landslides, and droughts, thereby
contributing to their water and food security as well as their well-being.

     A. Project Development Objective (PDO)
      20. The PDO is to improve irrigation services and agricultural productivity in the target areas.
     B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators

     21. Key results and outcomes will be measured using the following PDO indicators:

        •    Farmland benefiting from year-round irrigation services – 17,500 ha
        •    People benefiting from increased agricultural production (number) - 52,000
        •    People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience (number) – 160,000 (Corporate Score Card indicator)




                                                                     Figure 1: Theory of Change

 C. Project Beneficiaries

22.      This project will benefit 160,000 people with improved irrigation and agricultural services as well as watershed
management. These include the farming population of the Pathariya regions in Kailali district in the Far Western Province
across five municipalities (local level).16 Most of the beneficiaries belong to the indigenous Tharu community (48 percent).
The rural poverty rate in Sudurpaschim Province is 40.21 percent, 10 percentage points higher than the urban poverty


16
     The municipalities include: Bhajani, Ghodaghodi, Lamki Chuwa, Joshipur, and Bardagoriya.

                                                                                                                      Page 5
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


rate in the province and 15 percentage points higher than the national rural poverty rate.17 Rural poverty rates in the
country tend to be the highest among the landless and decrease with the size of landholding. Although over 97 percent
of the farmers in Kailali own their land, 72 percent own 1 ha or less, and only 5 percent own 2 ha or more.18 About 12
percent of the farmers own less than a tenth of a hectare.

 D. Project Components

23.       The project will have four components: (i) Irrigation improvement and development, (ii) Watershed management,
(iii) Agriculture support services, and iv) Institutional support and project management.




                                  Figure 2: RJKIP 3 would be the westernmost part of the RJK irrigation system in Karnali

24.      Component 1: Irrigation improvement and development (US$126 million, of which IDA US$95 million
equivalent). This component aims to expand and improve the irrigation network across approximately 17,500 ha of
existing agricultural land in Pathariya, where farmers do not have access to year-round irrigation, and where the
availability of water is expected to be further exacerbated by climate-induced changes in rainfall patterns and an increased
likelihood of droughts. The component will distribute part of the existing intake discharge of 80 m³/s drawn at Chisapani
from the Karnali River. The main canal bifurcates to supply the allotted 40 m³/s to the Rani Jamara Kulariya (RJK) area and
the remaining 40 m³/s to Lamki and Pathariya (see Figure 2). From that point, the GoN has completed the construction of
the Lamki feeder canal and is in the process of developing distribution networks in its command area. However, the feeder
canal and distribution networks in the Pathariya area (17,500 ha) have yet to be developed, which this project aims to
complete. These investments will enable farmers in that region to access their designated canal water supply throughout
the year and increase cropping intensity, thereby enhancing the resilience of beneficiaries to climate shocks and
contributing to climate adaptation. The component will extend the feeder canal by 13km and carry out command area
development activities, which include the construction of secondary, sub-secondary, and tertiary canals. WUAs are
responsible for developing watercourses. GoN will finance the cost required for tree clearance and land acquisition, which
is estimated to cost US$31 million.
25.      This component will finance: (i) supporting the design, construction, rehabilitation, and/or modernization of
irrigation and drainage infrastructure, including canals and related hydraulic structures, such as weirs, siphons, cross
regulators, and head regulators, considering current and projected climate change impacts 19; (ii) improving, upgrading,


17 National Statistics Office (2024). Nepal Living Standards Survey IV 2022/2023: Statistical Report. Government of Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal.
18 Based on the 2019 RJKIP feasibility study (Main Report Vol I).
19
   This activity will comprise about 95 percent of the component budget.

                                                                                                                                               Page 6
            The World Bank
            NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


and maintaining rural service roads and construction of culverts with due consideration to climate and disaster risks, which
will allow all-weather transport and market access to beneficiaries; and (iii) supporting new construction or renovation of
canal operator houses. The implementation of each of these activities will include an Environment and Social Management
Plan and a Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP). All the major irrigation structures will be designed to withstand 100-year
return period floods. Internal drainage systems and other structures will be designed according to site conditions to
protect the irrigation infrastructures and command areas against flooding and erosion.
26.     From the perspective of canal operation, the feeder canal will be designed to enable all its secondary canals to
operate continuously with their fair share of water. These subsystems can thus function autonomously. This arrangement
helps devolve the MOM to the respective WUAs, which will be financially sustained through irrigation service fees and in-
kind contributions.
27.     Overall, this component focuses on improving the irrigation network to ensure climate-resilient, reliable, and
equitable water access all year round, water drainage management and protection measures in the command area (to
increase flood and landslide resilience), mitigation of environmental and social impacts during construction and operation,
improved market linkage for agricultural production, and efficient canal operation services. With year-round irrigation,
farmers will be able to achieve a cropping intensity of around 226 percent when complemented with intensified
agricultural services, thereby significantly increasing their resilience to climate change–exacerbated droughts.20
28.      Component 2: Watershed management (IDA US$20 million equivalent). This component will finance various
watershed management activities to prevent soil erosion and waterlogging, conserve watershed areas, and mitigate the
impact of floods and droughts on agricultural productivity at the command area level. The project area has about two
hundred natural lakes and wetlands that community user groups have been using for irrigation, tourism, and fisheries,
which need to be improved and rehabilitated. The component will support the rehabilitation and augmentation of some
of these existing small-sized multipurpose lakes that capture monsoon precipitation to provide supplementary irrigation
water to the Pathariya command area in addition to the surface water provided through Component 1, thus increasing
resilience to droughts. This component will also include technical experts' services for assessing the proposed designs, the
required studies, and the dam safety standards and guidelines during the design and implementation. Given the seasonal
variability in water availability, it is crucial to develop sustainable water storage solutions that align with the principles of
watershed management, which are essential for the long-term sustainability of irrigation systems and the protection of
agricultural command areas against climate change risks. This component will finance the following activities: (i)
supporting riverbank protection of the rivers within the project areas; (ii) supporting soil conservation activities within the
catchment areas of water storage, such as landslide and gully control, check dams, and afforestation; and (iii) supporting
the augmentation and rehabilitation of storage systems for sustainable water storage systems to mitigate the seasonal
variability in precipitation. All three activities will reduce the flood and erosion risks of the targeted command areas as
well as the risk of droughts, thereby increasing the resilience of farmers.
29.     Component 3: Agriculture support services (US$16 million, of which IDA US$11 million equivalent). This
component will serve the command areas covered by the RJK irrigation system, including the area from RJKIP Phases 1
and 2 and Pathariya. This component will enhance the productivity, capacity, and resilience of the farmers to floods and
droughts through value addition, post-production support, market access, and adoption of modern technologies on a
demand-driven basis. Based on the implementation experience in Phase 2, activities will include: (i) increasing agricultural
production through the strengthening and mobilization of local cooperatives, adoption of modern technology, promoting
mechanization, promotion of climate-smart agricultural (CSA) practices, nursery establishment, and commercial farming
targeting high-value crops; (ii) providing of grants; (iii) providing postproduction support for storage, processing, and
marketing of targeted agricultural produce; and (iv) providing training and capacity building, including study tours.
Postproduction support will allow the beneficiaries to safely store their produce and mitigate the potential impact of

20
     Based on the DoWRI feasibility study of the Pathariya RJKIP Phase 3.

                                                                                                                          Page 7
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


climate change-induced risks such as extreme rainfall, enhancing their climate resilience. As in Phase 2, the project will
provide equal opportunity for women and youth to take up demand-based agricultural services. High priority will be given
to crops such as spring rice, wheat, potato, maize, and vegetables, which will contribute to increased cropping intensity
and food security. The component will promote CSA practices such as integrated farming, on-farm water resource
management, laser land leveling, and precision planting, which increase water-use efficiency and enhance climate
adaptation. Grants will be provided to eligible farmers from the project command area that will contribute to PDO .
Implementation modalities, eligibility criteria, and cost-sharing arrangements for these demand-driven activities will be
detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to be prepared and adopted no later than 3 months after credit
effectiveness.
30.     Component 4: Institutional support and project management (US$13 million, of which IDA US$11 million
equivalent). This component will finance the capacity building and institutional strengthening of WUAs in the project area
and of the Department of Water Resources and Irrigation (DoWRI), as well as project management support and capacity
building of the Project Implementation Office (PIO). The component will have two sub-components:
   a. Sub-component 4.1- Institutional support and capacity building of WUAs (IDA US$4 million equivalent). This sub-
      component will include capacity-building programs for WUAs to strengthen their ability to assume responsibility
      for MOM of improved and modernized irrigation, storage systems, and cold storage. Managing these systems will
      require greater skills beyond the current capacity of WUAs. Currently, they are capable of mobilizing members to
      carry out channel excavation and desilting works, but the new and modernized system requires more technical and
      organizational skills. The sub-component will finance the following activities:
      i. Supporting the preparation and institutionalization of the MOM plans for the sustainable management of
         modernized irrigation systems in Pathariya. The MOM plan will include: (a) the canal operation and asset
         management plans, (b) the resources management strategy and related plan for financial sustainability, and (c)
         devise the roles and responsibilities of WUA, local government, and irrigation agency for the sustainable
         management of the modernized irrigation systems. A federated WUA representing all the WUAs in Pathariya
         will be formed and strengthened under a joint management model. For Phase 1 and Phase 2 areas where MOM
         plans have already been prepared, this sub-component will strengthen its implementation and
         institutionalization.
      ii. Providing training programs and knowledge exchange for PIO and WUAs for MOM implementation,
          management and operational skills such as resources management (fee setting and collection, improved record
          and account management), and planning and decision-making, including for climate adaptation and resilience,
          with improved and inclusive gender and citizen participation. The training programs will embed aspects to
          ensure gender-responsive WUAs, with at least one-third representation of female landholders in WUA executive
          committee positions.
     iii. Supporting annual assessments to measure service delivery performance and governance of WUAs where
          irrigation schemes have been completed.
     iv. Constructing or renovating WUA offices and the acquisition of equipment for office management and MOM.
      v. Developing a geo-enabled digital Management Information System (MIS), institutional strengthening, and
         capacity building on MIS, including for DoWRI.
     vi. Providing design guides, manuals, and capacity building on watershed management, storage management, and
         dam safety.
   b. Sub-component 4.2- Project management (US$9 million, of which IDA US$7 million equivalent). This sub-
      component includes: (i) consulting services for project survey, engineering design, and construction supervision,

                                                                                                                    Page 8
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


       (ii) consulting services and institutional strengthening for implementation of the Environmental and Social
       Commitment Plan (ESCP), environment and social (E&S) monitoring and management, and the establishment of a
       Grievance Redress Mechanism, and (iii) project management support, goods (including supervision vehicles) and
       services required for project implementation. It will also finance capacity building on procurement and financial
       management.


 E. Role of Partners
31. This project will be financed by IDA, with GoN contributions for land acquisition and tree clearing. In addition,
WUAs and targeted farmers will also contribute to the project with in-kind contributions and ISF for the development
of watercourses and MOM. There are no other development partners as co-financers.


         Name of Partner       Nature of Involvement /Description
         GoN                   Cost of land acquisition for the irrigation canal system, forest clearance and
                               associated costs, and salary for civil servants in the PIO and Agriculture Component
                               Implementation Unit (ACIU).
         WUA                   ISF, contribution to federated WUA, in-kind contribution, and cost-sharing by the
                               targeted households for agricultural inputs and services.
         Agriculture           Cost-sharing arrangements for activities such as seed production and storage costs.
         Cooperatives


 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
32.     The project design draws on several lessons from previous phases of RJKIP and relevant global and regional
experience from similar projects. First, irrigation service improvements alone are insufficient to generate productivity
gains. These need to be complemented with targeted agricultural support to farmers and improvement in on-farm
practices to ensure efficient use of water and other inputs. Second, activities aimed at enhancing agricultural productivity
and farmer incomes should be relevant to the local context and respond to the market dynamics. This project prioritizes
agricultural modernization interventions that have already been tested and proven to work in the project area. Third, well-
trained and well-equipped WUAs are critical to the sustainability of irrigation systems. Thus, the project design includes
a comprehensive and targeted capacity-building program for WUAs whose outcomes will be tracked through an annual
MOM performance assessment.
33.      A key lesson from the country’s changing climate patterns is the need to prioritize storage systems to collect
monsoon precipitation. Phase 3 includes rehabilitating and augmenting existing lakes in the command area to provide
greater protection against high interannual variability in rainfall. It also contains watershed management interventions
that will help with soil and water conservation.
34.     This project also embeds lessons from Phase 2 in the design of Component 4 on institutional strengthening and
capacity building. In Phase 2, there were several issues, such as delays in decision-making, timely clearance of engineering
designs and drawings, and E&S document preparation arising from frequent staff turnover. The project cycled through
multiple project directors and other key staff due to changes in the government. While the project cannot fully address
this challenge, it will design training programs to be more adaptable to staffing changes and offer Hands-on Expanded
Implementation Support as needed. The project will provide a more structured orientation for every new staff member

                                                                                                                      Page 9
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


during onboarding for faster integration into the team, with clarity on their roles, responsibilities, and the status of the
project. This orientation will also include training on procurement, financial management, and environmental and social
standards to strengthen staff capacity from the outset.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION


 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
35.     The project will continue the existing implementation arrangements from Phase 2, with the Project
Implementation Office under the Department of Water Resources and Irrigation and the ACIU under the Department of
Agriculture (DoA). The DoWRI will be responsible for implementing the project. The Deputy Director General of the
Multipurpose and Irrigation Division will be the project’s focal person at the DoWRI, and the Deputy Director General of
the Planning, Monitoring, and Management Division will be the focal person at the DoA. The PIO will be the primary
implementing agency for Components 1, 2, and 4. The ACIU will be the co-implementing agency for Component 3. The
PIO and ACIU will have separate arrangements for financial management. The Project Steering Committee (PSC), formed
under Phase 2 and chaired by the Secretary of MoEWRI, will continue to provide overall policy guidance and ensure
coordination between the related agencies to support the project. The PSC comprises the senior management staff of the
Ministry of Finance (MoF), MoALD, Ministry of Forest and Environment, the National Planning Commission, DoWRI, DoA,
PIO, and ACIU.
36.       DoWRI will depute staff to the PIO, including a Class I level Project Director, a deputy Project Director, and staff
for engineering, procurement, financial management (FM), environmental and social, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
and the Association Organizer. The Association Organizer will be responsible for liaising with WUAs to implement the
institutional strengthening and capacity development program. For FM, the PIO will be staffed by the Under Secretary
(Accounts), Accounts Officer, and an experienced FM consultant. The PIO will also be supported by teams of consultants
for survey design and construction supervision. A liaison office in DoWRI will continue to facilitate approval processes,
assist with preparing annual work plans, and communicate with other agencies, as needed, on behalf of the PIO.
37.      A Class II level Officer will head the ACIU as the coordinator. Agriculture officers will support the coordinator along
with the Junior Technicians and Junior Technical Assistants. To continue post-irrigation support services in the Rani,
Jamara, and Kulariya in RJKIP Phase 2 command areas, a liaison unit will be maintained in Tikapur with the required
number of technical staff. ACIU will maintain an Accounts Officer/Accountant. The ACIU may hire an FM consultant to
prepare reliable financial reports in a timely manner. The PIO and ACIU will source specialists from the market on a full-
time or an intermittent basis, as per their needs. They will also be equipped with the required logistics to carry out field
activities and monitoring visits.
38.      As in the previous phases, the PIO includes a Social, Environmental, and Institutional Development Unit. The
staffing comprises a senior sociologist and sociologist, an environmental expert/officer who will also carry out
occupational health and safety (OHS) related responsibilities, along with individual consultants such as a biodiversity
expert, gender/gender-based violence expert, and an independent consultant for third-party monitoring, some of whom
support project implementation on an intermittent basis. Frequent changes in E&S officers at the PIO and delays in
appointing replacements, along with inadequate contract management, affected E&S performance at the contractor level
during Phase 2 implementation. Both the supervision consultant and contractor experienced frequent resignations of E&S
staff. The World Bank has worked with the PIO to improve E&S performance. Both units are well-staffed and have gained
significant project management experience from Phases 1 and 2. The World Bank will provide additional training to
enhance E&S and OHS skills. E&S consultants who will be supporting PIO and ACIU will be experienced and engaged on a
full-time basis.



                                                                                                                        Page 10
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



  B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
39.      The PIO, with the support of its project implementation consultants, will be responsible for the design and
implementation of an M&E system based on the project’s Theory of Change (ToC) to collect timely data, analyze progress
in activities and outcomes, and ensure that the ToC assumptions still hold (see Figure 1). The GoN will engage an
independent party for regular independent monitoring of the project’s environmental and social performance, as was
done under Phase 2. The M&E for most indicators, including E&S performance, will be conducted on a quarterly basis, and
the results will be presented as part of the project’s quarterly progress report. The PIO will use digital MIS and grievance
redress mechanism (GRM) databases to track progress in project implementation and citizen engagement. Analysis and
interpretation of M&E data and findings will inform strategic and operational decisions and course corrections. The
project will use various evaluation approaches, such as beneficiaries’ satisfaction surveys, to assess the project’s relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, and impact.

 C. Disbursement Arrangements
40.     The disbursements will be in the form of reimbursement supported by Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs)
or direct payments with invoices or relevant supporting documents. The PIO/ACIU will submit Withdrawal Applications
based on the expenditure reports, and the World Bank will disburse funds based on the financial reports. The World Bank’s
Disbursement Guidelines will be applicable. The IDA credit proceeds will be used to finance eligible expenditures only. If
the World Bank determines that the credit proceeds have been used to finance ineligible expenditures, the amounts used
for such expenditures will be refunded to the World Bank by the GoN. The PIO/ACIU will ensure that the Authorized
Signatories for disbursement are updated on a regular basis.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY


     A. Technical and Economic Analysis
41.      Technical Analysis. Communities in the project area face severe challenges caused by high seasonal variation in
irrigation water availability. More than half of the project area lacks access to year-round irrigation water. Irrigation water
scarcity limits agricultural productivity in the dry season. The existing irrigation systems developed by local communities
using indigenous knowledge and skills require significant rehabilitation, modernization, and extension to meet current
needs. The technical solutions are tried and tested designs, and the DoWRI has the technical capacity to design and
implement those solutions.21 As Karnali is a perennial river, the intake source is expected to have a year-round supply.
42.     The project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. It is consistent
with the country’s Nationally Determined Contribution22, the National Adaptation Plan 2021-2050, Nepal’s Long-term
Strategy for Net-zero Emissions, and the World Bank’s Country Climate Development Report for Nepal, which highlights
the need to enhance water-use efficiency in agriculture, upgrade irrigation infrastructure, and promote climate-resilient
water management practices to adapt to climate change. For mitigation, project activities, including the activities in
Component 1, will be consistent with the Universally Aligned List for Mitigation, subject to conditions listed in Annex 3 of
the Paris Agreement Alignment Water Sector Toolkit, and pose no carbon lock-in risks. The adoption of technologies and
practices that promote energy-efficient irrigation (by reducing water losses in conveyance and modernizing irrigation


21
   The technical design includes: (i) 12.95 km long Pathariya feeder canal, 178 km secondary and sub-secondary canals, and 180 km tertiary canals; and (ii) more than
380 canal structures including one weir in Ghaila Nala, three escapes, four Syphons, 13 LD Syphons, one aqueduct, 200 road culverts, 87 drops, 36 head regulators, 31
cross regulators, and five division boxes. By implementing this comprehensive approach, the project will enable year-round supply of irrigation water to the agricultural
lands of Pathariya.
22
   GoN, 2020. Second Nationally Determined Contribution. Kathmandu, Nepal.

                                                                                                                                                               Page 11
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


systems), afforestation, optimizing irrigation operations, building institutional capacity, and fostering WUAs’ involvement
will contribute to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction. The irrigation system is entirely gravity-fed.
43.      Regarding adaptation, floods, landslides, and droughts have been identified as the project area’s main hazards.
The project activities include measures to make both existing and expanded irrigation systems resilient to the
aforementioned climate hazards—among others, riverbank protection, landslide, and erosion control; improved
watershed management (including afforestation); and capacity building of WUAs to strengthen their ability to do the
MOM of modernized irrigation systems; optimize irrigation water use efficiency; adapt to the climate change impacts; and
reduce the inherent risks to an acceptable level. Moreover, the construction and operation of irrigation systems and water
storage facilities may lead to siltation or aggravate the flood risk in certain sections. Specific measures, including
desiltation and targeted erosion control measures, will be adopted to address these residual risks.
44.      Climate Mitigation. The application of the Ex-ACT tool (version 9.4.2) indicates that the project has the potential
to mitigate 0.133 MtCO₂-eq in total over a 20-year evaluation period (6 years of project implementation and 14 years of
capitalization). This reduction is primarily attributed to activities implemented under Component 3, which focuses on
enhancing the productivity, capacity, and resilience of farmers through cropping intensification, as well as the promotion
of climate-smart agriculture and good agricultural practices across various crops benefiting from irrigation improvements.
The reductions in emissions are primarily driven by the adoption of CSA and good farming practices. This equates to an
average mitigation of approximately 0.006 MtCO₂-eq per year. Moreover, due to strict forest guidelines, the project will
plant 10 trees for every tree felled, so it expects to cut 3,900 trees and plant 39,000 trees in the area.
45.     Private Capital Mobilization. The project’s support to farmers under Component 3 will mobilize private capital
through the farmers’ contribution to the grant-supported activities, such as agricultural mechanization, storage facilities,
and other inputs, including seeds. The project will provide grants to individual farmers and cooperatives covering up to
50 percent and 75 percent of the cost, respectively, with the beneficiaries covering the remaining balance. Over the project
period, beneficiaries are estimated to contribute a total of US$5 million. Altogether, these investments are expected to
increase productivity and income for the farmers while promoting modernization and climate-smart agriculture practices
in the project area.
46.      Gender. The WUAs for irrigation management in the project area are traditionally managed through the Badghar
system, a traditional customary governance institution in the Tharu community. 23 The headman (Badghar), predominantly
men, makes decisions related to distribution and management, community conflict, and use of natural resources (opening
canals, distributing water, fixing damages, and collecting charges and fines, etc.). This has resulted in the
underrepresentation of women in key decision-making roles. Women’s decision-making in community-level irrigation
associations is limited by institutional barriers (membership based on land or house ownership), traditional power
dynamics, and personal attributes like literacy, as well as technical and soft skills24. The focus group discussions held in
November 2024 revealed that women in project areas had limited capacity to voice concerns, negotiate, and manage
water systems, confining them to tokenistic roles and overlooking them as legitimate farmers. Enhancing women's
participation in WUAs is critical for addressing gender disparities. In rural areas of Rani, Jamara, Kulariya, and Pathariya,
WUAs offer a platform for women to assert their voice beyond water usage to challenge entrenched gender norms and
political dynamics.




23 Tebtebba Foundation. 2018. Customary Tenure Systems and Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and the role of conservation, sustainable
management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries: Ensuring Benefits for Indigenous Peoples. Baguio City, Philippines.
24 World Bank. 2024. “Cultivating Equality: Insights into Gender in the Climate Resilient Irrigation Literature and World Bank Portfolio.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Unpublished.

                                                                                                                                                              Page 12
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


47.      To address the gap in women’s membership, the project will aim to reach 33 percent of women members in each
existing and new WUA (main, branch, and sub-branch). The WUA members will receive upskilling and technical training
(on leadership, public speaking, institutional management, and financial literacy). The project will also advocate reform
through social mobilization and awareness campaigns, amend gender discriminatory provisions in the constitution of
WUAs, and promote joint membership and joint land titling for spouses to enable access to WUAs, including decisions
related to irrigation water management (schedule, fees, distribution times, and payment). This process, which has already
started in Phase 2 under the WUA strengthening component, will be carried out by women members and representatives
in the WUA executive committee.
48.      To enhance women’s leadership, the project will also ensure at least one woman in key decision-making positions
(chair, secretary, or treasurer) at each level of the WUA executive committees (main, branch, and sub-branch) under RJKIP
3. These roles collaborate on policies, operations and management, benefit sharing, and fostering community-wide impact
on women’s voice and agency.25 This action will be tracked by the indicator on the share of women in key decision-making
positions in each WUA. The project also seeks to offer job opportunities for women in civil works construction. It will offer
skilled and unskilled roles, ensuring equal pay for equal work and a safe and enabling working environment.
49.      Citizen engagement and beneficiary feedback. In Phase 3, citizen engagement has been incorporated into all the
components by engaging WUAs in every cycle of the project implementation and MOM after project completion. WUAs
are responsible for watercourse construction and in-kind contributions as well. Component 3 will also involve agricultural
cooperatives as needed. An intermediate-level result indicator has been added to the Results Framework as a beneficiary
feedback indicator to measure beneficiary satisfaction in project interventions. A robust GRM will be established for the
project.
50.      Economic Analysis. The project’s economic analysis using a cost-benefit approach shows that the Net Present
Value (NPV) at a 10 percent discount rate is positive and given in Table 1. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is
significantly higher than the assumed discount rate. These values indicate a strong economic justification for the project,
as the net benefits significantly outweigh the costs, and the EIRR exceeds the conventional discount rate, suggesting a
high return on investment.
51.    The expected benefits accrue from agricultural benefits to the farming population in the command area. The
analysis calculates the net benefits, in the with- and without-project scenarios, gained through higher cropping intensity
(from 180 percent to 226 percent), farm yields of major crops26, higher incomes due to market and value-chain services,
improved cropping patterns due to the availability of dry season water, and net GHG benefits. The watershed
conservation, erosion control, and enhancement of the storage capacity of natural lakes will also provide ecosystem
services. However, the additional benefits from ecosystem services are not accounted for in the analysis. The economic
analysis considers the costs of Components 1, 2, and 3, along with associated operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of
2.5 percent of capital costs and a project life of 40 years.




25
   The WUA Chair leads, delegates responsibilities, and provides overall direction to Executive Committee members of the WUAs and ensures policies and rules are
being followed. The Chair will have signature authority for approval of WUA finances, in addition to the Treasurer ; the Secretary supports the Executive Committee and
the WUAs ensuring the implementation of rules, policies, benefit-sharing, etc. The Treasurer is responsible for the WUA finances and accounting such as preparation
of annual budgets, maintaining financial records, etc.
26
   Major crops include rice, maize, wheat, potato, pulses, oil seeds, sugarcane, and vegetables.

                                                                                                                                                             Page 13
              The World Bank
              NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


Table 1: Economic Analysis Results (using US$1=NPR 136.76)

                                                                                                           Sensitivity Analysis
                                             Business as usual                                                                    Cost increases by 10%,
          Efficiency Parameter                                             Project cost increases           Benefit decreases
                                              (BAU) Scenario                                                                      and benefit decreases
                                                                                  by 10%                        by 10%
                                                                                                                                          by 10%
         Project life post-
                                                                                                   40 years
         construction
         Total investment cost
                                                                                 US$175 million (NPR 23.93 billion)27
         (US$ million)
         Discount rate                                                                               10%
         NPV (US$ million)                          112.4                             94.1                          109.4                 91.1
         B/C ratio                                   1.61                             1.47                           1.47                 1.34
         EIRR                                       16.5%                            14.5%                          16.4%                14.9%


     B. Fiduciary
52.     Procurement of goods, works, and services will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank Procurement
Regulations for IPF Borrowers, dated September 2023, the World Bank’s “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud
and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants”, dated October 15, 2006, and revised in
January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016, and the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. The World Bank’s
Systematic Tracking and Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system will be used to prepare, clear, and update Procurement
Plans and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. The World Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents will
be used for all contracts subject to international competitive procurement and those contracts as specified in the
Procurement Plan tables in STEP. Procurement documents with Rated Criteria will be mandatory for any procurement
under an open international market approach. Where National Procurement Arrangements are agreed upon, the Model
Bidding Documents, which are only for works, goods, and non-consulting services agreed upon with the World Bank, will
be used. The World Bank will provide close procurement implementation support and monitoring of agreed timelines in
the procurement plan of the project for the timely implementation of project procurement.
53.      Phase 2 showed how the country's complex environment in procurement and contract management limits
effective contract enforcement at the project level. This partly stems from the project director’s authorizing environment
and the longer approval process for large contracts. While this needs wider reforms in government processes, the project
will include necessary mitigation measures in the procurement plan, pay closer attention to bid documents, and reduce
the administrative and supervision burden on the PIO by streamlining procurement activities.
54.       In summary, the assessment of the implementing agency identified the procurement risk to be Substantial due
to: (i) delays in procurement decision-making, especially in case of high-value contracts; (ii) the possibility of delay due to
the adoption of Rated Criteria for open-international bidding especially in evaluating proposals; and (iii) inadequate
contract management and lack of an enabling environment for enforcing contract provisions, including in cases of delays
in contract execution. The procurement plan will include measures to help avoid frequent turnover by allowing for multi-
year consultants (such as for E&S). The detailed procurement risk assessment and mitigation measures are uploaded in
the World Bank’s P-RAMS system (procurement risk assessment management system) and discussed in the Key Risks
section below.
55.    As in Phases 1 and 2, the PIO and ACIU have distinct STEP accounts. The procurement methods and market
approach will be adopted as indicated in the Project Procurement Strategy Development (PPSD) and the Procurement


27
     Only cost associated to irrigation infrastructures and watershed infrastructures are considered in the analysis .

                                                                                                                                                      Page 14
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


Plan prepared for the first 18 months of project implementation. The PPSD has been finalized, and the 18-month
Procurement Plan has been uploaded to STEP.
56.     The FM arrangements for the project build upon the RJKIP Phase 2, which has Moderately Satisfactory FM
performance. Based on the experience of Phase 2, the PIO and ACIU will have separate financial accounts. This will allow
both units to operate independently, preventing delays from affecting one another. Quarterly internal audits will be
carried out as per the government’s system, and the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) will conduct annual project
audits. The PIO and ACIU will prepare separate annual work plans and budgets, quarterly IUFRs, and annual financial
statements, including audit reports for their respective components.


   i.   Annual Work Plan and Budgeting: The project will follow the GoN’s budgeting procedures, ensuring alignment
        with national budgetary processes. To ensure adequate and appropriate budgeting, the draft annual work plan
        and budget will be shared and agreed upon with the World Bank for review before submission to the MoF. Every
        year, both units will inform the World Bank about the final budget approved by the MoF by June 30. If any need
        for budget virement arises, the implementing agencies will initiate the process in a timely manner.
  ii.   Funds Flow: PIO and ACIU will ensure the timely release of budgets by fulfilling the required criteria as prescribed
        by the MoF and the Financial Comptroller General Office as applicable. Counterpart financing would be used to
        finance land acquisition costs for the irrigation canal system, forest clearance costs, and all associated costs with
        salaries and allowances of government staff in the PIO and ACIU.
 iii.   Accounting and Financial Reporting: Project accounting ledgers will be maintained and updated as per the
        government’s accounting system. The implementing units will follow the Project Accounting Module recently
        introduced by the Financial Comptroller General Office. The PIO and ACIU will prepare quarterly IUFRs. Annual
        project financial statements and the audit report will be prepared and submitted to the World Bank.
 iv.    Internal Controls and Internal Audit: Adequate internal control mechanisms will be established to ensure proper
        authorization, expenditure recording, and reporting. Regular internal audits will be conducted by the concerned
        District Treasury Controller Office to assess compliance with established procedures and identify any areas for
        improvement. Based on the lessons from Phase 2, the FM units at the PIO and ACIU will coordinate with the
        internal auditors for the timely issuance of internal audit reports with comprehensive records of project
        transactions.
  v.    External Audits: The OAG of Nepal will conduct annual audits of the project financial statements. Audit reports
        will be submitted to the World Bank within nine months of the end of each FY. There is no overdue audit report.
 vi.    Beneficiary Grant Mechanism for Component 3: The agriculture component includes beneficiary grants for
        agriculture cooperatives, mechanization, and other eligible inputs. These grants will be paid by the ACIU to the
        beneficiaries or the suppliers as per the procedures described in the PIM. The grant eligibility criteria for
        cooperative beneficiaries will only allow up to 75 percent grant financing for civil works. For individual
        beneficiaries, including members of cooperatives, any grant will be capped at 50 percent. Expenditures paid out
        of beneficiary grants would be reported back to ACIU, which would, in turn, report expenditures to IDA. The grants
        would be paid through a joint financing mechanism.
57.     The FM risk is rated Substantial mainly because of the risk posed to the project due to some ineligible
expenditures in Phase 2. With the resolution of this issue and the implementation of agreed mitigation measures, the
financial management arrangements for the RJKIP 3 are considered adequate to meet the requirements of the World
Bank.



                                                                                                                     Page 15
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



     C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
     Legal Operational Policies                                                                               Triggered?

     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                              Yes
     Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                        No


58.      The environmental and social risk of the project is rated Substantial. The project involves constructing and
rehabilitating canal distribution networks and field channels, maintaining reservoir ponds and lakes, and providing
agricultural support services. The following documents have been prepared and disclosed:28 Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Executive Summary (English translation), Stakeholder
Engagement Plan, Labor Management Procedures, E&S gap analysis report for Component 1, and E&S Scoping study for
Components 2 and 3. These documents identify gaps and further studies to be prepared during project implementation
for individual activities. Major gaps include the need to assess the impact of secondary and tertiary irrigation canals and
the impact on the Basanta corridor (an animal migratory crossing). Moreover, as the GoN revised the canal alignment to
minimize E&S impacts, a decision on updating the national EIA remains pending. In addition to national requirements, the
revision will be reflected and analyzed either in the E&S gap assessment prepared at project appraisal or in a separate
document following the national decision. By no later than nine months after credit effectiveness, the PIO will appoint an
independent party for annual independent monitoring of environmental compliance and performance of the project.
59.      The proposed alignment requires the physical relocation of 15 household structures scattered over four
locations but avoids impacts on religious sites and minimizes forest impacts by aligning the project with the existing
road. Of the 15 affected households, three are Indigenous Peoples households, with only one requiring relocation. The
project aims to ensure that the relocation of the project-affected households utilizes available replacement land in the
vicinity and does not disrupt their current livelihood sources and social networks. The project will primarily impact the
agricultural fields of 242 households, mostly involving partial land acquisition without the need for relocation. Vulnerable
groups, including Dalits, formerly bonded laborers, and landless farmers, may hold non-titled use rights to public land and
are likely to lose all their land if significant portions are affected. Efforts are made to identify in situ alternative lands to
avoid relocation. A Resettlement Action Plan and an LRP will be prepared, informed by a detailed social assessment. Due
to the predominance of Tharu ethnic group in the project area, ESS 7 is relevant, and the social assessment will also inform
the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Plan. Free, Prior Informed Consent, however, is not expected as the project
avoids culturally significant areas and adverse relocation away from traditional lands. The project will include a negative
list when selecting the location for the water reservoir to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on communities, cultural
heritage, and critical habitats, and only dams without high downstream consequences will be supported.
60.      International Waterways. OP 7.50 is applicable because the project will finance activities that may use waters of
the Karnali River, a major left-bank tributary of the Ganges River – an international waterway. The exception to the riparian
notification requirement according to paragraph 7(a) of the policy applies because activities are limited to upgrading and
modernization of RJK which will not adversely change the quantity and quality of water flows to other riparians. The
exception to the notification requirement was approved by the World Bank management on February 18, 2025.


28ESCP, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Executive Summary (English translation), Stakeholder Engagement Plan(SEP), Labor Management Procedures, E&S gap
analysis report for Component 1, and E&S Scoping study for Components 2 and 3 have been disclosed in-country by the PIO on March 24, 2025, please see
https://www.rjkip.gov.np/downloadCat/29. SEP and ESCP have been disclosed on the World Bank’s website on April 10, 2025, please see:
https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/document-detail/P507433?type=projects.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 16
        The World Bank
        NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


61.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which d etermines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention
of Bank Management and after management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.


 V. KEY RISKS

62.     The overall risk is rated Substantial due to the political and governance, fiduciary (especially procurement and
contract management), and E&S risks. The main risks and associated risk mitigation measures are summarized below:

 Risk category    Rating        Explanation of risk rating                      Mitigation measures
                                The federal system provides opportunities to
                                decentralize development benefits and           While the extent to which political risks can
                                make service delivery more effective and        be mitigated through project-specific
                                accountable. Nevertheless, the risks of         measures is limited, the World Bank will
                                political uncertainty, jurisdictional overlap   engage proactively with the government as
 Political and
                  Substantial   between the three tiers of government, and      issues arise through strategic communication
 Governance
                                the need for clarity and coherence between      and outreach. Legal covenants will commit
                                policies and devolved powers will remain in     the government to maintain the stability of
                                the forthcoming period. Political instability   the project leadership team, provided their
                                may cause frequent changes to the project's     performance is satisfactory.
                                leadership and/or key staff.
                                                                                The DoWRI will take proactive steps by
                                                                                streamlining the decision-making process for
                                Procurement risks include: (i) delays in
                                                                                all the project execution contracts, delivering
                                procurement decision-making, (ii) the
                                                                                Rated Criteria training and additional training
                                possibility of delays due to using Rated
                                                                                before bid/proposal opening, close contract
                                Criteria for open-international bidding, and
                                                                                supervision, enforcement of contract clauses,
                                (iii) inadequate contract management and
                                                                                and timely resolution of contract issues.
                                enforcement.
 Fiduciary        Substantial
                                                                                For the FM risks, the mitigation measures
                                As observed in Phase 2, the client has
                                                                                are: (i) capacity building for the PIO and ACIU
                                adequate FM staffing. Ineligible
                                                                                on FM and disbursement; (ii) strengthening
                                expenditures and delays in financial
                                                                                internal controls, including segregation of
                                reporting under Phase 2 contribute to FM
                                                                                duties, regular reconciliations, and periodic
                                risk. There is also the risk of inadequate FM
                                                                                internal audits; and (iii) monitoring and
                                capacity related to frequent staff turnover.
                                                                                supervision of FM arrangements for regular
                                                                                assessment of FM status. A Financial


                                                                                                                            Page 17
      The World Bank
      NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


                                                                                Management Manual will be included in the
                                                                                PIM to provide detailed guidelines on
                                                                                financial management processes and
                                                                                procedures.
                              The project has a large geographical scale
                              and potential impacts on forest land,
                              biodiversity, water resources, privately
                              owned land, and farmer livelihoods,
                                                                                E&S risks will be mitigated through the
                              including the removal of trees from 14
                                                                                implementation of relevant E&S instruments
                              community forests. Additionally, the project
Environmental                                                                   agreed on the ESCP. Hands-on Expanded
                Substantial   poses risks related to deforestation, habitat
and Social                                                                      Implementation Support modality will be
                              fragmentation, pollution, OHS, and the
                                                                                used to support PIO in the preparation and
                              displacement of vulnerable groups such as
                                                                                implementation of these E&S instruments.
                              Indigenous Peoples, Dalits, and landless
                              farmers. The substantial risk is also linked to
                              the capacity of the client and their E&S
                              performance in Phase 2 of the project.




                                                                                                                        Page 18
       The World Bank
       NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                                                                      ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                Closing Period
   Farmland benefiting from year-round irrigation services
   Farmland benefiting from year-round irrigation services (Hectare(Ha))
   Feb/2025                                                                                Jul/2031
   0.00                                                                                    17,500
   Increased agricultural productivity
   People benefitting from increased agricultural production (Number of people)
   Jul/2025                                                                                Jul/2031
   0                                                                                       52,000
     ➢People benefitting from increased agricultural production - Female (Number of people)
   Jul/2025                                                                                Jul/2031
   0                                                                                       28,000
     ➢People benefitting from increased agricultural production - Youth (Number of people)
   Jul/2025                                                                                Jul/2031
   0                                                                                       22,000
   People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience
   People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience (Number of people)
   Jul/2025                                                                                Jul/2031
   0                                                                                       160,000
     ➢People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience - Female (Number of people)
   Jul/2025                                                                                Jul/2031
   0                                                                                       82,800
     ➢People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience. - Youth (Number of people)
   Jul/2025                                                                                Jul/2031
   0                                                                                       70,400


Intermediate Indicators by Components



                                                                                                            Page 19
    The World Bank
    NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


Baseline                                                                                 Closing Period
Irrigation improvement and development
Irrigation Canal network improved, rehabilitated, or modernized (Kilometers)
Jun/2025                                                                                 Jun/2031
0                                                                                        370
Improvement of Rural Road to increase access to market and other services (Kilometers)
Jun/2025                                                                                 Jun/2031
0.00                                                                                     100
Watershed management
Hectares of terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management (Hectare(Ha))
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        2,100
Farmland area protected from the climate and disaster risk of uncontrolled river bank erosion, flooding, etc. (from Patharia River, Kandra, and other local rivers) (Kilometers)
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        4,500
Water storage improved, rehabilitated, or modernized (Number)
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        6
Agriculture support services
People reached with agricultural assets or services (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        65,000
   ➢People reached with agricultural assets or services - Female (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        33,000
   ➢People reached with agricultural assets or services - Youth (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        28,000
People adopting improved intensified cropping promoted under the project (Percentage)
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        60
People adopting improved agricultural technology (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                 Jul/2031
0                                                                                        39,000



                                                                                                                                      Page 20
    The World Bank
    NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


  ➢People adopting improved agricultural technology - Female (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            20,000
  ➢People adopting improved agricultural technology - Youth (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            17,000
Institutional Support and Project Management
WUA training on O&M accomplished (Days)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            3,000
  ➢WUA training on O&M accomplished - Female (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            2,000
  ➢WUA training on O&M accomplished - Youth (Number of people)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            1,000
The share of women members in the executive committee of WUAs with at least one in a key position( chairperson, treasurer, or secretary) in each WUA. (Percentage)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
10                                                                                           33
Share of total funds resources delegated for O&M by the target rural households and WUAs (Percentage)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            80
Share of project beneficiaries with a rating of ‘Satisfactory’ or above on project interventions (Percentage)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            80
Percentage of grievances registered, related to delivery of project benefits that are addressed timely. (Percentage)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            80
WUAs formed, reorganized, and registered (Number)
Jul/2025                                                                                     Jul/2031
0                                                                                            20
Average annual score of WUA performance measurement (Percentage)
                                                                                             Jul/2031
                                                                                             80



                                                                                                                                Page 21
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes


 Farmland benefiting from year-round irrigation services
 Farmland benefiting from year-round irrigation services Hectare(Ha))
                           This indicator measures in hectares the total area of land in the command area provided with year-round irrigation
                           services through irrigation and drainage system development supported by the project.
                           Year-round irrigation refers to the irrigation services that provide consistent and reliable irrigation to the command area
Description
                           throughout the year, regardless of seasonal variations in rainfall or extreme weather events. By ensuring a steady supply
                           of irrigation water throughout the year, year-round irrigation supports continuous cropping cycles and increased
                           agricultural production.
Frequency                  Bi-annual
Data source                Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for Data       Review/progress update against the result framework/field furvey
Collection
Responsibility for Data    PIO
Collection
 Increased agricultural productivity
 People benefiting from increased agricultural production (Number of People)
                           This indicator measures increased production resulting from project interventions, including but not limited to
                           agriculture assets, improved technologies and services, finance, etc. Interventions are aimed at households. Households
Description                whose productivity is increased by 20% from the baseline will be considered. Total beneficiaries are calculated assuming
                           an average household size of 4.5. It is assumed that at least 80% of the people will have access to agricultural assets and
                           services and will increase their productivity.
Frequency                  Bi-annual
Data source                Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for Data       Review/Progress update against the result framework/Field survey
Collection
Responsibility for Data    ACIU
Collection
 People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience
People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience (Number of People)
                          Corporate result indicator. This indicator measures people benefiting from enhanced climate resilience as a result of
                          improved/year-round irrigation services through project investment in climate-resilient irrigation infrastructure,
                          conservation and augmentation of water storage, and command area flood protection work, and/or from
Description
                          improved/modern agricultural technology, locally viable climate-smart technologies, and farming practices, especially
                          those focused on efficient water management. These practices and technologies aim to increase agricultural productivity,
                          efficiency, and resilience of the agriculture sector while reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Frequency                 Bi-annual
                          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Data source
Methodology for Data       Review/Progress update against the result framework/Field survey
Collection
Responsibility for Data    PIO+ACIU
Collection




                                                                                                                                              Page 22
           The World Bank
           NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components

 Component 1: Irrigation improvement and development
      1.   Irrigation canal network improved, rehabilitated, or modernized (Kilometer)

                      The indicator measures the total length of the improved, rehabilitated, or modernized irrigation canal covering the entire canal
 Description          network from the main/feeder canal to the tertiary/ water course supported by the project.


 Frequency            Bi-annual
 Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
 Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework/Field survey
 Data Collection
 Responsibility for   PIO
 Data Collection
      2.   Improvement of rural roads to increase access to market and other services – (Kilometer)

 Description          The indicator measures the total length of the rural/agriculture road improved or rehabilitated supported by the project.
 Frequency            Bi-annual
 Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
 Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework/Field survey
 Data Collection
 Responsibility for   PIO
 Data Collection
 Component 2: Watershed management
      1.   Farmland area protected from the climate/disaster risk of uncontrolled river bank erosion and flooding (from Pathariya, Kandra and other
           local rivers) (ha)

                      This indicator measures the farmland area in the command area that will be protected from riverbank erosion and floods
 Description          occurring within the project lifetime, which will otherwise cause riverbank erosion and destroy the farmland.
 Frequency            Bi-annual
 Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
 Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework/Field survey
 Data Collection
 Responsibility for   PIO
 Data Collection
      2.   Hectares of terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management (ha)

                      Corporate Results and Climate Resilience Indicator. The indicator measures the terrestrial and inland areas for which the
                      protection, conservation, restoration, and/or sustainable management practices have been introduced, thereby improving the
                      preservation of water resources, sustainable use, and enhancement of ecosystem services. The indicator measures the area for
 Description          which watershed management practices have been adopted due to activities under Component 2. Watershed management
                      practices refer to activities/approaches for conserving and improving water management, reducing the risk of flood and
                      drought, implementing sustainable land management through plantation/reforestation, reducing erosion, improving soil
                      moisture through check dams, etc.
 Frequency            Bi-annual
 Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report




                                                                                                                                             Page 23
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework/Field survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
3. Water storage improved, rehabilitated, or modernized (Number)
                     The indicator measures the total amount of water storage improved, rehabilitated, or modernized, covering small to medium-
Description
                     sized existing water storage.
Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework/Field survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
Component 3: Agriculture Support Services
People reached with agricultural assets or services (Number of people)
                     This indicator measures the cumulative number of people who, as a result of project interventions, would have access to : (a)
                     improved farming tools (for example, power tillers, reapers, harvesters, threshers, tractors), (b) agricultural inputs (for example,
                     improved seeds, fertilizers, pesticides), and (c) technical know-how and extension services. Thus, this indicator also captures:
Description          (a) the number of people within the WUAs who would receive capacity-building services to enable them to undertake and/or to
                     self-finance the MOM of the irrigation and drainage canals covered by the project; and (b) all farmers trained on improved
                     water control technology and/or receiving improved irrigation services.

Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework/WUA survey. The (unique) beneficiaries who receive agricultural
Data Collection      assets/services from RJKIP 3 will be captured.
Responsibility for   ACIU/PIO
Data Collection
People adopting improved intensified cropping promoted under the project ( Percentage)
                     This indicator measures the percentage of people out of the total people reached with agricultural assets or services, who have
                     adopted improved intensified cropping practices in the project command area. Crop intensification will be defined as: (a) a
Description          change in cropping pattern (crop diversification), (b) an increase in cropping intensity, (c) the adoption of new or improved
                     cultivars, and/or (d) a reduction in fallow land or increase in productivity per unit area.

Frequency            Bi-Annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework /Field Survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   External survey firm/ACIU
Data Collection
People adopting improved agricultural technology (Number of people)
                     This indicator measures the number of people who have adopted any improved agricultural technology as promoted by
Description          Component 3 and/or facilitated by the irrigation improvements by Component 1.
Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report




                                                                                                                                               Page 24
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


                     Review/Progress update against the result framework. The adoption number is measured as the product of: (i) the share of
Methodology for      farmers adopting at least one improved technology (measured in the sample covered by the household survey), and (ii) the
Data Collection      number of farmers provided with access to improved agricultural technologies (from the project report/activity record).

Responsibility for   External Survey firm/ACIU
Data Collection
Component 4: Institutional Support and Project Management
WUAs formed, reorganized, and registered (Number)
                  WUA will be formed and registered in each subsystem that covers new irrigated areas. Also, in subsystems with the existing
Description       irrigated areas along with their extensions, the existing WUAs will be reorganized to encompass the farmers of the extended
                  areas, and thereafter, they will be registered.
Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework /Field Survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
WUA training on O&M accomplished (Number of person-days)
                  This indicator measures the number of person-days of WUA members (gender disaggregated) who have received the training
                  needed for the MOM of a modernized Irrigation system.
                  O&M training refers to those training that relates to the MOM of irrigation systems. They include different trainings on: (a)
Description       matching irrigation demand and supplies, (b) asset management, (c) canal and hydraulic operation of water control structures,
                  (d) resources management for O&M, (e) WUA institutional arrangements, and roles, and responsibilities of key members and
                  PIO professionals concerning the MOM of the irrigation system, and (f) other related topics.

Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework /Field Survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
Women members in the executive committee of WUAs with at least one in a key position (chairperson, treasurer, or secretary) in each WUA
(Percentage)
                  Gender Indicator: This will measure the percentage of females as members in the executive committee of WUAs with at least
                  one in a key decision-making position (chairperson, treasurer, or secretary) in each WUA. The indicator allows women to
Description       actively participate in the planning and designing of infrastructure, in quality control, and in decision-making processes.


Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework /WUA survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
Funds/resources delegated for O&M by the target rural households and WUAs (Percentage)




                                                                                                                                        Page 25
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


                     This indicator measures the percentage of share of total funds for MOM contributions by the target rural households and
                     WUAs, as supported by Sub-component 4.1. It will capture their cash contributions and their monetized in-kind contributions.
                     This indicator refers to the globally accepted irrigation sustainability indicator known as the “cost recovery ratio”. It mea sures
                     the resources (irrigation service fees (ISF) and commodities/kind ) contributed by the targeted household and WUA against the
                     MOM cost required to manage the part of the the system assigned to respective WUA, below the level of management
Description
                     interface structure. The management interface structure is to be defined by the MOM plan and agreed upon by PIO and WUA.

                     O&M Cost recovery ratio = (Resources contributed by WUA members divided by the total MOM cost of the system below the
                     level of management interface structure)

Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework /WUA survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
Project beneficiaries who rate project interventions as ‘Satisfactory’ or higher (Percentage) (disaggregated by sex and youth)

                     The indicator measures beneficiaries’ satisfaction with the project activities and project’s effectiveness from the users'
                     perspective. It measures the percentage of individual farmers/beneficiaries who rate the project’s interventions as
Description          ‘Satisfactory’ or higher. It captures demand-side accountability to ensure that beneficiaries have a voice in evaluating and
                     influencing project outcomes and includes a feedback mechanism.

Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework /WUA survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
Grievances registered, related to delivery of project benefits that are addressed timely (Percentage)
                     This indicator measures the percentage of grievances registered related to the delivery of project benefits or avoidance of
Description          negative impacts that are addressed within three months of being registered in the GRM database.
Frequency            Bi-annual
Data source          Progress report/Activity record/Survey report
Methodology for      Review/Progress update against the result framework /WUA survey
Data Collection
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection
Average annual score of WUA performance measurement (Percent)
                    This indicator measures the performance scores of WUAs annually, where modernization/rehabilitation/improvement of
                    irrigation schemes have been completed. The key service areas to measure the performances are: (i) water service delivery (key
                    subindicators: establishment and operationalization of canal operation plan, functional status of physical system/infrastructure,
                    MOM plan prepared and implemented for the whole system, and equitable water distribution system established with gated
Description         structures and records of gauging stations); (ii) WUA governance (key subindicators: Legal aspects of WUA (WUA formation,
                    registration and inclusive WUA), water users inventory prepared, and membership registered, conflict management system
                    established/grievances redress system established, and WUA administration (functional office, regular meetings, general
                    assembly, account keeping/auditing (fiduciary management), etc.), and (iii) resource mobilization (key subindicators: Irrigation
                    service fee (ISF) collection system established, ISF collection ratio, generate other local resources, linkage/Memorandum of




                                                                                                                                               Page 26
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


                     understanding (MoU) with local governments established for ISF collection, organizational/WUA management with adequate
                     human resources/staffing, asset management/ inventory of assets, and share of O&M funded by farmers/WUA).
Frequency            Annual
Data source          Progress report/Performance assessment report
Methodology for      Assessment of annual performance against the key service areas, review/Progress update against the result framework /WUA
Data Collection      survey.
Responsibility for   PIO
Data Collection




                                                                                                                                      Page 27
