Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01135




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Cote d'Ivoire                  P507888                     Community and Local Development in Western Côte
                                                           d'Ivoire
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            02-Mar-2026                 19-May-2026                  Social Sustainability and
AFRICA                                                                                  Inclusion
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Republic of Cote d'Ivoire   Cotton and Cashew Council
Financing (IPF)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve socioeconomic resilience of targeted communities in western Cote d’Ivoire.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      100.00

  Total Financing                                                                                           100.00
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           100.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                              100.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                            100.00



                                                                                                                    Page 1
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                    Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                     The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1. Since the end of its second civil war in 2011, Côte d’Ivoire (CI) has emerged as one of west Africa’s leading economies
   and an important pillar of regional stability. From 2012 to 2019, annual real GDP growth averaged 8.2 percent and
   between 2015 and 2021 poverty fell from 44 percent to 37.5 percent (World Bank, 2023 ; 20241). Progress has been
   underpinned by improvements in governance with CI’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating rising
   from 2.7 in 2011 to 3.8 in 2023. Côte d'Ivoire exited the World Bank’s List of Fragile and Conflict-affected Situations
   (FCS) in 2020 and is now West Africa’s third largest economy. Though in recent years Côte d'Ivoire has suffered from
   less conflict and fewer violence related fatalities,2 endogenous and external fragility dynamics are putting renewed
   stress on the country. In June 2020, Côte d'Ivoire suffered its first cross-border attack since 2016 with more following
   in 2020 and 2021.3
2. Endogenous risks and historic vulnerabilities in Côte d’Ivoire’s western regions require urgent attention amidst new
   and evolving pressures. While international attention has focused on the north due to conflict in the Sahel and cross-
   border extremist attacks in 2020-2021, the country’s western regions remain critically overlooked. Endogenous risks
   and long-standing vulnerabilities, including past electoral violence in 2010, persist amid new pressures such as
   irregular migration, climate change, and resource conflicts. Home to 40% of the nation’s impoverished population,
   the western regions, particularly in the Montagnes district, remain susceptible to fragility, conflict and violence risks.4
   The upcoming October 2025 election poses a potential tipping point for renewed instability.
3. The Montagnes district comprises the regions of Tonpki in the north of the district, Guémon in the center-east, and
   Cavally in the south (Annex 1, Figure 2). In 2021, the population of the Montagnes district was estimated at just over
   three million, making it the second most populous district in Côte d'Ivoire after the autonomous district of Abidjan.
   This vast and strategically important area is endowed with significant natural wealth, particularly in agriculture. It
   holds most of CI’s natural reserves, as well as significant forestry, agricultural and mining resources, and contributes
   substantially to the national economy, producing 1.8 million tons of cocoa in 2023 despite an overall decline in
   production. Other key crops include coffee and rubber, with the latter witnessing robust growth. Despite these
   resources, the district faces deep-seated socio-economic and environmental challenges. While nearly 70% of the
   district's population is under the age of 355 offering significant potential for development, this young population

1 World Bank, Évaluation de la pauvreté en Côte d’Ivoire, 2023 and World Bank, Poverty and Equity Update - Côte d’Ivoire, 2024
2 Between 2020 to 2024, the number of fatalities fell from 114 to 22. This number includes fatalities due to battles, protests, riots, strategic

developments, and violence against civilians. See: ACLED – downloaded October 23, 2024.
3 Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA), 2025
4 RRA, 2025
5 ANStat, 2021



                                                                                                                                                   Page 2
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


    remains vulnerable due to high poverty rates and limited access to socio-economic infrastructure and job
    opportunities.
4. Poverty rates in the district’s three regions of Guémon (42%), Cavally (50%) and Tonkpi (51%) far exceed the
   national average of 38%, with rural poverty averaging 18 percentage points above the regional average at 65%, 58%,
   and 64%, respectively.6 This structural poverty is both the cause and result of low human development, poor access
   to social infrastructure and services, and household dependence on agriculture highly exposed to price and market
   fluctuations. The economic consequence from global crises such as COVID-19 deepened vulnerabilities in the
   Montagnes district, where 74% of households feared food insecurity in 2020.7 Declining crop prices (affecting 34% of
   households) and rising input costs (13%) have further strained rural livelihoods, weakening food security and overall
   well-being.8
5. Access to basic social services in the Montagnes district is among the lowest nationwide, coupled with poor gender
   equality outcomes. In 2021, only 69% of women gave birth in a health facility, and 30% of children under five were
   stunted.9 The region also has the country’s lowest doctor-to-population ratio, limited urban water supply coverage,10
   and just 10 of Côte d’Ivoire’s 136 social centers.11 Access to improved water12 is a huge challenge for the region which
   is significantly lagging behind the rest of the country (see Annex 1, figure 4). Recent analyses demonstrates that
   adolescent pregnancy, female genital mutilation or cutting, and child marriage are all significantly more common
   among the poorest women/poorest households in Cote d'Ivoire.13 As a result, the Montagnes district consistently
   fares among the worst performing on various indicators specific to women's agency and power of action (including on
   decision-making, ownership of smartphones, access to finances, land ownership, as well as exposure to gender-based
   violence).14
6. The Montagnes district is highly vulnerable to climate-induced disasters including floods, droughts, extreme heat,
   and wildfires. Current climate projections suggest that the average annual temperature in Montagnes is expected to
   rise by 1.5 to 2.5 degrees by 205015 with precipitation patterns becoming increasingly erratic.16 The region’s high
   dependence on agriculture and forestry coupled with population growth and irregular to migration has intensified
   pressures on natural resources that are already impacted by climate change. Over 50 percent of the district’s land
   area is covered by natural forest,17 with cocoa and coffee being the two major agriculture products of the region. The
   fertile land of the region has attracted migrants both from within Côte d'Ivoire and neighboring countries in the Sahel.
   However, the expansion of cocoa production has led to significant deforestation and forest degradation. Deforestation
   in turn has had a negative impact on cocoa production and climate change is already displacing the cocoa‑growing
   zones to other areas across the country. In the absence of adaptation measures, half of the currently suitable cocoa


6 ANStat. (2024). Profil de Pauvreté de la Côte d’Ivoire 2021. Ministère de l'Économie, du Plan et du Développement. Agence Nationale de la

Statistique.
7 Institut National de Statistique. (2020). Mesure de l'impact socio-économique de la COVID-19 sur les conditions de vie des ménages en Côte

d'Ivoire.
8 ANStat. (2024). Profil de Pauvreté de la Côte d’Ivoire 2021. Ministère de l'Économie, du Plan et du Développement. Agence Nationale de la

Statistique.
9 DHS Cote d’Ivoire 2021
10 Ibid.
11 Source: DGPS MEPS
12
   Improved water is defined as water those with access through tap in dwelling, tap in yard, public tap, or bottled/sachet water (PTI Indicators).
13 World Bank Data, 2024. "Overview of Gender Gaps in Cote d'Ivoire 2024."
14 DHS Cote d’Ivoire 2021
15
   World Bank. Think Hazard: Montagnes, Cote d'Ivoire.
16
   World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Cote d'Ivoire.
17
   Global Forest Watch. Cote d'Ivoire, Montagnes. https://www.globalforestwatch.org/dashboards/country/CIV/8/

                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


     growing areas will no longer be viable by 2050.18 Climate change is therefore projected to affect a major source of
     income for small-holder farmers and contribute to driving inter-communal conflict due to increased competition over
     natural resources.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context
7. The District of Montagnes bore the brunt of Côte d’Ivoire’s protracted military and political unrest between 1999
   and 2011. This decade-long crisis led to the de facto territorial division, with the northern regions controlled by the
   New Forces (Forces Nouvelles) and the southern regions under government authority, until the Ouagadougou
   Agreement of 2007 brought a resolution. Sharing a border with Liberia and Guinea, the Montagnes District endured
   the heaviest impacts, including extensive militarization and violent confrontations among military, rebel, and
   mercenary factions. Compounding these challenges, the western region became a refuge for displaced populations,
   straining local resources and exacerbating inter-community tensions. The prolonged absence of state and
   development actors further paralyzed essential social services and infrastructure, entrenched inequalities, and
   reinforced a deep-seated sense of neglect among western communities.
8. The 2020 presidential elections and the 2023 municipal and regional elections reignited political tensions in Côte
   d’Ivoire, with the Montagnes District acutely impacted. These elections were characterized by heightened
   polarization, disputes over results, and episodes of inter-community violence. In the Montagnes district, political
   rivalries often intensified longstanding conflicts over land ownership and citizenship. Weak capacities of local
   institutions to resolve some of these issues are prolonging long-standing tensions. This underscores the critical need
   for an integrated approach that combines structural reforms with community-driven initiatives to mitigate the political
   exploitation of local conflicts.
9. The west is marked by steady migratory flows, both internal and cross-border, driven by the region’s agricultural
   wealth. Historically, it has attracted migrants from central and northern Côte d'Ivoire (Baoulés, Malinkés) and
   neighboring countries like Burkina Faso, Mali, and Liberia. 19 This influx has intensified competition for arable land,
   water and other natural resources, with indigenous communities (Dan, Wê, and Guéré) often viewing non-native
   migrants as "invaders." Tensions are exacerbated by the lack of formalized land rights, as well as the shift from
   communal to individualized land ownership, which has excluded women and deepened conflicts between natives and
   agricultural migrants.20
10. Unregulated migration into forested areas has fueled conflict, despite migrants playing a key role in agricultural
    expansion. Dispossession of indigenous populations without compensation fostered resentment, contributing to
    divisive public discourse on land ownership and belonging. More recently, instability in the Sahel has increased
    migration, particularly in Danané, Toulepleu, and Guiglo, where informal agricultural expansion threatens both
    livelihoods and ecosystems. In protected areas like Cavally and Goin-Débé forests, recurring clashes over land have
    been exploited for political ends, leading to property destruction, displacement, and deepening inter-community
    tensions. 21

 Relationship to CPF
11. The project's objectives are fully aligned with the recently adopted Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2023-
    2027. While consistent with all the CPF's objectives, the project directly contributes to the first and second high level
    outcomes (HLO). HLO 1 aims to improve human capital, while HLO 3 intends to reduce spatial disparities and

18
   World Bank. 2023. Country Climate and Development Report: Cote d'Ivoire.
19
   The World Bank Group (2024). Côte d’Ivoire Risk and Resilience Assessment
20 RRA, World Bank 2025
21 The World Bank Group (2024). Côte d’Ivoire Risk and Resilience Assessment



                                                                                                                        Page 4
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


     strengthen resilience. The project also addresses challenges specific to gender and climate change - two of the three
     cross cutting themes prioritized by the CPF.
12. The project responds to recommendations made in the 2025 Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA). The RRA
    highlights the need to address vulnerabilities in CI’s western regions, with economic marginalization deepening after
    the 2010-2011 post-election crisis and fueling grievances, although many of the FCV-related challenges facing the west
    pre-date the post-election crisis and the rise of violent extremism in the Sahel (as described above). The RRA
    recommends for the Bank to support the Government in developing a stronger conflict-prevention strategy, focusing
    on addressing east-west FCV drivers across Gulf of Guinea countries, including Cote d’Ivoire, reinforcing national
    reconciliation and social cohesion, strengthening the WB portfolio in the country's western regions, and improving
    reliance on local communities for project management and accountability. The RRA also recommends increasing the
    participation of decentralized stakeholders in project implementation and monitoring.
13. The project is consistent with Côte d'Ivoire’s latest Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC, 2022) and Biennial
    update reports (BUR, 2024) and the World Bank’s Country Climate and Development Report for Côte d'Ivoire (CCDR,
    2023). The NDC sets an unconditional target of 30.4 percent GHG emissions reduction across the economy.22 Forestry
    is the focus of the current NDC, with efforts to reduce deforestation, restore land and improve land governance
    expecting to contribute significantly to meeting the NDC target. The BUR highlights the significant loss of forest cover
    in the country due to the conversion of forests into agricultural lands and the increase in GHG emissions from
    agriculture sector.23 The CCDR highlights the climate vulnerability of key economic sectors like cocoa and the potential
    increase in conflict and migration if land degradation worsens.24 The project will contribute to Cote d’Ivoire’s climate
    commitment by financing community level climate resilient investments and building the capacity of local
    stakeholders in adapting to and mitigating climate change impact.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To improve socioeconomic resilience of communities in western Cote d’Ivoire


  Key Results (From PCN)
14. The following two core PDO indicators will be considered, reflecting the three resilience pathways:

15. Beneficiaries in project target areas provided with improved access to socio-economic services and infrastructure
    (broken down by gender, youth, and marginalized groups). This indicator will also be broken down into the following
    scorecard indicators:
      a. Number of new or better jobs, of which (%) for women and youth
      b. Number of people provided with water, sanitation, and hygiene, of which (%) is safely managed
      c. Number of students supported with better education
      d. Number of people receiving quality health, nutrition, and population services

16. Percentage of beneficiaries in target communities who report enhanced trust as a result of project support (%).25


22 Côte d'Ivoire, Nationally Determined Contributions, 2022. https://unfccc.int/documents/497390
23 Côte d'Ivoire, Biennal update reports (BUR), 2024. https://unfccc.int/documents/636718
24 World Bank. Country Climate and Development Report: Côte d'Ivoire, 2023.
25 For definition of enhanced trust, see Annex 2.



                                                                                                                        Page 5
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


 D. Concept Description
17. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve socioeconomic resilience of communities in western Cote
    d’Ivoire. In the medium-term this would lead to better human development outcomes and livelihood opportunities
    for these lagging regions and marginalized communities.
18. The project will target the most marginalized villages within the three regions in the District of Montagnes by using
    the Project Targeting Index (PTI)26 as criteria for selection of intervention clusters (Annex 1, Figure 5). Key indicators,
    disaggregated at the sous-prefecture or commune level, will be chosen to guide the selection process. The following
    indicators have been identified to allow the creation of a composite index: i) share of poor, ii) distance to market, iii)
    distance to health facility, iv) share of population with unimproved water, and v) distance to primary schools.
19. To achieve its objective, the project builds on the approach of the Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion
    project (P175043 - COSO), contextualizing it to the specific risks and needs of Montagnes District in Western Cote
    d’Ivoire. It proposes to improve the socio-economic resilience of communities in that area by (i) financing local
    investments and income generating activities, identified and implemented with communities through a Community
    and Local Development (CLD) approach that prioritizes climate resilience and ensures the participation of women,
    youth, and other marginalized groups; (ii) supporting socio-economic development at the communal/sub-prefectural
    level to ensure investments made a the local level are linked to broader socio-economic development planning at the
    communal level and; (iii) generating knowledge and assessing ways to institutionalize a more coordinated and
    sustainable CLD approach in Côte d’Ivoire. Figure 1 in Annex 1 below outlines the theory of change underlying this
    approach. The project is structured around four main components to achieve these objectives.

20. Component 1: Resilient and inclusive local development at the community level. Through the CLD approach, this
    component aims to strengthen the engagement of populations in inclusive, resilient and localized development at the
    village level. It aims to strengthen the resilience of local communities through two main approaches: (i) by improving
    access to essential basic services and (ii) by improving economic development through income-generating activities.
    Local level investments will be identified and implemented by communities and will follow an integrated planning and
    implementation approach, aligned with the medium-term territorial development vision of the target areas. By
    adopting a CLD approach, complemented by key data and informed by climate science, the component aims to
    support people in the target lagging regions to fully participate in their local development activities and to create
    inclusive and resilient communities with enhanced access to economic opportunities. Inclusion of women, youth, and
    other marginalized groups will be ensured through their representation in decision making, and as part of the
    community committees and overall planning and implementation processes.
21. Target localities will be clustered by sub-prefectures and selected through the Project Targeting Index to ensure
    impactful and equitable investments. Investments will be bundled so that each locality will receive a set of
    interventions over the life of the project. It will deliver 3-4 annual investment cycles consisting of community-selected
    investment/infrastructure, income generating activities for women groups, and in collaboration with the World Bank
    financed Youth Employment and Skills Development Project (PEJEDEC) - Phase 3 (P172800) Technical and Vocational
    Education and Training (TVET) activities will be provided to selected youth. The bundled approach has been inspired


26
  One way to guide the geographic prioritization of Bank interventions is through a composite, geographic targeting index called the Project
Targeting Index (PTI). A PTI can be used to better understand which locations within a given country or region may need to be prioritized (and de-
prioritized) given certain objective, data-driven criteria. A composite index combines indicators of several criteria in a transparent manner to
highlight where potential impact or need is greatest. This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank Poverty and Equity Global Practice.

                                                                                                                                               Page 6
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


    by the evidence-backed Ultra Poor Graduation Approach27 which builds on the logic that a “big push” program, aimed
    to address the many challenges of poverty simultaneously, boosts livelihoods, income, and health among the ultra-
    poor.
22. Subcomponent 1.1: Improved access to basic social services through sustainable, resilient, and inclusive
    infrastructure. Subcomponent 1.1 will support increasing access to local-level, climate-resilient, socioeconomic
    infrastructure by financing community investments for the construction, rehabilitation, upgrading, and/or equipment
    of community infrastructure designed to enhance the inclusion of marginalized groups in local development activities.
    Investments in access to services can include access to health, education, and other social services as prioritized by
    the community. At the village level, an open menu approach with a negative list will be implemented across multiple
    cycles to ensure flexibility while maintaining eligibility criteria.

23. Subcomponent 1.2: Increased livelihood opportunities through sustainable, resilient, and inclusive income
    generating activities. This subcomponent aims to strengthen local resilience by investing in climate-adaptive
    economic opportunities. Specifically, it will finance short-term income-generating activities for women to diversify
    rural livelihoods and support youth to access Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) . The subcomponent
    will support the targeted provision of assets and services tailored to meet women’s differentiated needs and ensure
    female farmers, herders, and small-scale traders are adequately supported. This includes not only agricultural assets
    but also support for transborder small-scale commerce. Women's groups will be provided with material,
    transportation costs, and other needs specific to their economic activities. TVET targeting youth will also be financed
    under this component, by providing financial support for rural youth to access new and flexible learning and livelihood
    opportunities.
24. Component 2: Socio-economic development at the communal/sub-prefectural level. To boost economic
    development, the rehabilitation of rural markets and access roads at the cluster level will be conducted where the
    need is identified. This component will support the rehabilitation and development of local economic infrastructure
    at the communal or sub-prefectural level. It will address socio-economic development needs that require inter-village
    solutions, particularly rural markets, which are hubs for improving the livelihoods of vulnerable populations. This may
    include the development, modernization and/or extension of all-season rural roads, thus facilitating the connection
    between production basins and markets. Improved access to markets, combined with increased economic activity,
    should enable populations to diversify their sources of income and strengthen their resilience to food insecurity,
    exacerbated by intensifying droughts, rising temperatures and increased flooding. By stimulating economic activity in
    modernized and better-connected rural markets, this component will create economic integration opportunities for
    women, youth and vulnerable populations, fostering resilience.
25. Component 3: Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening. Component 3 aims to supporting the
    institutionalization of Community-Led Development (CLD) and foster trust and cooperation between communities
    through analytical work, policy recommendations, capacity building and supporting local initiatives that promote
    inclusive governance and conflict prevention.
26. Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Relations and Mutual Trust Between Communities in the District of Montagnes. This
    subcomponent aims to foster stronger relationships and trust between selected communities in Montagnes District.
    It will support initiatives that encourage inter-community dialogue, collaboration, and joint activities to address
    common challenges. The focus is on reducing tensions, mitigating social divisions, and creating an environment

27 https://poverty-action.org/impact/ultra-poor-graduation-approach



                                                                                                                       Page 7
       The World Bank
       Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


    conducive to peaceful coexistence. Activities under this component may include social cohesion interventions (such
    as perspective taking, local mediation programs, strengthening existing conflict resolution mechanisms and capacity-
    building efforts for stakeholders involved in social cohesion efforts). All interventions under this subcomponent will
    be grounded in analytical work that identifies local sources of fragility and resilience. Based on this analysis, evidence-
    based interventions will be designed and adapted to the specific local context to ensure their relevance and
    effectiveness. This approach will enable the implementation of tailored strategies that respond to community needs
    while strengthening the foundations for long-term stability and social cohesion.
27. Subcomponent 3.2: Analytical Work and Institutionalization of CLD in Côte d'Ivoire. Using the CLD approach and
    mechanisms developed in the northern regions through the ongoing COSO Project (P175043), coupled with the CLD
    approach in Montagnes District proposed here, this Subcomponent will undertake comprehensive analytical work to
    assess how to institutionalize a more coordinated and sustainable Community-Led Development approach in Côte
    d’Ivoire. Analyses will focus on key elements, including the policy and legal framework, institutional capacity, and
    governance structures to integrate CLD into national and local systems. It will map financial flows to identify
    opportunities and propose sustainable funding models while assessing the capacity of communities to engage
    effectively in decision-making and project implementation. Studies will also evaluate monitoring and evaluation
    systems to institutionalize accountability and adaptive learning. Additionally, it will examine capacity development
    needs, socio-cultural dynamics, and risks, proposing mitigation measures to address potential challenges. By reviewing
    international best practices and aligning CLD approaches with national development goals and decentralization
    efforts, a detailed roadmap for institutionalizing CLD, ensuring its long-term sustainability and contribution to poverty
    reduction and social cohesion in Côte d’Ivoire will be proposed.
28. Subcomponent 3.3: Capacity building for community investments to strengthen local resilience and inclusion.
    Subcomponent 3.3 will strengthen the capacity of local stakeholders to drive and participate in all stages of annual
    investment cycles under Component 1. Facilitators, in partnership with existing Government structures, will drive
    community mobilization and communication campaigns to raise awareness and inform target communities and
    groups of the project’s objective, approach, and activities. Specific capacity building and coaching will also be provided
    on needs prioritization, proposal development, implementation of investments, local-level financial management
    (FM) and procurement, participatory monitoring of activities, and maintenance arrangements. Climate awareness-
    raising, diagnostics, and filtering activities will be embedded as part of the planning process for the different
    subproject components to ensure selected investments address or adequately consider climate risks and support local
    adaptation. Trainings would also cover key development principles that are critical to the project, such as on climate
    mitigation, social inclusion (gender, youth, and other marginalized groups), environment and social sustainability, and
    citizen engagement, for those communities to take a more active role in their own development. Finally, budget will
    also be included for cross-country knowledge exchange to capitalize on successes under COSO and other similar
    projects.
29. This sub-component will also focus on empowering local governments in the Montagnes District to take a central
    role in coordinating development interventions across sectors and donors. Through targeted capacity-building
    initiatives, local governments will be equipped with the skills, tools, and systems necessary to lead and manage the
    coordination process effectively. Activities will include training on planning, resource management, and monitoring,
    as well as the establishment of inclusive coordination platforms to engage stakeholders such as civil society,
    development partners, and local communities. These efforts will strengthen institutional capacity, enhance
    transparency and accountability, and ensure that development initiatives align with local priorities and national goals.
    By placing local governments at the center of their development processes, this component seeks to foster


                                                                                                                          Page 8
       The World Bank
       Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


    sustainable, locally driven coordination mechanisms that maximize the impact and coherence of development efforts
    in the Montagnes District.
30. Component 4: Project Management and Coordination. Component 4 will strengthen project management and
    coordination across all levels to ensure effective planning, implementation, and oversight. It will support project
    management and coordination at the regional, national, and subnational levels by covering the operating costs of
    planning, implementation, and technical oversight of project activities; environmental and social safeguards
    management and monitoring; FM and procurement; preparation of work plans, budgets, and progress reports; and
    communication and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements, including the setup of a management
    information system (MIS) and a project beneficiary feedback mechanism. Three regional antennas will be established
    for each of the three region and will provide capacity building, technical assistance and implementation support both
    to LGs and the local level.
31. At this stage, the project activities are not expected to pose risks to the adaptation and mitigation goals of the Paris
    Agreement. On mitigation, the project supports universally aligned activities such as sustainable natural resources
    management, rehabilitation of WASH infrastructure, capacity building and training. On adaptation, the Montagnes
    district of Cote d’Ivoire is affected by increased temperatures, more frequent and intense floods and droughts, and
    wildfire. The project aims to minimize these climatic risks and enhance resilience by undertaking participatory climate
    risk assessments throughout the investment selection process and ensuring that all infrastructure investments will
    adopt a rigorous climate-resilient design and maintenance standards to withstand relevant climate shocks. Similarly,
    the project will support resilient economic development in the region by financing small-scale income generating
    activities that contribute to climate change adaptation and resilience for local communities.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                       Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


32. The environmental and social risks at concept stage are rated Substantial, due to various factors that could
    exacerbate degradation (deforestation and forest degradation) and resurface due to project interventions, including
    the pressure on social infrastructure and natural resources from migrant influx, disruption of local customs, climate
    change impacts, potential disruption of natural and critical habitats, threats to biodiversity, potential pollution, latent
    community conflicts, diversion of project benefits by elites, and challenges in sustaining project acquisitions. At the
    concept stage, project localities, including potential protected areas, have not been identified. Once confirmed, the




                                                                                                                          Page 9
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)


    project will adopt appropriate risk mitigation measures and preparation procedures per the Interim Guidance Note
    on Managing Risks for Projects Involving Protected Areas.28


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Julia Lendorfer
   Senior Social Development Specialist

   Maya Boulos
   Social Development Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Republic of Cote d'Ivoire

 Implementing Agencies
   Cotton and Cashew Council

  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                               Julia Lendorfer, Maya Boulos

 Approved By

 Practice Manager/Manager:                          Nicolas Perrin                                      04-Sep-2025

 Country Director:                                  Antonius Verheijen                                  08-Oct-2025




28 World Bank. Interim Guidance Note: Managing the Risks of Projects Involving Protected Areas, 2025.



                                                                                                                      Page 10
The World Bank
Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire(P507888)




                                                                    Page 11
