Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   United Republic of Tanzania – Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
                                   DDO) (P507912)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Program Information Document (PID)

                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2025 | Report No: PIDDA00146




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     United Republic of Tanzania – Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
     DDO) (P507912)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                            United Republic of Tanzania - Development Policy
Tanzania                       P507912                      Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
                                                            (Cat DDO)
Region                         Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                                                       Development Policy
                               30-Apr-2025                  Urban, Resilience and Land
AFRICA                                                                                     Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
United Republic of
                               Ministry of Finance
Tanzania

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen economic resilience and the technical, financial and institutional
capacity to manage climate, fiscal and disaster risks within the United Republic of Tanzania

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                              300.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             300.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                         300.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision


                                                                                                                   Page 1
       The World Bank
       United Republic of Tanzania – Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
       DDO) (P507912)


 The review did authorize the preparation to continue


 Explanation




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

The United Republic of Tanzania’s (URT’s) disaster and climate risk profile highlights the need for coordinated disaster
risk management (DRM) across sectors and improved multi-hazard risk reduction. Ranked 45th most vulnerable and
34th least ready to adapt to climate change, Tanzania faces increasing exposure to disasters due to its growing population
and economy. Over the past two decades, the country has experienced over 65 major events, with floods and droughts
accounting for 70% of natural disasters and causing annual economic losses of $170 million. Recent cyclones, such as
Kenneth (2019) and Jobo (2021), along with El-Niño rains and Tropical Cyclone Hidaya (2023-2024), caused 155 deaths,
affected over 200,000 people, and resulted in $368 million in damages. These widespread events strain the government’s
response capacity, which remains limited at the local level.

Climate change is causing major vulnerabilities in Tanzania's key sectors, resulting in economic and infrastructure
challenges. Since 1971, temperatures have risen by 0.24°C per decade, and sea levels have increased by 40-200 mm per
decade since 1955. By the 2050s, temperatures could rise by 1.4 to 2.3°C, and sea levels could increase by 160-300 mm,
leading to more frequent heatwaves, dry spells, and extreme precipitation events, particularly in northeastern Tanzania.
Water resources and hydropower are also at risk, with per capita water availability projected to drop by 76% by 2080.
Hydropower, contributing 37% of Tanzania’s electricity, is vulnerable to droughts and flooding. Dar es Salaam's
infrastructure, valued at $5.3 billion, is increasingly at risk from flooding and sea-level rise. While Tanzania has advanced
its climate policy framework, gaps remain, which the URT aims to address through reforms supported by this operation.

Strengthening Tanzania’s economic resilience is a crucial priority for addressing climate-related risks. Investing in
resilient infrastructure could mitigate these risks but requires enhanced revenue mobilization to sustainably fund these
investments, which is a key policy priority. The Government also aims to strengthen economic resilience by maintaining
fiscal and debt sustainability by improving institutional, financial, and regulatory frameworks and increasing fiscal
transparency. Making the financial sector’s prudential framework more climate-informed is another priority area aimed
at facilitating efficient resource allocation and risk mitigation by the private sector.

The macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the proposed operation. The adequacy of the macroeconomic
framework is assessed on the authorities’ impressive track record for sound macroeconomic management, including
prudent fiscal stance, conservative monetary policy, a sustainable debt outlook, and the commitment to reforms to



                                                                                                                        Page 2
        The World Bank
        United Republic of Tanzania – Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
        DDO) (P507912)


improve business environment for private investments1, as well as to promote resilient and inclusive growth. Tanzania has
historically received one of the highest CPIA scores among the SSA countries, especially for macroeconomic management
indicators.

 Relationship to CPF
The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY25-29 seeks to support Tanzania in leveraging its social and economic
progress to achieve more inclusive, private sector-driven, and resilient growth. The proposed operation is aligned with
the CPF, contributing to all three Higher Level Objectives of enhanced human capital, catalyzing private sector-led growth
and enhanced resilience to shocks and climate impacts.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 The Project Development Objective is to strengthen economic resilience and the technical, financial and institutional
 capacity to manage climate, fiscal and disaster risks within the United Republic of Tanzania

 Key Results

The proposed operation aims to achieve the following results: (i) establishment of regional disaster response teams in
key areas; (ii) Community health workers operational for public health and multi-hazard emergency surveillance,
preparedness and response; (iii) contingency fund to address climate emergency-related road infrastructure maintenance;
(iv) people living in Wami Ruvu Basin flood prone areas covered by enhanced fluvial flood early warnings; (v) increased
share of women's leadership and management positions in Basin Water Boards; (vi) improved spatial planning to orient
risk-informed city development in key cities; (vii) ZECO engineers trained on emergency power service restoration; (viii)
assets of the banking system under the commercial banks in compliance with the prudential guidelines for climate-related
financial risks (iv) carbon projects developed in alignment with the carbon market regulations to increase access to climate
finance

 D. Project Description

The proposed stand-alone Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Development Policy Financing (DPF) with Catastrophe-
Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) is an International Development Association (IDA) credit of US$300 million. The
project will address ongoing climate and disaster risks through reforms under three (3) pillars. Pillar 1: Strengthening
Institutional and Financial Capacity for Disaster Preparedness and Response aims to strengthen organized disaster
response capabilities of the health and disaster risk management (DRM) sectors. This pillar will increase human capacity
within government systems for effective response, promote coordination between the health and DRM sectors in areas
of preparedness and response, and operationalize response teams, enhancing readiness for both natural and health-
related disasters. The pillar also promotes the establishment of flood early warning systems (EWS) and decision support
systems in key flood-prone basins to safeguard at-risk populations, improving proactive disaster preparedness. The pillar
will also support allocation of additional dedicated resources to the Contingency Fund. Pillar 2: Mainstreaming Disaster
Risk Management Across Key Sectors aims to incorporate resilience and risk prevention principles into the planning,

1 This commitment was recently reconfirmed through the approval of the World Bank Financial Access for Sustainable and Transformational

Growth Project (FAST) in the amount of US$ 150 million.

                                                                                                                                          Page 3
       The World Bank
       United Republic of Tanzania – Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
       DDO) (P507912)


decision-making, and management of essential infrastructure and services. This will ensure that current and future
infrastructure investments in key sectors are risk-informed, contributing to long-term resilience against climate-related
and natural hazards. Specifically, the pillar will support efforts to reduce risk-prone urban expansion through risk-informed
urban planning and bolster the resilience of Zanzibar's water and energy sectors by enhancing the reliability of power
infrastructure and supporting sustainable management of the island´s groundwater resources informed by aquifer
monitoring and preventing over-extraction and contamination, and mitigating risks of saltwater intrusion. Pillar 3:
Enhance Economic Resilience and Establish foundations for Carbon Market Access aims to enhance Tanzania’s economic
resilience by strengthening institutional, financial, and regulatory frameworks, and enabling access to global climate
finance through carbon markets. It will promote fiscal transparency, sustainable investment, and accountability while
integrating climate risk considerations into financial institutions’ decision-making to support adaptation, mitigation, and
long-term resilience to climate-related disasters.

 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

Implementation and Monitoring will be undertaken jointly by the URT and WB teams. The teams will meet regularly to
monitor progress in implementing the agreed reforms and to assess progress towards results. The Ministries of Finance
in both mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar will be the main coordinating agencies on the side of the URT and will rely on
reporting from relevant line ministries. World Bank Technical Assistance will ensure a close engagement, based on lessons
from Cat DDOs in Africa and key development partners will also be regularly consulted and engaged in the monitoring of
relevant reforms.

 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

Overall, the PAs are expected to reduce poverty by decreasing household vulnerabilities and mitigating the effects of
future climate-related disasters. The proposed policy actions aim to reduce poverty by addressing structural inequalities
and enhancing resilience to climate-related disasters.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

The proposed policy actions are likely to have positive environmental impacts. Pillar 1 focuses on strengthening
institutional capacity for disaster management, allowing timely responses to disasters that could damage natural habitats.
Pillar 2 supports increased resilience in physical infrastructure, particularly in energy, urban, and water sectors, promoting
efficient pollution prevention and ecosystem conservation. Pillar 3 aims to enhance economic resilience by strengthening
institutional, financial, and regulatory frameworks, and enabling access to global climate finance through carbon markets.

 G. Risks and Mitigation

The overall residual risk rating for the operation is Moderate, with only two substantial risks to achieving the
development objective of the operation. These are: institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, and


                                                                                                                         Page 4
       The World Bank
       United Republic of Tanzania – Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
       DDO) (P507912)


environment and social risk categories. The Ministry of Finance will have a central leadership role in coordinating program
implementation and the task team will also ensure a close engagement to support he multi-sectoral focus of this
operation. Technical assistance will be provided to address technical challenges during implementation, as well as to
promote a strong coordination with development partners to ensure alignment around the reform priorities.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Yohannes Yemane Kesete
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Aghassi Mkrtchyan
   Lead Economist, Program Leader

   Nicholas James Callender
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  United Republic of Tanzania
  Rished Bade
  Commissioner of External Finance
  rished.bade@hazina.go.tz

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Finance
  Rished Bade
  External Commissioner for Finance
  rished.bade@hazina.go.tz

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL



                                                                                                                       Page 5
     The World Bank
     United Republic of Tanzania – Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
     DDO) (P507912)



Task Team Leader(s):                   Yohannes Yemane Kesete, Aghassi Mkrtchyan, Nicholas James Callender

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Catalina Marulanda                     14-Feb-2025

Country Director:                      Milena Petrova Stefanova               13-Mar-2025




                                                                                                             Page 6
