Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 12/12/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04622




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 13, 2024                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507588                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     SLWSP                       2026

                     Operation Name            Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Sierra Leone              Sierra Leone                           WESTERN AND CENTRAL         Water
                                                                                      AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Water Resources and        14-Apr-2025                 25-Sep-2025
                                               Sanitation

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     03-Dec-2024               60,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Increase access to water supply and sanitation services, improve operational performance of the water supply services
                     providers and enhance water resources management in Sierra Leone.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This project will support the country’s sustainable Water Resources Management (WRM) and long-term inclusive WASH
                     program prioritizing the urgent interventions to improve water and sanitation services and water sector performance,
                     while at the same time undertaking protection of the water sources in Sierra Leone. The proposed project aims to
                     prioritize urban water supply and sanitation services improvement with a primary focus on Freetown city and selected
                     secondary cities and rural areas. The capacity development support will mainly target the Ministry of Water Resources
                     and Sanitation and the agencies responsible for water resources management and WASH service delivery. It is expected
                     to strengthen the knowledge, management, and monitoring capacity for resilient water resources; improve fecal sludge

                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                   Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                     management; develop strategic studies to facilitate subsequent phases of the long-term engagement for inclusive,
                     affordable, sustainable, and resilient services.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Sierra Leone has 3,000 to 3,500mm/year of rainfall, and a rainy season from April to October. It has hill-&-valley
                     landscape, with many rivers &streams. Most of these river crossing points are in pristine locations with ambient noise
                     levels below 45 dB, excellent air quality &high biodiversity. The country’s rivers are polluted by mining activities, that
                     use heavy metals in the processes. The pollution is worse in the dry season. Downstream riparian communities are
                     seeking alternative sources of domestic water such as wells, as downstream ecosystems & estuaries are being degraded
                     & silted. It is broadly known that Project activities may take place nationwide, in urban, peri-urban &rural areas, a share
                     of which are expected to be in vulnerable neighborhoods. The Project may provide support for fencing &protection of
                     threatened watershed in the Western Area including in the Guma Valley (GV). There is little or no facilities to collect
                     &store surface water, which limits the Country’s capacity to provide clean &safe water supply. The GV Dam in Freetown
                     was constructed to service 500,000 people, but the current population is close to 2 million. The secondary cities are
                     either serviced by mini-dams or rivers, which barely meet their water demand. Most of the infrastructure is outdated
                     with potential risks of getting damaged, with severe consequences on life, property or the distribution system.
                     Sanitation &sewage across the country is poor. The only sewer system in the country is a small grid covering major
                     offices in the central business district of the capital Freetown. The wastewater is not treated, &raw sewage is released
                     into the sea. A Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) was built in Freetown in 2021combines biogas digestion to generate
                     methane &transform the digested sludge into fertilizer. The Projects intends to support FSTP. The specific Project



Public Disclosure
                     locations are not identified. If Project locations are identified by appraisal, further details will be included.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     MWRS will be responsible for Project implementation, including ESF. It will directly implement component 1 on
                     institutional strengthening and integrating the Sanitation mandate and capacity building. MWRS will collaborate with all
                     entities involved in Project implementation: the National Water Resources Management Agency (NWRMA), the Guma
                     Valley Water Company (GVWC) and the Sierra Leone Water Company (SALWACO). Freetown City Council (FCC) and
                     other City councils will implement sub-component on urban WASH services. MWRS does not have a track record for
                     implementing Bank-financed projects, but GVWC was partly involved in the implementation of the Freetown Emergency
                     Recovery Project (FERP), P166075, with an experience in E&S risk management under the Operational Policies (OPs).
                     FERP was implemented by a Project Fiduciary Management Unit (Unit), a unit within Ministry of Finance. It comprised
                     E&S specialists, amongst others, that supervised consultants, contractors and all parties involved in project
                     implementation. MWRS is part of the Bank-supported WASH Poverty Diagnostic and WASH Access Development
                     Program. Environmental conservation and risk management is the responsibility of Environment Protection Agency
                     Sierra Leone (EPASL). Activities having an environmental footprint shall obtain an Environmental Impact Assessment
                     (EIA) license to start work. There are mechanisms in place to ensure compliance. The National Protected Area Authority
                     (NPAA) is responsible for all protected areas, parks and wetlands. EPASL has developed an environmental regulation
                     through WB support, and has benefitted from training on the ESF. There is familiarity with the Bank’s ESF by EPASL.
                     Nevertheless, the MWRS requested E&S HEIS support from the Bank to help with Project preparation and train MWRS
                     staff on E&S requirements. Project staff shall include an Environmental, Social and a Gender Based Violence (GBV)
                     Specialist, and shall benefit from capacity building support by the Bank.


                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The Project’s Environmental risk is rated as Substantial. The nature of risks & potential impacts of water infrastructure
                     intervention with potential distribution system failure, due to dated & poor engineering designs or the lack thereof,
                     pollution & infectious disease transmission from handling sewage. There is weak institutional & human capacity to
                     manage& mitigate the risks associated with the Project activities. MWRS & implementing partners shall establish an
                     E&S risk management in accordance with the ESF. The Project is expected to have positive impacts nationwide.> It
                     will contribute towards institutional strengthening & human capital development for service delivery, tools & facilities
                     for water resource management, improvement in urban water & sanitation delivery. It will campaign to eradicate
                     open defecation. The Project does not include studies or the construction of dams. There are E&S risks relating to
                     handling of sewage, small to moderate-scale civil works, potential impact on biodiversity & conflict over erecting a
                     barrier around sensitive ecologies in water catchment areas. Construction-related impacts on noise levels, air & water
                     pollution, occupational & community health & safety are also envisaged. Some of the institutions involved in Project
                     implementation have some knowledge of the Bank’s E&S risk management, benefiting from the Freetown Emergency
                     Recovery Project (FERP). MWRS & SALWACO are yet to implement a Bank-financed project. FCC & EPASL are partially
                     involved in the on-going Resilience Urban Sierra Leone Project, processed under the ESF. These institutions will
                     require training on the ESF. EPASL has a rigorous risk assessment process from screening to scoping & a full scale
                     study or ESMP depending on the risk level. A stakeholder consultation & disclosure process is prioritized, with an



Public Disclosure
                     effective mechanism for grievance redress. The risk rating will be revised as Project details become available at
                     appraisal or implementation.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is rated Substantial. The risks emanate from potential social exclusion, possible resettlement of people
                     who encroached into protected areas of degraded watersheds, creating safe and clean water access in poor
                     neighborhoods and remote areas. The proposed construction of FSTPs in Freetown and selected cities is expected to
                     be on public land, but additional land acquisition cannot be ruled out at this stage. In Sierra Leone, about 20.2% of
                     people have access to safe drinking water. It is expected that poor & vulnerable people are not among them. There is
                     a potential risk that, disadvantaged and vulnerable groups may not be sufficiently included in consultation and
                     decision-making processes. The Project stakeholder engagement design focuses on inclusive participation,
                     information disclosure using appropriate language and media. The Project’s civil works could induce labor influx
                     implying potential social risks while interacting with community leading to potential GBV risks. The support to
                     increasing access to WASH services may induce temporary and permanent land acquisition. The Project’s support to
                     stopping encroachment along threatened watershed and FSTPs may cause economic and physical displacement. The
                     scope of land take is not known at this stage. There is a potential risk of conflict including with artisanal miners due to
                     construction of barriers in water catchments areas. Considering MWRS’s weak institutional capacity in E&S risk
                     management, a strategic institutional capacity building effort is required & will be a special focus as part of the E&S
                     HEIS, which MWRS required. The technical assistance towards design and feasibility studies, ensuring access to
                     vulnerable and disadvantaged groups warrants a social analysis to understand the overall sociocultural dynamics in



                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                     water access, sanitation and inform Project design accordingly. The ToRs for various TAs will be reviewed and cleared
                     by the Bank.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The Project will improve water access, sanitation, & hygiene, with institutional support & capacity building. It includes
                      hydrological monitoring, urban water & sanitation improvements, & WASH facilities in secondary cities. Risks include
                      worker safety, pollution, & ecological impacts. Social risks involve community exclusion, labor influx, acquisition of
                      land, & restriction of access to resources. The project may not support asbestos pipe replacement. If, however, works
                      uncover asbestos pipes, there could be significant potential impact on the health of workers & the community,
                      including from mismanaging waste disposal. Sewage handling ad FSTP operation may cause health risk to workers
                      and the community, or may pollute the environment. The Project will prepare E&S framework instruments, such as
                      ESMF, SEP and RPF to manage & mitigate subproject specific risks & impacts. Site specific plans will be prepared prior
                      to start of any works.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      The Project's stakeholder engagement design must focus on inclusive participation &information disclosure using



Public Disclosure
                      appropriate language & media. Key stakeholders include MWRS, NWRMA, GVWC, SALWACO, Freetown City Council,
                      & city councils of selected secondary cities. Beneficiaries include communities with access to clean water, schools,
                      health facilities, students, water service providers, maintenance workers, FSTP users, CSO/NGOs, & those adversely
                      affected by the project. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared & implemented, proportional to the
                      project's nature, scale, risks, and impacts. The SEP will be disclosed before project appraisal, ensuring consultations
                      are timely, relevant, understandable, & accessible. A documented record of stakeholder engagement will be
                      maintained & publicly disclosed. A project-wide Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will address concerns, including
                      a confidential channel for GBV incidents.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      Extending access to safely managed water, catchment protection & rehabilitation, design & construction of FSTPs will
                      require mobilization of skilled & unskilled primary, contracted, & primary supplier workers. The potential social risks
                      due to workers & local community interaction, include SEA/SH. The Project footprint across different parts of Sierra
                      Leone will engage skilled &unskilled labor & prioritize sourcing from local areas to minimize the potential for labor
                      influx. Workers' camps are not expected to be necessary. The Project implementing entities will be required to
                      establish a comprehensive labor management procedure, including guidance to develop Health, Safety &
                      Environmental (HSE) plan to protect workers health & safety during construction & operation of water & sanitation
                      facilities, raise grievances, procedures for incident investigation & reporting, emergency preparedness & response.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant




                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                      The Project will require various construction materials like cement, granite aggregates, steel rods, stones, sand,
                      concrete blocks, timber, &water, with a preference for locally sourced, sustainably harvested materials. Suppliers of
                      materials must have EIA permits or related certification. The Project will minimize pollution risk through improved
                      hygiene practices, but handling &treating sewage & operating septic tanks or sewers pose significant hygiene risks.
                      Overflows or leaks from the FSTP and ancillary facility could pollute water or soil, but this will be factored into project
                      design. Moderate risks include air &noise pollution. Non-hazardous & hazardous waste from oil leaks & replaced
                      equipment pose pollution risks. A Waste Management Plan will be prepared to address these. Asbestos containing
                      pipes may expose workers & the community to respiratory hazards, necessitating an Asbestos Management Plan.
                      Drought & sporadic rain could affect the availability of good quality water.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      Since some civil work will take place on school and health facilities, the health and safety of students, school staff,
                      health workers, health service visitors, and vulnerable &disadvantaged households &communities will be prioritized.
                      Vehicular accidents, dust emission, noise, trips and falls into excavated sites & trenches, hygiene risk associated with
                      solid waste and sludge treatment, temporary disruption of water distribution systems are potential impacts. All
                      relevant mitigation measures will be taken upfront including robust consultation with key stakeholders surrounding
                      the fecal sludge treatment plant. Children and young people shall be protected from the risk of sexual exploitation
                      and abuse by contractors workers. The universal access concept (access for everyone) shall be considered in the
                      provision of safe and clean water access at schools, health facilities, and community level, including individuals with
                      disabilities.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      The Project will improve access to safe water, improved toilets and hygiene facilities in schools, health facilities &
                      disadvantaged communities. The Project will target facilities on public land to avoid displacement of people. FSTP on
                      existing municipality owned waste management property. Where displacement cannot be avoided, for example,
                      where protection of degraded watersheds does lead to household relocation from defined watersheds. The Project
                      will implement appropriate mitigation measures in accordance with the Project’s Resettlement Framework (RF). At
                      this stage of the Project preparation, the specific sites are unknown, hence the nature and extent of involuntary
                      resettlement impacts remain unclear. To address these uncertainties, the Project will prepare, consult up on, and
                      disclose a RF before the Project appraisal. The RF will guide the preparation of site-specific Resettlement or Livelihood
                      support Plans, tailored to the potential risks of physical or economic displacement.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      Building protective barriers to prevent encroachment on protected sensitive ecologies in the threatened watershed
                      would have profound benefits for the forest ecosystems. However, depending on the type of barrier, ecological
                      corridors might be impacted, but it is not likely that habitat fragmentation or loss of ecosystem services will result
                      from a small scale of activities along existing pipeline corridors, even within protected forest reserve or community
                      forest. Transmission routes typically fall within designated Right of Ways (RoW). There is potential for temporary
                      disturbance to nature and biodiversity from human activity and noise generated by excavation, pipe laying, metal
                      work etc. ESMF will address consistency with ESS6 requirement including an exclusion criterion of activities that may


                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                      cause significant risk on biodiversity conservation and apply the mitigation hierarchy and specific measures that will
                      constitute a section on Biodiversity Management under the ESIAs/ESMPs.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The Bank has conducted a screening of indigenous peoples and sub-Saharan Africans historically underserved
                      traditional local communities in Sierra Leone. At this stage, no people meet the policy requirements and the
                      application of this standard to the Project is not relevant. Future assessments will determine if this needs to be
                      changed.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The proposed Project will involve moderate civil works, such as excavations and pipe laying, construction and
                      concrete works. No works is expected to be carried out in cultural heritage areas. Nevertheless, this ESS is
                      conservative deemed relevant. However, the degree of relevance of this ESS will be further assessed during Project
                      preparation as part of the risk management process. Should the Project affect cultural heritage, appropriate steps will
                      be taken to ensure conservation of cultural heritage during all phases of the Project. The ESMF to be prepared for the
                      Project will also include a chance find procedure and outline the steps to be taken if and when an item/s of cultural
                      significance is discovered.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      This standard is not relevant at this stage.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        TBD
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No
                       The Bank has not conducted an assessment of the Borrower's policy, legal and institutional framework for the
                       implementation of this project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No
                       Not applicable.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?


                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Sierra Leone Water Security And Wash Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                     The Environmental and social risk management potential risk and impacts assessment and instruments will be
                     sequenced to meet minimum requirements by appraisal and subsequently later by project effectiveness.
                     Part one: Environmental and social risk management instruments that shall be prepared prior to Project appraisal
                     1.      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                     2.      Stakeholder Engagement Plan

                     Part two: Environmental and social risk management instruments that shall be prepared by project appraisal
                     1.      Environmental and Social Management Framework
                     2.      Social Analysis (including covering the TA aspect)
                     3.      Labor Management Procedure
                     4.      SEA/SH Assessment and Action Plan
                     5.      Resettlement Framework


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene          Title:         Lead Water Specialist

                      Email:                  xchauvot@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Judith Ibiada Warmate                Job Title:     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation


Public Disclosure
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                  jwarmate@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                        Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene, Judith Ibiada Warmate

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:               Ralph Augustine Bona

                     ADM Social Specialist:                      Samuel Lule Demsash




                    Dec 13, 2024                                                                                                  Page 8 of 8
