Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 03/10/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04827




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 12, 2026                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507888                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      COSO West                   2026

                     Operation Name            Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Cote d'Ivoire             Cote d'Ivoire                           WESTERN AND CENTRAL         Social Protection & Jobs
                                                                                       AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Cote          Prime Minister's Office                 02-Mar-2026                 19-May-2026
                     d'Ivoire

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     25-Feb-2026               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services and economic opportunities in Western Côte d’Ivoire.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed operation seeks to improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services and economic opportunities in
                     Western Côte d’Ivoire. The project is structured around the following core components: Component 1: Resilient and
                     inclusive local development at the community level finances (i) climate resilient, small-scale community infrastructure
                     for health, and other basic services selected by communities and relying on community labor ; and (ii) targeted support
                     to women and youth economic groups for income-generating activities through direct financing and technical assistance
                     from implementing partners. Component 2: Socio-economic development at the regional level finances (i) regional-level
                     economic infrastructures (markets, granaries etc.), based on value chains assessments to strengthen economic
                     development, connectivity; and (ii) local investments to rehabilitate and improve existing water points (pump

                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                   Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     repair/replacement, technician refresher training, capacitating water committees). Component 3: Knowledge
                     generation and institutional strengthening finances (i) community behavioral interventions focused on social cohesion
                     to ensure equitable, transparent access to shared services , support local mediation at village and sous préfecture levels
                     ; (ii) analytical work to identify potential institutionalization pathways for CLD in Côte d’Ivoire and (iii) Capacity building
                     for local stakeholders. Component 4: Project management finances staffing and operational costs to ensure effective,
                     transparent delivery through robust coordination, safeguards, fiduciary management, M&E, and beneficiary feedback
                     mechanisms.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The operation is regional in scope, implemented in western Côte d’Ivoire within the Montagnes District, covering the
                     Tonkpi, Guémon, and Cavally regions. The project targets 621 villages across the 35 poorest sub-prefectures, reaching
                     an estimated 2 million direct beneficiaries. The intervention area is predominantly rural, with livelihoods strongly
                     dependent on agriculture, forestry, and natural resource use. Despite its economic importance, including 1.8 million
                     tons of cocoa produced in 2023, the district faces significant environmental pressures. The district is characterized by
                     diverse and rugged terrain, a humid tropical climate, and a dense hydrographic network dominated by the Cavally and
                     Sassandra river basins, which are critical for domestic water supply, agriculture, and ecosystem services. The area also
                     contains numerous groundwater sources, although aquifer recharge and quality are increasingly affected by climatic
                     variability, pollution, and over-abstraction, heightening water security risks during dry periods. The project area includes
                     high-biodiversity settings and inland wetlands, with multiple protected areas and wildlife sanctuaries of national and
                     global importance, including Taï National Park, Mont Péko National Park, Mount Samgbé, and the Mount Nimba Strict



Public Disclosure
                     Nature Reserve. These ecosystems provide critical services such as carbon sequestration, watershed protection,
                     biodiversity conservation, but also render the area highly sensitive to land-use change, habitat fragmentation, pollution,
                     and cumulative impacts, particularly where agricultural expansion, mining activities, or infrastructure development
                     intersect with ecologically fragile zones. Climate hazards such as flooding, extreme heat, drought, and wildfires further
                     exacerbate environmental vulnerability by damaging crops, degrading soils, reducing water availability, and disrupting
                     transport routes .
                     The social context of the Montagnes District is characterized by high vulnerability and inequality, driven by persistent
                     rural poverty, rapid population growth, and limited access to basic services. The project targets some of the poorest
                     sous-prefectures in the three regions, where livelihoods depend largely on agriculture, livestock, trade, crafts, and
                     inland fishing sectors that together employ over 45 percent of the population and are highly exposed to climate and
                     market shocks. Between 2014 and 2021, the district’s population increased from 2.37 million to over 3 million, fueled
                     by internal migration and cross-border inflows from Liberia, Burkina Faso, Mali, and Guinea. This demographic growth
                     has intensified pressure on land, water, forests, health, education, and transport services, contributing to recurrent land
                     and water conflicts, social tensions, and cultural friction among local communities, migrants, and minorities. The
                     presence of ethnic minorities, migrants, and groups without secure customary land rights creates heightened risks of
                     exclusion, tenure insecurity, and unequal access to project benefits. Land tenure is a particularly sensitive issue:
                     customary, statutory, and informal systems coexist, often without clear documentation or enforcement. Competition
                     over fertile land, forest resources, and water, exacerbated by agricultural expansion and transhumance, lead to farmer-
                     herder conflicts and localized disputes. Parts of the protected areas of the district have been affected by the presence of
                     informal campements established by farmers and migrant workers, particularly during periods of weak enforcement
                     and socio-political instability.


                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                          Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      Although Côte d’Ivoire is not classified as an FCV country, the project area exhibits localized fragility, including the
                     legacy of political crisis and violence in the early 2000s. Vulnerable groups, such as elderly widows and persons with
                     disabilities affected by past violence, often lack adequate social protection and are at heightened risk of marginalization.
                     In addition, climate-related hazards compound social vulnerability. Seasonal flooding along waterways regularly
                     damages crops and road networks, disrupting market access and exposing communities to food insecurity. Periods of
                     extreme heat, drought, and wildfires further reduce water availability and undermine agricultural livelihoods. These
                     shocks disproportionately affect poor households, women, youth, and persons with disabilities, increasing the risk of
                     negative coping strategies. Gender inequality remains pronounced. Women constitute a significant share of the
                     agricultural workforce but face systemic barriers in access to land, finance, inputs, extension services, and decision-
                     making. Youth unemployment and underemployment are high, heightening economic insecurity. Despite these
                     challenges, the district’s border location, especially proximity to Liberia, offers important opportunities for trade,
                     market integration, and economic recovery.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Implementation arrangements will follow those of the current Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project
                     in Cote d’Ivoire (COSO North-P175043) closing in 2027. The Prime Minister’s Office will provide overall strategic
                     oversight and ensure the necessary coordination for implementation. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be
                     established within the Prime Minister office , building on the existing PIU of the COSO North project and retaining the
                     same project coordinator for both projects. A deputy national coordinator dedicated to the project will be recruited.
                     The existing PIU team includes an environmental specialist and a social specialist who are supporting the preparation of
                     the new project. Both specialists are familiar with the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework . For COSO




Public Disclosure
                     West, 3 E&S specialists will be recruited 3 months after project effective date. A social development specialist with
                     expertise in gender and sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEA/SH) and an environmental specialist will be
                     recruited at the central level.. At the regional level, an office in Man will be put in place and will be managed by the
                     deputy coordinator. An environmental and social specialist will be recruited to be based in this regional office for day to
                     day close supervision of the activities. The security risk assessment has not recommended that a security specialist
                     needs to be recruited. However, the PIU will continue monitoring the security situation in the project area. The E&S
                     specialists will therefore receive training for security risk monitoring. The Cote d’Ivoire overview assessment
                     recommends that the national law is used for ESS2 with gap filling measures where needed. One key gap is the ability of
                     labor inspectorate to ensure regular monitoring of projects works, especially in remote areas. To ensure a proper
                     monitoring of labor conditions, workers health and safety issues and address child labor risk, the PIU will enter in a
                     memorandum of understanding with the Regional Labor Office of Man to provide this monitoring for this project and to
                     provide reporting of OHS compliance and incidents, confirmation regarding the various mitigation measures including
                     signing of codes of conduct to the PIU.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The project is expected to generate positive environmental outcomes by promoting sustainable natural resource
                     management, incorporating renewable energy use (solar-powered options), climate resilient design, and supporting


                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     climate adaptive economic opportunities in the targeted areas. However, the environmental risks and potential
                     adverse impacts are rated as Substantial due to the sensitivity of the project area environment (as outlined in Section
                     D) and the medium scale nature of proposed activities. These include the construction, rehabilitation, upgrading, and
                     equipping of socioeconomic infrastructure such as rural roads, markets, boreholes, schools, and health centers
                     including solar equipment , as well as the development of income generating activities (IGAs). Key environmental risks
                     and adverse impacts relate to potential water, soil, and air pollution; the generation of waste and hazardous
                     materials; disturbance of natural and critical habitats with implications for biodiversity; increased use of
                     agrochemicals; and occupational and community health and safety (OHS) concerns. Specific risks may include: (i)
                     deterioration of air quality caused by dust during construction or rehabilitation of rural roads and buildings; (ii) noise
                     pollution and vibrations from excavation activities and the operation of machinery and vehicles; (iii) contamination of
                     surface water from hydrocarbons, lubricants, and oils; (iv) accidents and incidents linked to worksite and the supply
                     and transport of construction materials and equipment; and (v) odor nuisances resulting from inadequate
                     management of medical and markets-generated waste. Overall, the project’s environmental risks and impacts are site
                     specific, reversible, and may include some limited transboundary impacts.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is assessed as Substantial at Appraisal The The project will finance basic social infrastructure and
                     local economic facilities (including public water points, health and education facilities, rural roads, and markets) which
                     are expected to be limited in scale. However, these activities may require some land acquisition and temporary
                     physical and/or economic displacement. Weak documentation of land rights and limited experience with formal
                     resettlement processes increase the risk of exclusion of vulnerable groups and dissatisfaction if not carefully




Public Disclosure
                     managed. Labor-related risks also contribute to the risk rating since the project will engage multiple categories of
                     workers, including community workers, in a largely informal rural economy. This creates potential risks related to
                     poor working conditions, occupational health and safety, and weak oversight. Given the central role of agriculture in
                     livelihoods, there is a risk of child labor, particularly where project-supported activities increase household labor
                     demand. The presence of minorities, migrants, and groups without secure land rights increases the risk of social
                     exclusion, elite capture, and unequal access to project benefits. New infrastructure and economic opportunities may
                     also reactivate latent community tensions or disrupt established customs and informal arrangements governing land
                     and resource use. SEA/SH risks are relevant due to high poverty, gender inequality, and potential labor influx
                     associated with infrastructure works. Although labor influx is expected to remain limited, weak service coverage and
                     social norms that discourage reporting increase vulnerability. From a security perspective, western Côte d’Ivoire
                     remains a historically fragile area, with residual risks linked to community-level political tensions, inter-communal
                     conflict, banditry, and cross-border criminality.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      Rural roads, market, water and sanitation facilities, and education and health infrastructure
                      rehabilitation/construction and income generating activities (IGAs) may generate some limited environmental and
                      social risks, such as increased traffic, potential water, soil, and air pollution, hazardous materials, waste management


                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      issues, disturbance of natural and critical habitats with consequences for biodiversity; misuse of agrochemicals and
                      occupational and community health and safety (OHS) concerns; temporary income disturbances and loss of assets,
                      poor working conditions, community conflicts, grievance systems that have a fee/cost. Furthermore, the risk of
                      exclusion of vulnerable groups and labor-related risks may raise issues if they are not properly managed and
                      overseen. Since the precise locations of the planned investments are not yet determined and will be identified
                      through a CLD approach during project implementation, the Borrower is preparing an Environmental and Social
                      Management Framework (ESMF), consistent with ESS1 . The ESMF will be approved and disclosed by 20, April 2026. It
                      will include a Pest Management Plan as well as resettlement principles and procedures and will be fully aligned with
                      the national legislation, specifically Decree No. 2024 595 of June 26, 2024, which establishes the rules and procedures
                      governing environmental and social assessments (Section 3, Article 47). The ESMF will outline procedures for
                      screening and mitigating the potential risks and adverse impacts from proposed project activities, in particular those
                      that could involve civil work: rural roads, rehabilitation and construction of school and health facilities, water and
                      sanitation infrastructure etc. and other potential activities that will require resource efficiency and pollution
                      management (e.g. hazardous wastes). Mitigation measures to minimize these risks and adverse impacts, related
                      specifically to resource efficiency and pollution management, such as hazardous waste, will be included in the ESMF.
                      To ensure that project activities support local public health directives, and do not put beneficiaries or laborers at risk,
                      the project will introduce a “WASH standard” to any infrastructure that will be supported by the project. The ESMF
                      will include: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) procedures for
                      participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c)
                      procedures for assessing potential E&S impacts of the planned activities, including cumulative/transboundary impacts
                      and SEA/SH risks; (d) institutional arrangements for avoiding, minimizing, mitigating and managing the impacts




Public Disclosure
                      identified, according to the mitigation hierarchy; (e) typical environmental and social management planning
                      processes to address negative impacts throughout project implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the
                      implementation of mitigation measures; and (g) the capacity-building measures recommended for E&S planning and
                      the monitoring of project activities; (h) project grievance mechanism with SEA/SH referral pathways; (i) a SEA/SH
                      prevention and response measures to prevent and manage any SEA/SH risk; and (j) a specific chapter on cultural
                      heritage, including “Chance Find” procedure to manage potential risks related to Cultural Heritage discovered during
                      project implementation. It also incorporates relevant World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety
                      Guidelines for waste management. When project sites are identified, specific ESIAs/ESMPs, and E&S audits (if
                      needed), will be prepared as per the guidelines provided in the ESMF. The project has developed an exclusion list
                      comprising exclusion of works in “campements” located in protected areas that will be considered for activities
                      selection. The Borrower has also prepared an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) that outlines the
                      timelines for preparing and disclosing relevant environmental and social instruments and building capacity of key
                      stakeholders.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      At appraisal , the main stakeholders identified are: beneficiaries including communities and their organizations;
                      village development committees; national and local government representatives; customary and local authorities;
                      community facilitators, contractors and NGOs. The project has developed a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that
                      includes a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to receive and address project related complaints and grievances,
                      including allegations related to SEA/SH. Several consultations were undertaken during project identification and
                      preparation in 2025 as well as during the SEP and ESMF preparation in 2025/2026 in the 3 regions targeted by the


                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                        Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      project: Cavally (Guiglo, Bloléquin, Zagné, and Taï), Guémon (Duékoué, Ouyabli-Gnondrou, and Guézon), and Tonkpi
                      (Danané, Zouan-Hounien, Sipilou, and Yorodougou). Meetings mainly involved regional technical and administrative
                      services, mayors, regional councils, including professional agricultural organizations and local civil society
                      organizations (local CSOs, women's and youth groups and associations, vulnerable groups, etc.), the media, and
                      traditional and religious authorities. More than 300 people were consulted, of whom approximately 20% were
                      women and 80% were men. This facilitated the identification of the views and concerns of the various actors involved
                      in the project, as well as the collection of their suggestions and recommendations. Main concerns and suggestions are
                      related to: a transparent selection process of beneficiaries, access to employment, pre-existing land disputes and risk
                      of weakening local structures that guarantee traditional rights. The SEP includes meaningful consultation activities
                      and tools adapted to all categories of stakeholders, with differentiated measures towards women and vulnerable
                      groups, as well as ethnic minorities and proposes engagement activities at all stages of the project, embedded in the
                      CDD approach. A GRM has been developed, allowing access from the village level to the national level including four
                      intermediate levels with secured and accessible entry points. The SEP has been validated, consulted upon and
                      publicly disclosed both in country and on the Bank's website on 17 February 2026 .

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The project will involve small-scale construction activities with a significant contribution of labor from communities .
                      It will require direct, contracted and community workers for the implementation of the planned activities. An E&S
                      overview assessment(OA) was undertaken for Cote d’Ivoire in 2024 and has concluded the equivalence of most of the
                      national legal and regulatory requirements with the World Bank’s ESS2, the institutional settings and to some extent,
                      the implementation capacities. The project will use the country system where equivalent, especially regarding



Public Disclosure
                      working conditions, non-discrimination, prevention against child labor and protection of vulnerable workers. The
                      requirements relating to the remaining gaps are related to community workers management, implementation of
                      child labor requirements, and work related SEA/SH. These aspects are spelt out in the ESCP. Participation in
                      community works will be clearly documented and free of coercion. Eligibility criteria will prohibit the involvement of
                      children and adolescents below the minimum working age of 16, as well as individuals for whom participation would
                      pose health or safety risks. Community facilitators will be trained to identify and prevent child labor and unsafe
                      participation. It includes requirements applicable to labor and working conditions for community workers and
                      subcontractors, topics not adequately covered by the national regulations. The OA has also outlined the need to
                      support labor inspectorate to ensure regular supervision of works in remote areas and this need has been reiterated
                      during stakeholders consultation. The project will establish a Memorandum of Understanding with the Regional Labor
                      Office of Man before the commencement of project activities to ensure proposed works are undertaken in
                      accordance with national regulations requirements. The project will ensure a workers GRM is implemented before
                      works begin, including for the management of work related SEA/SH. The requirements for the Workers GRM will be
                      integrated in the PIM and implemented by each contractor, supervised by the Labor Inspectorate.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      Water : The project support for agricultural IGA will focus on providing technical assistance, which may include
                      agricultural and trade assets, materials, transportation costs, and training. However, the project will not fund small-
                      scale irrigation schemes using boreholes or inland wetlands for agricultural IGAs. The use of water and sanitation
                      systems, such as mini-boreholes with solar power for schools and health facilities, is expected to be low to moderate.
                      Measures to ensure rational water use and maintain water quality will be included in the ESMF and will be


                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      implemented to prevent any risk of contamination. These measures will be further detailed in the ESIAs/ESMPs to be
                      prepared once sites have been identified. Air : Emissions generated during the works will be managed by complying
                      with applicable emission standards, implementing regular water sprinkling, and ensuring proper maintenance of
                      vehicles and machinery to reduce dust and exhaust impacts on neighboring communities. These measures will be
                      included in the ESMF and will be further detailed in the ESIAs to be prepared later (if required) to minimize air
                      emissions among other issues. Raw materials : The rehabilitation and construction of rural roads, schools, and health
                      facilities may require raw materials sourced from the natural environment. While significant construction materials
                      are not expected to be used, the Borrower will ensure the efficient extraction and use of raw materials. Measures
                      consistent with the EHSGs and other Good International Industry Practice (GIIP) will be incorporated into ESIAs .
                      Noise: Rural road rehabilitation, drilling machine and school, and health construction may cause noise disturbances
                      for riverside communities. The ESMF outlines mitigation measures to maintain acceptable noise levels, including
                      restricting nighttime work and limiting the use of noiseintensive equipment. These measures will be further detailed
                      in ESIAsto be prepared, as required. Waste : Waste will be generated from construction/rehabilitation activities,
                      equipment installation, IGAs, and the operation of infrastructure facilities such as markets, health centers, and
                      schools. Construction activities will also involve the use of chemicals, with mitigation measures to be defined in the
                      ESMF. The Borrower will prepare a Hazardous Waste Management Plan for all hazardous materials, and ESIAs will
                      include measures to minimize waste generation and promote reducing, re-use and recycling approach, including a
                      site-specific Waste Management Plan to be included in the ESIA. For health centers, a Medical Waste Management
                      Plan will be developed in accordance with the national medical waste management plan and will be included in
                      specific ESIAs to be prepared, as needed. Pest : The project’s support for agricultural IGAs is expected to increase the
                      potential use of agrochemicals. Consequently, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared as a dedicated




Public Disclosure
                      chapter within the ESMF to address and mitigate the associated risks and potential adverse impacts.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      Community health and safety key risks include construction-related hazards, such as traffic accidents involving
                      construction vehicles on rural roads, increased exposure to dust, noise, and vibrations, and risks linked to unsafe
                      worksite practices, particularly where communities, children in particular, have unrestricted access to construction
                      areas. Poor waste management and inadequate sanitation at worksites may lead to water contamination and public
                      health risks. The project area is also exposed to climate and environmental hazards, including seasonal flooding,
                      extreme heat, droughts, and wildfires. During implementation, flooding can damage infrastructure, disrupt transport
                      routes, and increase risks of injury and waterborne diseases. Labor influx, even if limited in scale, may increase risks
                      related to communicable diseases, including sexually transmitted infections, and heighten SEA/SH risks. Weak health
                      service coverage and limited awareness further compound these risks. Community-executed works may expose
                      participants and nearby residents to occupational and public safety risks, including injuries due to lack of technical
                      skills, inadequate tools or personal protective equipment (PPE), and unsafe work practices. Informal organization of
                      works may lead to poor hazard identification, absence of supervision, and insufficient emergency preparedness.
                      There is also a risk of child labor and participation of vulnerable individuals in physically demanding or hazardous
                      tasks, particularly in agricultural or construction-related activities. From a security standpoint, while no recent violent
                      incidents have been reported, the area remains historically fragile, with residual risks linked to localized insecurity,
                      banditry, and cross-border criminality. Project activities could inadvertently expose communities to security risks if
                      not implemented in a conflict-sensitive manner. The identified risks require proactive mitigation measures, including
                      traffic and site safety management, emergency preparedness, climate-resilient design, community awareness, a


                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                        Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      SEA/SH prevention and management action plan to be prepared 6 months after effectiveness . All civil works will be
                      subject to site-specific Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS) measures, incorporated into bidding
                      documents and contractors’ contracts. Contractors will be required to prepare and implement Contractor
                      Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMPs), including provisions for dust suppression, noise control, safe
                      storage of materials, and waste management and provisions on applicable working conditions. In terms of security
                      risk management, the project will rely on its inherently conflict-sensitive design characterized by strong community
                      anchoring and an inclusive approach, a preference for engaging local contractors and local labor, and the existence of
                      a grievance redress mechanism, to mitigate upstream, at an early stage, the inherent security risks. Downstream, in
                      order to reduce residual security risks, the project will build on the establishment of risk mitigation measures, which
                      may be consolidated in security monitoring measures appended to the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The
                      Project will receive training to undertake security monitoring to be performed by its regional E&S specialist based in
                      its Man’s office in collaboration with regional government security officers.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      The project will finance small-scale basic social infrastructure and community investments such as public water
                      facilities, health and education facilities, rural roads, markets, and income-generating activities. They are not
                      expected to generate any large-scale or permanent involuntary resettlement. At appraisal, physical interventions in
                      “campements” (encampments) located in gazetted forests are excluded by design. Therefore, the project does not
                      include infrastructure development, land related income generating activities or any activity that may induce
                      involuntary resettlement or restriction of access to resources in gazetted forests. However, localized and limited
                      resettlement-related impacts may occur in other villages. These are expected to mainly involve minor land



Public Disclosure
                      acquisition, temporary physical displacement of small informal structures and economic displacement, including
                      temporary loss of access to land, crops, trees, grazing areas or disruption of small businesses and market activities
                      during construction. Economic displacement is likely to be more prevalent than physical displacement, particularly
                      affecting informal users, customary landholders, women, and poor households without formal land titles. In rural
                      areas, works may result in temporary loss of crops, even where land is publicly owned but customarily used.
                      Vulnerable groups, including female-headed households, elderly persons, persons with disabilities and migrants may
                      be disproportionately impacted due to limited capacity to absorb shocks. In community-driven investments, there is
                      also potential for informal or involuntary land donation, which could mask coercion or livelihood loss if not carefully
                      managed. While individual impacts are expected to be small and site-specific, the cumulative effect across multiple
                      villages could be significant if not systematically screened and mitigated. These impacts are considered manageable
                      through early screening, participatory site selection, avoidance and minimization measures, fair compensation,
                      livelihood restoration, using proportional ESS5 instruments. A screening procedure for land acquisition including
                      through land donation following ESS5 requirements will be included in the ESMF to guide sites selections and site
                      specific Resettlement action plans (RAP) preparation. Livelihood restoration activities will be developed and included
                      in RAPs where required. These provisions are clearly indicated in the ESCP.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is relevant as the project areas include high-biodiversity settings mainly inland wetlands and forest
                      ecosystems (Mounts Samgbé National Park, Nimba Strict Nature Reserve, Tonkpi gazetted Forest, Peko National Park,
                      Taï National Park). The project activities are not intended to directly affect these areas of high biodiversity settings.


                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                      Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      ESS6 relevance aims to protect biodiversity and habitats, considering the potential risks from activities such as
                      construction and agricultural IGA. The loss of vegetation and associated habitat impacts are expected to range from
                      moderate to substantial, driven primarily by construction activities and agricultural pressures. The ESMF will provide
                      guidance on applying the mitigation hierarchy and the precautionary principles in the design and activities
                      implementation to promote the sustainable management of natural resources. It includes an exclusion list for critical
                      habitats. During implementation, robust screening will be carried out for any activity located in or near natural
                      habitats to ensure that project interventions do not alter or disturb in these ecosystems. ESIAs will provide
                      appropriate mitigation measures to address risks to natural habitats and preserve their ecosystem services, through
                      the application of sound environmental management practices.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not considered relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                      Underserved Traditional Local Communities currently identified in the project area.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The World Heritage Sites of the Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve and Taï National Park are in the project area, as
                      well as other significant sites listed on national heritage inventories. Project activities will avoid impacts to these
                      known heritage sites. Light earthworks, including excavations for construction/rehabilitation of community
                      infrastructure could lead to the discovery of unknown cultural heritage. The ESMF will confirm, through consultation




Public Disclosure
                      with communities and the Ivorian Office of Cultural Heritage (OIPC) , the existence of tangible or intangible cultural
                      heritage in project areas. If there is any cultural heritage that could be affected, the Borrower will design mitigation
                      measures, in consultation with the relevant national authorities and experts and local communities, to protect it. A
                      Chance Find procedure will be included in the ESMF, and an associated clause in contractors' contracts if required.
                      This procedure will also be conducted by the PIU with communities.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      Project activities will not involve financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          In Part
                       Based on the findings of the Cote-d'Ivoire 2024 environmental and social Overview Assessment, the project will
                       partially use the Borrower’s environmental and social Framework (BESF) for the following standards requirements:




                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                       ESS 2: the legal framework of Côte d'Ivoire is largely compliant with ESS2 requirements, with some residual gaps
                       related to measures applicable to subcontractors, and community workers. In addition, the national framework does
                       not include sufficient provisions to address child labor or forced labor related risks. Therefore, the project will rely on
                       provisions that are consistent with ESS2 and address the gaps in the ESCP. In addition, to guarantee proper monitoring
                       of labor and working conditions on project working sites, the regional labor inspectorate will benefit from additional
                       support from the project.

                       ESS 8: the legal and institutional framework for the protection of cultural heritage is satisfactory. However, to support
                       implementation, support is required for involvement of the Ivorian Office of Cultural Heritage (OIPC) in consultations
                       aiming to identify projects impacts as well as for monitoring. This need for involving OIPC in ESIA data collection,
                       consultations and reviews will be required per the ESMF.



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No
                       No other financial partner involved.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The Borrower will develop the following documents by 20 April 2026:



Public Disclosure
                     •       Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including a Pest Management Plan and resettlement
                     principles and procedures

                     During implementation:
                     •       Site specific ESIAs, E&S audits and RAPs (if required).
                     •       SEA/SH prevention and management action plan




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Julia Lendorfer                          Title:         Senior Social Development Specialist

                      Email:                  jlendorfer@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Maya Boulos                              Job Title:     Social Development Specialist

                      Email:                  mboulos1@worldbank.org




                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                                      Page 11 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)




                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Julia Lendorfer, Maya Boulos

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Edichi Brigitte Andoh Epse Mobongol

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Gisele Belem




Public Disclosure




                    Mar 12, 2026                                                                                Page 12 of 12
