Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01388




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                                Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                         WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                         Burkina Faso Agricultural
                          Burkina Faso                                                P507256
                                                         AFRICA                                                      Transformation Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         02-Dec-2025                  05-Feb-2026                    Agriculture and Food
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Ministry of Economy,           Ministry of Agriculture
                          Finance and Forecasting        Livestock and Fisheries

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase productivity, value addition, and climate resilience along
                          selected value chains in the project areas.

                          Components
                          IMPROVING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE
                          IMPROVING STORAGE, AGRO-PROCESSING AND ACCESS TO MARKETS
                          PROMOTING ACCESS TO FINANCE AND PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT
                          INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND PROJECT COORDINATION

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                            177.90

                            Total Financing                                                                                                 177.90
                                         of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               150.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00



                                                                                                                                               Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Development Association (IDA)                                                                      150.00
                                 IDA Credit                                                                                                     150.00
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Counterpart Funding                                                                                               27.90
                                 National Government                                                                                             20.00
                                 Local Beneficiaries                                                                                              7.90




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           Other Decision (as needed)




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1. Burkina Faso has experienced a security crisis and significant political instability in recent years. The security
                             situation significantly worsened since 2019, leading to widespread loss of livelihoods and two political changes in
                             2022. Insecurity in the affected areas caused major displacement of the local population: the number of registered
                             internally displaced persons (IDPs) increased exponentially from 50,000 in January 2019 to 2.05 million by December
                             2023. East, North, and Sahel regions continue to suffer from chronic underdevelopment and limited provision of public
                             services because of high levels of insecurity and significant investment gaps. In response to these challenges, the
                             government of Burkina Faso has adopted the Action Plan for Stabilization and Development for 2023–2025 with four
                             priority areas: (a) restore territorial integrity; (b) respond to the humanitarian crisis; (c) rebuild the State and improve
                             governance; and (d) work toward national reconciliation and social cohesion.
                          2. There have been recent noteworthy positive developments, including an increase in state control over the national
                             territory which rose from 40 percent in 2022 to 70 percent in 2024, and a rebound in economic growth. IDPs are


                                                                                                                                                    Page 2



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                              gradually returning to their homes (over a million as of December 2024). In addition, Burkina Faso's economy has
                              shown surprising resilience. After particularly weak growth of 1.8 percent in 2022, the economy is projected to grow
                              by 4.7 percent in 2025 (2.3 percent per capita1) fueled by the services sector which was driven by strong performance
                              in public administration services which represent 22 percent of the economy. Average inflation is expected to reach
                              2.7 percent in 2025, down from 4.2 percent in 2024. Low inflation and a good harvest in late 2024 are expected to
                              reduce extreme poverty, from 37.5 percent in 2024 to 34.2 percent in 2025. The current account deficit is expected
                              to narrow to 4.2 percent of GDP in 2025, down from 6.6 percent in 2024, driven by higher gold production and
                              projected lower crude oil prices. The fiscal deficit is estimated to narrow to 4.7 percent of GDP in 2025, driven by
                              lower spending on public wages (-0.2 percentage points of GDP), alongside stable revenue mobilization.
                          3. Consolidating the above gains will require accelerating structural transformation of the country’s economy.
                             Burkina Faso's structural transformation has been slow, with primary activities still the economy’s mainstay. The
                             primary sector, including agriculture, still employs over 90 percent of the rural population. The rapidly growing gold
                             mining sector represents 83 percent of exports, 17 percent of GDP, and 22 percent of government revenues.
                             Agriculture still accounts for 18.5 percent of GDP and about 80 percent of employment in rural areas. Burkina
                             Faso's primary agricultural export is cotton, accounting for about 14 percent of the country's total exports. In Burkina
                             Faso like in many other countries dependent on agriculture, structural transformation has been characterized by the
                             relative decline of subsistence farming and the rising importance of market-oriented production, including an increase
                             in the value added for agro-industries, and the growing share of high-value agricultural products in the composition




_For Official Use Only_
                             of exports, relative to primary low-value agricultural exports. However, the degree of this transformation remains low,
                             and its acceleration is a top government priority.


                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          1. Burkina Faso’s agricultural sector is primarily characterized by subsistence production systems, with most
                             producers cultivating less than one hectare of land. Most of the cultivated land is covered by millet, sorghum, maize,
                             rice, and fonio, which are main staple foods. Other significant crops include cowpeas, onions, mangoes, and cash crops
                             like cotton, groundnuts, soybeans, and sesame. These production systems are characterized by very low productivity
                             and limited diversification. As a result, Burkina Faso suffers from chronic food and nutrition insecurity. According to
                             the 2021 Demographic and Health Survey, 22.6 percent of children are stunted, 10.6 percent wasted, and 56 percent
                             of women aged 15-49 are anemic, with higher rates among pregnant women. The agricultural sector needs profound
                             agricultural transformation to boost production, diversification and value addition in order to strengthen food and
                             nutrition security, including boosting rural incomes.
                          2. The main constraints limiting agricultural transformation include: weak public institutions which as unable to provide
                             effective coordination and support to sector participants, and weak farmers’ organizations which are unable to
                             undertake effective collective action including facilitating linkages between producers and other participants in
                             agricultural value chains, poor access to improved inputs, inadequate storage (post-harvest losses are around 30
                             percent), and lack of access to credit limiting on-farm investments, value addition and other transformative post-
                             harvest activities.
                          3. Agricultural insurance in Burkina Faso faces a complex set of challenges that limit its effectiveness, scale, and impact
                             on farmer resilience. Most agricultural insurance initiatives are small-scale pilots, with only a few thousand farmers



                          1 Source: World Bank, Macro Poverty Outlook, October 2025. Burkina Faso’s population was estimated at 23.5 million in 2024, growing at 2.2

                          percent per year (Data Bank: World Bank Indicators). About 33.7 percent of the population was estimated as urban and median age as 17.7 years
                          (Worldometer, 2025)

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                               covered at any time (In the 2025 humid agricultural season, 4,197 producers in Burkina Faso enrolled in index-based
                               climate insurance including 41% of women).
                          4.   Institutions supporting agriculture remain weak. The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MARAH) suffers
                               from critical skills gaps in key areas including extension services and monitoring and evaluation systems that remain
                               inadequate for generating information needed for policy formulation and agricultural sector oversight. There are few
                               structured organizations and platforms, particularly Farmer Organizations (FOs), which offer services like advocacy,
                               technical support, access to credit facilitation, market access, and support for specialized activities such as
                               reforestation and empowering women farmers. Existing FOs are generally weak in organizational management, basic
                               infrastructure, and business planning, limiting their ability to provide effective support to their members.
                          5.   Usage of improved inputs remains low, while post-harvest losses remain high. At 13.3 kg/ha, fertilizer usage is one
                               of the lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa. Similarly, usage of improved seeds is very low, as is the usage of basic farm
                               equipment which results in low labor productivity. Farm inputs are expensive and out of reach of many smallholder
                               farmers. In addition, input distribution systems are weak, including limited quality control mechanisms resulting. The
                               quality of locally fabricated equipment is also low. Paucity of appropriate storage facilities results in high post-harvest
                               losses (more than 30%).
                          6.   Access to credit and private investment capital is limited for smallholder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs. This
                               restricts acquisition of improved inputs, value addition and development in downstream industries, especially for rice
                               and maize. Only 4 percent of total credit is allocated to agriculture, largely for cotton, and formal credit rates are high,
                               placing a financial burden on borrowers. Collateral requirements exclude small farmers. Limited access to credit also




_For Official Use Only_
                               constrains lucrative investment sectors such as maize and poultry feed processing. Rice processing equipment is
                               insufficient to meet national output, and quality improvements have been minimal. Scaling up and diversifying these
                               industries will require improved access to finance, alongside targeted reforms, and greater private sector engagement.
                          7.   Climate change poses a significant threat to agricultural productivity in Burkina Faso. It is characterized by more
                               frequent droughts, floods, erratic rainfall, and other extreme weather events leading to substantial crop losses and
                               reduced rural incomes. The sector’s heavy dependence on rainfall makes food and cash crops highly vulnerable to
                               climate variability, with water scarcity and extreme events regularly impacting land and labor productivity. Farmers
                               are responding with adaptive strategies such as applying organic matter, minimum tillage, crop rotation, mixed
                               cropping, agroforestry, and soil and water conservation techniques, which help conserve soil carbon and nutrients but
                               are not sufficient to fully offset the long-term impacts of climate change due to the country’s limited adaptive
                               capacity.
                          8.   Agriculture is central to Burkina Faso’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) for climate mitigation and
                               adaptation. The NDC targets unconditional greenhouse gas emission reductions of 20.67 percent and conditional
                               reductions of 30.76 percent by 2030. Key efforts include rehabilitating 75,000 hectares of degraded land each year for
                               forestry and grazing, totaling 1.12 million hectares by 2030—and expanding energy access through the Mission 300
                               initiative. This initiative promotes cross-sector collaboration to deliver reliable energy to rural food production hubs,
                               enabling improved irrigation, processing, cold storage, and digital services. These interventions aim to boost
                               productivity, resilience, and job creation, with particular focus on empowering youth and women and supporting
                               micro, small, and medium enterprises in the agricultural value chain.
                          9.   Gender disparities are a significant barrier to agricultural productivity. Most economically active women in Burkina
                               Faso work in rural areas, primarily in food production, yet female-headed households experience the lowest returns
                               on labor, with productivity 16 percent lower than male-owned farms for all crops and 22 percent lower for food crops.
                               Women account for 55 percent of the agricultural labor force but own just 17 percent of land compared to 41 percent
                               for men, largely due to customary practices and limited knowledge of land rights. Financial inclusion is also unequal,
                               with fewer women holding bank accounts. Women generally have less access to inputs, equipment, and extension
                               services, and mostly use traditional tools. They have limited control over family resources, less crop diversification,
                               and are excluded from contract farming due to lack of land, labor, financial resources, and support services

                                                                                                                                                      Page 4



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                  Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)



                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase productivity, value addition, and climate resilience of
                           producers along selected value chains in the project areas.

                            Key Results
                          10. Key short and medium-term results include: (i) increased agriculture productivity; (ii) improved market linkages and
                              increased agro-processing and value addition, (iii) increased number of people adopting climate smart technologies,
                              and (iv) increased access to diversified financial services.
                            D. Project Description

                           11. The Project is expected to reach in total about 150,000 direct beneficiaries with a focus on private sector producers




_For Official Use Only_
                               and operators as key players in the structural transformation of the sector. The bulk of these beneficiaries are
                               farmers (including women, youth and IDPs), farmer organizations (FOs) and agriculture-related Small and Medium
                               Enterprises (SMEs). Other direct beneficiaries include the public institutions involved in project implementation
                               that would benefit from increased capacity, primarily the public agriculture services. The Project is also expected
                               to benefit rural communities through targeted functional and technical skills development programs and the
                               creation of job opportunities resulting from investments in lowland and irrigation schemes development, and the
                               promotion of private sector investment in the targeted value chains. The positive externalities from enhancing
                               climate resilience will also ensure a broader local community impact, hence making local communities’ members
                               indirect beneficiaries of the Project.
                          12. Project structure and duration. The Project is designed around four components over a period of six years: (i)
                              Improving agricultural productivity and resilience to climate change, (ii) Improving solar-powered storage, agro-
                              processing including use of solar powered equipment and access to markets, (iii) Promoting access to finance and
                              private sector investment, and (iv) Institutional strengthening and project coordination.
                          13. Project geographic scope and commodity focus. The Project will focus on four of the seventeen regions of Burkina
                              Faso2, and, within these regions, on irrigation perimeters and lowland areas that have growth potential, are not yet
                              receiving assistance of any other development operations and where security is ensured. The Project’s key
                              commodities of focus will be primarily rice, maize, cashews, mangoes and onions. These commodities have been
                              selected because they are financially profitable, have potential for job creation and/or are important for
                              exports/import substitution – as these attributes are consistent with supporting solar powered agricultural
                              transformation (detailed selection criteria will be presented in the PIM). This list will not necessarily remain as such
                              over the course of the project. In fact, it is meant to be adjustable as a function of the changing sector environment,
                              both domestic and external, based on the specific factors that have determined their selection in the first place.




                             2 The four regions targeted are Guiriko, Tannounyan, Yaadga, and Bankui.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 5



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                  Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                          COMPONENT 1: IMPROVING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE (INDICATIVE IDA FINANCING US$ 102.9
                          MILLION)

                          14. Component 1’s objective is to increase crop productivity including use of solar powered equipment, strengthen
                              farmers’ resilience to climatic shocks, and diversify both crop production in response to effective market demand.
                              Expected outcomes from this component include improved farm-level productivity, increased volume and quality of
                              marketable products, diversification of production including vegetable production, and improved nutrition. Support
                              under this component is proposed to be organized around the following subcomponents.
                          15. Subcomponent 1.1: Enhancing access to agricultural inputs and improved technologies. Subcomponent 1.1 aims to
                              support and incentivize the adoption of Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) technologies and practices that deliver triple
                              wins of increased productivity, enhanced resilience to climate shocks, and reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
                              Key activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: (i) strengthening institutional and commercial input
                              supply systems (e.g., seeds, plants and fertilizers) to improve the availability and timely access to high-quality inputs
                              by using the existing e-voucher mechanism, this includes assessing current systems, enhancing quality control
                              mechanisms, and expanding the production and distribution of improved planting materials, certified seeds,
                              fertilizers, and agrochemicals; (ii) improving advisory service delivery, including support for capacity building and
                              outreach—particularly targeting technologies (including biodigesters for clean cooking, heat generation and other
                              agricultural uses such as fertilizers, etc...) having strong potential impact on women farmers ; and (iii) enhancing
                              adoption of appropriate mechanization and digital technologies, and facilitating access to climate forecasting, early




_For Official Use Only_
                              warning systems and pest/disease monitoring tied to climate change. Targeted technologies and services will be
                              adapted to local production environments, customized to farmer capacities and resources (with special attention to
                              labor-saving, GHG emission reduction, affordable technologies for women), and driven by market demand.
                          16. The Project will also support Farmers’ Organizations (FOs)3 to facilitate technology transfer, technology sourcing and
                              demonstration, farmer training, improved availability and access to germplasms and inputs that are more productive
                              and adapted to climate change, and efficient advisory service delivery. This will include: (i) strengthening of selected
                              FOs through training in group dynamics to promote good governance; and (ii) strategic planning, operational and
                              business management, and marketing plans. These trainings will capitalize on IFC's expertise in strengthening
                              agricultural cooperatives through its Agribusiness Leadership Program.
                          17. Subcomponent 1.2: Support to diversified production, lowland development and irrigation schemes. SC 1.2 aims at
                              supporting productive land development by increasing the provision of irrigation water, including the use of solar
                              pumps, on sites with high production potential, and by securing land tenure, to produce staple and high value crops
                              (e.g., horticulture) year-round. The Project will finance solar pumping and irrigation schemes and lowlands4
                              development with special focus on integrated soil fertility and organizational support regarding water management.
                              This will include financing development of new irrigation schemes focusing on energy efficiency and ensuring that the
                              attendant land tenure rights for farmers benefiting from irrigated and lowland allocation under the Project are
                              safeguarded5 and providing support to water user associations to ensure that irrigation water is optimally utilized.
                              Due attention will be paid to operations and maintenance arrangements, both during project implementation and
                              after project completion, to avoid the pitfalls in that area encountered in many past irrigation operations. SC 1.2 will
                              be implemented in close coordination with the on-going Bank-financed Water Security Project (BFWSP, P177094) and
                              the Development, Resilience and Valuation of Water for West Africa Project (DREVE, P505175) under preparation. A
                              successful shift in favor of more diversified production, together with sustained increases in the productivity of staples,

                             3 Including cooperatives.
                             4 The targets are a total of 3,900 ha of irrigated land to be developed, and 1800 ha lowland to be developed
                             5 The Project will conform with the legal texts for acquisition and use of rural land. These texts are governed by Law n° 034-2012/AN of 02 July

                             2012. The Law focuses on equitable access to rural land and offers various solutions for secure land tenure, including Certificates of Rural Land
                             Ownership, Certificates of Rights of Use, and Land Charters. It also provides for the establishment of local bodies to resolve land conflicts.

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                   Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                              would not only generate increased productivity and better incomes for farmers, but it will also result in improved
                              nutrition and food security, foster biodiversity, and strengthen resilience of the production systems to climate change.
                              The Project will also explore the multipurpose use of water by farmers (irrigation, drinking water and livestock).
                              Building on the experience of other projects, particularly PReCA, every effort will be made to ensure that SC 1.2 is
                              ready for execution with some irrigation studies in place to allow for early implementation once the Project is
                              approved.6 Preliminary assessment has determined that the potential on neighboring riparian countries of the new
                              irrigation schemes under PATA will not be significant; these countries (Ghana, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Togo and Benin)
                              have been notified through the Volta Bassin Authority (see para 79 below).


                          COMPONENT 2: IMPROVING STORAGE, AGRO-PROCESSING AND ACCESS TO MARKETS (INDICATIVE IDA FINANCING US 23.2 MILLION)
                          18. Component 2’s objective is to support producers, off-takers and processors to better access domestic and export
                              markets, reduce the risks associated with diversification (e.g., for production of fruits and vegetables in the fresh),
                              diminish post-harvest and marketing losses, and increase the range and quantity of locally produced agricultural
                              commodities on both rural and urban markets. The focus will be on supporting agri-related women groups,
                              cooperatives, and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). This will be done in synergy with IFC, as well as with other
                              World Bank - financed projects supporting value chains development and private sector investments (e.g., WA Food
                              System Resilience Program-FSRP, P172769; BF Entrepreneurship, Skills and Technology Project-ESTP, P177005).




_For Official Use Only_
                          19. Sub-component 2.1: Developing market access and infrastructure. SC2.1 aims to improve crop product marketing,
                              leading to an increase in the availability of locally produced products on the domestic and export markets. This sub-
                              component has a twin focus: (i)ensuring agri-food quality and safety ; and (ii)enhancing access to market information
                              for processed products and attendant advisory services for agri-SMEs. It will finance (i) developing and updating
                              quality norms and standards, (ii) training of producers on sanitary and Phytosanitary Standards (SPSs) as well as
                              standards to effectively engage/participate in specific markets by meeting the processors needs in term of
                              commodities standards (e.g., through support by Business Development Services - BDSs); (iii) training of processors
                              on quality standard and safety of marketed products; and (iv) market intelligence (including market information
                              systems). SC 2.1 will also finance public infrastructure related to (i) the construction/ rehabilitation of marketing
                              facilities (including solar-powered storage facilities, cold chambers and drying areas) to reduce post-harvest losses
                              and spoilage and extend products “seasonal marketing window”, especially for perishable products and (ii) climate-
                              resilient market facilities (e.g., aggregation points, warehouses), ensuring that these facilities are demand-driven by
                              end-beneficiaries and managed along appropriate modalities, including under public-private partnerships, so that they
                              are optimally utilized and maintained7.
                          20. Subcomponent 2.2: Supporting agro-processing and value addition. SC2.2 aims to: (i) increase returns to investments
                              in the selected value chains through agro-processing and (ii) promote adoption, acquisition and sustained use of
                              climate resilient processing, packaging and handling technologies and practices to improve output, efficiency,
                              profitability and competitiveness of targeted agro-processing activities. Activities to be financed under this
                              subcomponent include: (i) training of processors in processing techniques and packaging with a particular emphasis



                             6 A preliminary assessment has determined that the potential on neighboring riparian countries of the new irrigation schemes under PATA will

                             not be significant. These countries (Ghana, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Togo and Benin) have been notified through the Volta Bassin Authority to
                             conform with Legal policies regarding International Waterways (see para 77 below).
                          7 This public infrastructure consists of, (2) large 500 tons cold rooms, (4) shopping counters, (15) 250-ton grain storage warehouses with drying
                          area, (15) 250-ton storage warehouses for input storage and (20) onion storage warehouses.



                                                                                                                                                                              Page 7



                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                  Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                              on youth and women, (ii) construction and equipment of maize, rice and tomato processing units, and (iii) training of
                              manufacturers of processing equipment.


                          COMPONENT 3: PROMOTING ACCESS TO FINANCE AND PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT (INDICATIVE IDA FINANCING US$8.4 MILLION)
                          21. Component 3’ objective is to enhance access to financial services for farmers and agri-entrepreneurs across
                              production, processing, and marketing stages and attract private sector investment along the various segments of the
                              targeted value chains.
                          22. Subcomponent 3.1: Promoting access to finance and leverage green financing opportunities. SC3.1 aims to (1)
                              broaden the availability and affordability of financial services—especially for underserved groups such as micro, small,
                              and medium enterprises (MSMEs), women, and youth—and (2) mobilize resources for investments that support
                              environmental sustainability, climate resilience, and low-carbon growth. Key activities to be financed under this
                              subcomponent include: (i) providing Matching Grants; (ii) supporting capacity building for the existing Partial Portfolio
                              Credit Guarantees mechanism; (iii) strengthening the national agricultural insurance programs, and (iv) piloting
                              financial mechanisms tailored to the needs of agri-entrepreneurs, cooperatives and SMEs .
                          23. Matching Grants. The Project will establish a Matching Grants (MGs) mechanism that will provide partial support
                              (blended finance) to farmers and agri-business operators. The grants will represent only a fraction of the overall
                              investment costs (between 30-40 percent to be increased when beneficiaries are women, youth or IDPs), and,




_For Official Use Only_
                              therefore, for financial closure, beneficiaries will mobilize the remaining resources either with their own capital or
                              loans from financial institutions. The MG mechanism will target (i) smallholder producers, Producer Organizations
                              (POs), women groups, cooperatives, and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) that need financing to create, acquire,
                              upgrade and/or modernize their existing agriculture production, storage and processing facilities, as well as (ii) all
                              other private sector players and entrepreneurs involved in the selected agriculture value chains with similar needs.
                          24. The Project will finance a total of 800 MGs through two dedicated windows: (i) Window 1: about 400 small MGs of up
                              to US$4,000 for IDPs with 80 percent of sub-project financing requirements supported by the Project and the
                              remaining 20 percent by beneficiaries, and (ii) Window 2: about 400 medium MGs of up to US$10,000 with 30 percent
                              of a given sub-project’s financing requirements supported by the Project and the remaining 70 percent by
                              beneficiaries and financial institutions. The eligibility and selection criteria of the beneficiaries, and the accessibility to
                              the MGs predicated on the kind of investments to be undertaken, as well as procedures to be followed all along the
                              investment cycle, will be detailed in the project implementation manual.
                          25. The national Dumu-Ka-Fa fund will support the project in selecting beneficiaries and monitoring matching grants
                              implementation on the ground. As this national fund is new, the Project will provide institutional capacity building as
                              well8.
                          26. Partial portfolio credit guarantee scheme. Acknowledging the importance of de-risking and mobilizing additional
                              financing from banks and MFIs, the Project will leverage the existing agriculture window of the partial portfolio credit
                              guarantee scheme established by Financial Inclusion Support Project-FISP (P164786) to facilitate access to finance.
                              The Project will coordinate with FISP to add new eligibility criteria to the agriculture window that are aligned with the
                              objectives of the Lijeeguoli program without adding additional endowment to the window. The project will also
                              finance capacity building activities for beneficiaries to make better use of the existing financing opportunities.
                          27. Agriculture insurance. In protecting agriculture producers’ investments, SC 3.1 will work with the Direction générale
                              de la promotion de l'économie rurale (DGPER) to strengthen the national agricultural insurance program. The Project
                              will (i) strengthen the agro-meteorological data infrastructure allowing to design sound and reliable index insurance

                             8 An institutional audit of Dumu-ka-fa has been commissioned to assess its capacity to manage activities under SC 3.1 and to define the amount

                             of technical assistance needed to assist in running the MG scheme. This technical assistance could be provided through the hiring of an external
                             private service provider that would help Dumu-Ka-Fa while they are building their capacity.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 8



                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                              products as tools to manage climate risks; (ii) establish a smart premium subsidy scheme and provide financing for
                              contribution to the premium subsidy; (iii) provide capacity building and awareness raising of all stakeholders along
                              the agriculture insurance value chain; and (iv) pilot agriculture insurance distribution schemes (e.g., bundling with
                              credit and/or inputs; etc.). The Project will provide technical assistance to DGPER to implement a one-stop window
                              for agricultural risk management.
                          28. Pilot financial mechanisms. In parallel, the Project will collaborate with IFC to link with their local partner financial
                              institutions to design and pilot customized financial mechanisms tailored to the needs of agri-entrepreneurs,
                              cooperatives and SMEs. These risk-sharing mechanisms will provide a sustainable continuation of activities initiated
                              through MG funding and ensure that the risk due to climate-induced unpredictability in yields and incomes is duly
                              taken into account. IFC will contribute to the design of models and generate Investment roadmaps that will facilitate
                              pilots in various domains such as commodity-based collateral systems to fund aggregation of crop production, long
                              term leasing to build up agricultural equipment fleets, design of agricultural index insurance bundled with farmer
                              input purchases.
                          29. Sub-Component 3.2: Promotion of private investment. SC3.2’s objective is to create an enabling environment that
                              attracts, retains, and expands private investment—both domestic and foreign—by addressing barriers and fostering
                              a climate of confidence for investors.
                          30. Activities to be financed under this sub-component include: (i) provide tailored technical assistance and capacity
                              building to Business Development Services (BDSs) providers so that they can in turn strengthen the technical,
                              entrepreneurial and management skills of client investors to develop their business plans and coach them to ensure




_For Official Use Only_
                              the success of their projects, (ii) promoting access to market for processed products through certification, traceability,
                              participation to both national and international fairs and (iii) promoting contract farming along the targeted value
                              chains. The Project will leverage IFC’s experience in supporting private investment projects across the value chains
                              and conducting deep dives on investment opportunities.
                          COMPONENT 4: REGULATORY AND INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING, AND PROJECT COORDINATION (INDICATIVE IDA FINANCING US$ 15.5
                          MILLION)

                          31. Component 4 will have two sub-components addressing (i) sector policy and governance issues, and related training
                              needs, and (ii) project coordination and management activities. This component will be implemented by the Project
                              Implementation Unit (PIU) under the oversight of the Project Steering Committee (PSC).
                          32. Sub-component 4.1: Support to regulatory and institutional strengthening. SC 4.1 aims to address key bottlenecks
                              hindering the creation of an enabling environment and the capacity of public institutions needed for agricultural
                              transformation. It will focus on two main areas: (i) identifying and supporting the necessary policy and regulatory
                              reforms through targeted studies and supporting the Government reform agenda with particular emphasis on
                              incentivizing private sector engagement , (ii) assessing public institutional and training needs, and financing critical
                              capacity-building initiatives to meet those needs, and (iii) establishing a robust Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) system
                              and a Management Information System (MIS), integrated with similar systems across other relevant ministries.
                          33. Subcomponent 4.2: Support to project coordination, monitoring & evaluation. SC 4.2 aims to ensure effective and
                              transparent project management and M&E systems. The Project will finance, among others: (i) the operational costs
                              for project management both at central and regional level; (ii) the environmental and social activities designed to
                              monitor and comply with the requirements of the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF); (iii)
                              project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) activities; (iv) communication and knowledge management activities; and
                              (v) citizen engagement activities and the Project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).



                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate


                                                                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                           Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          The proposed project activities could generate some adverse environmental and social risks and impacts such as health
                          risks on communities, risks of construction site accidents and traffic accidents, risk of drowning in rivers and irrigation
                          canals, risk of soil and land degradation during construction, biodiversity risks associated with habitat destruction, risk of
                          water and soil pollution by solid and liquid waste from living bases and construction sites; occupational Health and
                          Safety of workers; exclusion from the project’s benefits of certain category of people such as vulnerable groups that
                          could include women, youth, people with disabilities, some rural communities, internal displaced populations. The
                          Environmental and Social risk classification is substantial (like labor influx associated with SEA/SH, pollution, land
                          acquisition, restrictions on land use and involuntary resettlement etc. ). At this stage, the project will involve direct,
                          indirect workers and primary supply workers. A screening process will be described in Project Operational Manuel




_For Official Use Only_
                          (POM) to capture risks and impacts associated with expected activities. Appropriated mitigation measures will be
                          outlined in required instruments and implemented throughout the project implementation cycle to ensure that the E&S
                          risks and impacts associated with expected activities are fully assessed and all risks and impacts are mitigated and
                          addressed appropriately.



                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements




                           Note to Task Team: The following sections are system generated and changes must be made in Data Sheet(s). Delete
                           this note when finalizing the document.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank




                                                                                                                                                   Page 10



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


                           Idriss Serme
                           Senior Agriculture Economist

                           Erick Herman Abiassi
                           Senior Agriculture Economist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Ministry of Economy, Finance and Forecasting

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433




_For Official Use Only_
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Idriss Serme, Erick Herman Abiassi

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                El Hadj Adama Toure                  10-Nov-2025

                          Country Director:                        Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil            02-Dec-2025




                                                                                                                             Page 11



                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
