Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01614




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                    Hai Phong City Resilience
                          Viet Nam                       EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        P507658
                                                                                                                    Development Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         04-Feb-2026                  27-May-2026                   Transport
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Socialist Republic of Viet     Hai Phong City People's
                          Nam                            Committee

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          The project development objectives (PDO) are to improve Hai Phong City’s connectivity and access to resilient
                          infrastructure services and strengthen capacity for urban resilience management in selected areas of Hai Phong City.

                          Components
                          Thuy Nguyen Integrated and Resilient Urban Infrastructure Development
                          Re River Environmental Improvement
                          City Center Flood Reduction
                          Systems and Capacity Development to Improve Urban Resilience

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                           394.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                394.00
                                       of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                260.10
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00



                                                                                                                                              Page 1



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                                 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                             260.10
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                 Counterpart Funding                                                                                      133.90
                                   Borrower/Recipient                                                                                     133.90




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          High


                           Decision




_For Official Use Only_
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                          Other Decision (as needed)

                          B. Introduction and Context

                          Country Context

                          1. Hai Phong, Viet Nam’s third largest city and an industrial gateway for trade, is pivotal to the country’s economic
                             growth. Hai Phong is a centrally governed municipality and the second largest economic, political, and cultural center
                             in the Northern Delta region. Hai Phong has maintained double-digit growth for the last 10 consecutive years and
                             currently ranks 3rd nationwide in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) scale, trailing only Ho Chi Minh City and the
                             capital Hanoi. After merging with the former Hai Duong province in July 2025, Hai Phong city has an area of 3,195
                             km², with a population of 4.7 million people in 2025.

                          2. Hai Phong plays the role of a vital transport hub for the Northern Key Economic Region and the entire country. The
                             city serves as the convergence point for important national road and rail transport routes while the Lach Huyen
                             International Port and Cat Bi International Airport have established it as a major international trade gateway. Driven
                             by robust growth in imports and exports, Hai Phong has emerged as a pivotal economic engine in Viet Nam. Maritime
                             transport is among the key job drivers.

                          3. Major infrastructure initiatives, such as the Hai Phong – Ha Noi – Lao Cai – Kunming/Guangxi Economic Corridor
                             and the Hai Phong Free Trade Zone (FTZ), are set to enhance Hai Phong’s position as a vital growth engine for Viet


                                                                                                                                               Page 2



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                                  Nam’s economy, focusing on high-value, innovation-driven industries. The Hai Phong – Ha Noi–Lao Cai–
                                  Kunming/Guangxi Economic Corridor is a potentially transformative infrastructure initiative designed to enhance
                                  connectivity between Viet Nam's key northern port and Southwest China. Through strategic upgrades, particularly
                                  the development of a standard-gauge railway running from Hai Phong - Ha Noi – Lao Cai – Kunming/Guangxi and
                                  expressway expansions, the corridor will significantly increase freight capacity for containerized manufactured goods
                                  and inputs. Further, Hai Phong is the first locality authorized by the National Assembly to pilot a Free Trade Zone
                                  (FTZ). The FTZ will target high-tech, green, and innovation-driven sectors such as high-value manufacturing, logistics,
                                  and digital industries.

                              4. Hai Phong is experiencing rapid urban and industrial expansion and needs complementary multi-sectoral resilience
                                 improvements to firmly position itself to become a modern, green international logistics center. Hai Phong is
                                 developing new urban areas such as Thuy Nguyen area north of the Cam River, which will host the city's new
                                 administrative center. Hai Phong aims to become a modern international logistics hub by 2030, focusing on
                                 multimodal transport development. The inner city sits at the nexus of new urban areas (including Thuy Nguyen), a
                                 pipeline of 31 approved housing investments totaling 36,600 units, and plans for an additional 33,500 social housing
                                 units by 2030 for low-income and industrial workers. This growth is anchored by large-scale industrial and coastal
                                 economic zone developments - 15 new industrial parks covering 6,700 hectares by 2025 and a 20,000-hectare coastal




_For Official Use Only_
                                 economic zone - linked to strategic gateways such as Tien Lang Airport and Nam Do Son Port1. Hai Phong is also
                                 developing eco-industrial parks and investing in renewable energy projects, including waste-to-energy and offshore
                                 wind power, to support its green transition.2 This trajectory, combined with climate change impacts (sea-level rise,
                                 storm surge, extreme rainfall, and urban heat) places mounting pressure on foundational urban systems. Regional
                                 transportation networks must accommodate rising passenger and freight flows and ensure reliable access between
                                 the inner city, Thuy Nguyen, ports, and airport under adverse weather. Flood risk management systems require
                                 upgrading to safeguard households, public services, and economic assets across riverine and coastal interfaces.
                                 Environmental sanitation should keep pace with densification and industrial activity to protect public health and
                                 strengthen water security. Ensuring that transport connectivity, flood resilience, and sanitation services are
                                 coherently planned and climate-informed within the inner city is therefore critical to sustaining livability, enabling
                                 efficient logistics, and protecting vulnerable communities and investments as Hai Phong requires sustainable urban
                                 development through an integrated multi-sector investment package.

                              5. The city’s growth is constrained by inadequate cross-city connectivity, degraded water quality in major rivers, and
                                 recurrent flooding in the historic inner city. These issues undermine productivity, public health, and the city’s
                                 transition from an agricultural base toward higher-value industrial and service activities. In Thuy Nguyen area, missing
                                 transport links limit efficient movement of goods and people, fragment emerging industrial zones, and slow private-
                                 sector development, while climate-intensified storm events regularly overwhelm aging drainage systems downtown,
                                 causing service disruptions, economic losses, and exposure to waterborne health risks. The current water quality
                                 data for the Re River indicates that it does not meet national standards required for water supply. Nevertheless, this
                                 river serves as the primary source of water supply for nearly half of Hai Phong's population. Investments are therefore
                                 needed to (i) complete strategic connectivity through regional linkages - unlocking land values, catalyzing industrial-
                                 service growth, and cutting travel times; (ii) protect and improve the river water quality - reducing pollution loads

                          1
                              https://theinvestor.vn/hai-phong-city-eyes-20000-hectare-coastal-economic-zone-d6590.html
                          2
                              https://en.vietnamplus.vn/hai-phong-becomes-increasingly-attractive-to-domestic-foreign-investors-post239684.vnp

                                                                                                                                                         Page 3



                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                                  and safeguarding citywide public health; and (iii) reduce central urban flooding - through resilient drainage and flood
                                  management that enhances environmental quality and livability.

                              6. With a 125 km coastline, Hai Phong is highly vulnerable to extreme climate events, which requires strategic
                                 investments to strengthen the resilience of key urban areas and infrastructure systems. Over the past few years,
                                 rising temperatures, unpredictable rainfall, and higher tidal levels have intensified urban flooding and overwhelmed
                                 environmental sanitation systems- especially in the low-lying historical city center. The city regularly faces typhoons,
                                 tropical depressions, rising tides, thunderstorms, and increasingly severe issues such as seawater intrusion, saline
                                 groundwater, and red tides due to sea level rise and rising temperatures.


                              Sectoral and Institutional Context

                              7. Hai Phong has achieved notable successes but needs focused investment to holistically address its transport and
                                 urban challenges for sustained development. Hai Phong’s master plan 2040 with a vision to 2050, which was
                                 approved by the Prime Minister on March 30 20233, sets the agenda for a transformation to a dynamic metropolitan
                                 hub and a major seaport city on par with leading cities in Asia and the world. As both the Red River Delta and Viet




_For Official Use Only_
                                 Nam experience continued growth, it is imperative for Hai Phong to strengthen urban services, enhance the quality
                                 of life, and broaden its economic roles. To sustain industrial and urban growth and make an attractive investment
                                 destination,4 the city’s master plan emphasizes three economic pillars: industry, sea trade and tourism. A critical
                                 priority identified in the master plan is to invest in improvements in the road network. For instance, the North-South
                                 axis, linked with Ring Road 3 (RR3), has the potential to efficiently connect North Cam River, Cat Bi Airport, and Lach
                                 Huyen Port, which will unlock the potential of this marine economic corridor within Hai Phong.

                              8. Despite its strategic location as an important traffic hub and the main gateway to the sea for Northern provinces,
                                 Hai Phong faces significant infrastructure challenges that limit the efficiency of its transport systems. Hai Phong’s
                                 port system, including Lach Huyen, Dinh Vu, Tan Vu, Nam Dinh Vu, and Nam Do Son, comprises more than 70
                                 operational wharves and are equipped for deep-water vessels over 130,000 DWT. The Lach Huyen International
                                 Gateway Port can accommodate large container ships and handled 150 million tons of cargo in 2024. In April 2025,
                                 Hai Phong also inaugurated the Hateco Hai Phong International Container Terminal, once it is fully operational, Hai
                                 Phong Port’s market shares in container and non-container cargo in the Northern region of Viet Nam are expected
                                 to reach 40 percent, and 60 percent respectively.5 While Lach Huyen and Dinh Vu ports benefit from favorable
                                 geographic and maritime conditions, their full potential will be realized with availability of a direct Northwest-
                                 Southeast regional transport corridor, which is also important for the planned conversion of Thuy Nguyen into a new
                                 urban center.

                              9. Hai Phong’s transport sector is vital for its economy but gaps in the city's road network have constrained the
                                 efficient flow of people and goods, created traffic congestion, and compromised road safety. The network lacks
                                 regional connectivity, particularly a Northwest – Southeast corridor that connects several important industrial zones


                          3
                            https://sotc.haiphong.gov.vn/eng/press-release-on-hai-phong-city-master-plan-for-the-period-of-2021-2030-vision-to-2050/
                          4
                            Hai Phong, Quang Ninh attract 7.82 billion USD in FDI in 2024, January 16, 2025.
                          5
                            https://en.vietnamplus.vn/first-commercial-ship-docks-at-new-berths-in-hai-phong-post317555.vnp.

                                                                                                                                                       Page 4



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                                  and urban areas to the seaport clusters. At present, there is only one national highway (NH10) that acts as the main
                                  regional transport corridor for the city. Despite investments, the road network is overloaded, especially on routes
                                  connecting seaports, leading to increased logistics costs, traffic disruptions, and increased air pollution. National
                                  Highway 5 (NH 5), a radial route with a large volume of heavy trucks that runs through the core of Hai Phong, is a
                                  major contributor to the city’s traffic fatalities and environmental pollution. The overutilization of this road,
                                  particularly by commercial and heavy vehicles, creates heavy traffic congestion in the historic inner city of Hai Phong,
                                  which is located mainly to the south of Cam River and is densely populated with offices, commercial and
                                  entertainment centers, markets, schools, hospitals, and traffic hubs (bus stations, railway stations, etc.).6 As such,
                                  diverting inter-city truck passage by developing bypass(es)/ring road(s) and regional transport corridors can help
                                  alleviate congestion, decrease crashes and lessen pollution. RR3 will strengthen sub-regional freight connectivity
                                  between Hai Phong and the northern Red River Delta and substantially reduce the traffic from Northwest and
                                  partially the upcoming Kunming–Hai Phong corridor to the port, which is currently passing through the urban city
                                  center.

                              10. The Re River is crucial for Hai Phong’s water supply and sustained urban and industrial development, yet it is
                                  experiencing pollution which could be worsened by more frequent and intense flooding. The river, located in the
                                  west of the city, spans over 45 km from Rang River in Hai Duong to Cai Tat tidal dam in Hai Phong and is part of the




_For Official Use Only_
                                  main water supply axis of the An Kim Hai irrigation system. It is vital for irrigation in An Duong and Hong Bang areas,
                                  supplying water to an aquaculture lagoon in Hai An area, and providing raw water to An Duong and Vat Cach plants7.
                                  The river is expected to supply over 50 percent of Hai Phong city's clean water demand, including three industrial
                                  zones: Nomura, Trang Due, and An Duong.8 However, the Re River is experiencing increasing pollution caused by
                                  urbanization and increased economic activities within the catchment area9. As of 2024, all households within the
                                  catchment of Re River have access to improved sanitation, and 99.78 percent of households have their toilets
                                  connected to the city’s combined sewer network. Nevertheless, wastewater within this catchment, as in other part
                                  of Hai Phong city, is collected through a combined system and discharged directly to the river. In 2024, approximately
                                  9,000m³ of domestic wastewater is released into the Re River each day, which impacts the river's raw water quality
                                  and causes it to exceed the permissible limits set by national water quality standards. The river is also suffering from
                                  residential encroachment along its embankment, further exacerbating the pollution in the river through illegal
                                  discharge of wastewater from the residents. Rapid urbanization and climate change will add pressure to Re River
                                  water quality, if unaddressed. More frequent and intense flooding and storm surges due to climate change could
                                  intensify runoff from industrial areas, leading to increased concentrations of pollutants, and exacerbate pollutant
                                  transport.10 Being an important landscape axis for the development of An Duong urban area, priority infrastructure


                          6
                            The three areas of Hong Bang, Ngo Quyen, and Le Chan have the highest population density in the city - ten times higher than the
                          city average.
                          7
                            The Re River supplies 200,000 m³/day raw water for the An Duong Water Supply Plant. It is also supplying raw water to several small
                          plants in the former An Duong district area and irrigation water for over 10,000 ha of agricultural land and serves as the downstream
                          drainage system for a large catchment area of approximately over 14,000 ha.
                          8
                            Hai Phong City Water Supply Master Plan to 2025, with a Vision to 2050.
                          9
                            In An Duong area, 301 out of 430 wastewater discharge points into irrigation works, affect the Re River. In addition, 12 concentrated
                          sewage discharge points from residential areas and markets, and 720 households along the river, directly discharge wastewater into
                          it.
                          10
                              Thu PTS, Tri DQ and Hong NV (2025) Assessing coastal industrial pollution and climate change impacts through integrated
                          modeling for sustainable management in Hai Phong, Vietnam. Nature Environment and Pollution Technology: 25(1).

                                                                                                                                                            Page 5



                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                               on both sides of the Re River would be needed to collect wastewater from key discharge points along the river,
                               prevent illegal wastewater discharge and to prevent further encroachment.

                           11. Hai Phong faces increasingly frequent and intense flooding due to an inadequate drainage system. The historical
                               city center of Hai Phong experiences severe flooding due to rainfall and high tides in the Cam/Tam Bac Rivers, which
                               is expected to become more severe and frequent with climate change.11 Although Hai Phong has a dense drainage
                               system for direct storm water drainage to external rivers, urban development has reduced permeable areas and
                               surface water reservoirs, making gravity drainage ineffective during heavy rain and high tides. The current drainage
                               pipe network consists of combined sewers for both rainwater and wastewater. The system largely consists of old
                               sewers and does not adequately meet drainage requirements. Small pipe sizes (D400-D1000) account for a large
                               proportion (about 82.66 percent), while trunk sewers of size D1200-D2000 account for a small proportion (about
                               17.34 percent of the total length of the drainage network), excluding the urban drainage trunk pipe/canal systems of
                               recently constructed projects. The density of the drainage pipelines in the inner city only reaches about 3 km/km²,
                               which is lower than the standard target for a Class I urban area (>= 4 km/km²). Rapid urbanization and industrial
                               growth also produce significant wastewater, necessitating collection and treatment to protect water sources like Re,
                               Hon Ngoc, and Da Do rivers. The outdated drainage system in the historical city center of Hai Phong fails to drain
                               water into Tam Bac River during rainfall and high tides, leading to frequent flooding. A comprehensive solution




_For Official Use Only_
                               involving rehabilitation of the culvert network, increased storage/regulation capacity (e.g., Tam Bac Lake/river), and
                               additional forced discharge capacity is needed to address the added challenges that climate change brings to urban
                               drainage, support economic development of the most vibrant urban area of the city and improve water standards.
                               Without these measures, future urban areas like Thuy Nguyen may also face flooding challenges.

                           12. The Hai Phong City People's Committee (HPCPC) oversees municipal infrastructure policy and planning, budget
                               allocation and coordination with national government agencies. The Department of Construction (DOC) handles
                               planning, implementation, maintenance, and management of the city's road network, besides public transport
                               licensing and management, and other municipal infrastructure services including drainage and wastewater
                               management. The complex coordination between municipal and national agencies affects the release of funds for
                               capital improvements - in 2024, only 56 percent of allocated capital was disbursed by October. Its 2026–2030
                               investment plan exceeds VND 92.4 trillion (~US$3.7 billion), mostly from its own budget.

                           13. While Hai Phong's financial condition is strong, recent national institutional reforms enacted by the Government
                               of Viet Nam will require the city to strengthen institutional capacity and coordination. Effective July 1, 2025, Hai
                               Duong province merged with Hai Phong city, all district administrative units were terminated, and wards were
                               consolidated into about one-third of the prior number of wards. The expansion of Hai Phong City coupled with the
                               consolidation of the city’s governance structure will require it to adopt to a new regime for urban planning and
                               infrastructure management and development. In 2023, Hai Phong showed strong fiscal performance, collecting
                               approx. US$4.3 billion (98 percent of the state target) with domestic revenue exceeding projections by 36 percent.
                               At the same time, Hai Phong’s state budget revenues have exceeded 100 trillion VND annually for three consecutive
                               years (2022–2024), placing it among the top fiscal performers nationwide. The average annual revenue growth rate



                          11
                            OECD (2016), Green Growth in Hai Phong, Viet Nam, OECD Green Growth Studies, OECD Publishing,
                          Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264260207-en.

                                                                                                                                                 Page 6



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                                  for 2021–2025 is projected at 7.06 percent, with domestic revenue rising by 9.27 percent.12 This fiscal strength
                                  provides Hai Phong with autonomy and resilience in public investment, infrastructure development, and social
                                  programs. However, the effective implementation of integrated urban strategies requires strong coordination among
                                  various governmental bodies within a reformed institutional framework.

                           14. The proposed project is aligned with the Viet Nam Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18-22 under which
                               the project was initially conceptualized and identified for financing, and the Viet Nam Country Climate and
                               Development Report (CCDR). It supports the CPF’s Pillar 3 – “Ensure Environmental Sustainability and Resilience”
                               and contributes directly to the objective of “increasing climate resilience.” It also aligns with recommendations under
                               Priority Package #2 of the CCDR, which emphasizes the need to upgrade infrastructure assets to climate-resilient
                               design standards. While the preparation of a new CPF is ongoing and which will align with the government’s upcoming
                               national five-year plan (2026-2030), this project is aligned with the current discussion with GOV on World Bank
                               support embedded in that new development plan.

                           15. Planned investments in Hai Phong infrastructure and urban capacity also directly align with the approved Hai
                               Phong City Master Plan and is consistent with Viet Nam’s national land use planning law. The proposed project
                               aligns with the objectives and development plan of Hai Phong City.




_For Official Use Only_
                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                               16. The project development objectives (PDO) are to improve Hai Phong City’s connectivity and access to resilient
                                   infrastructure services and strengthen capacity for urban resilience management in selected areas of Hai Phong
                                   City.

                               Key Results

                           17. Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level results indicators:
                               • Outcome indicator 1 – Average travel time for trucks between Dinh Vu Port in the South and the project road
                                  intersection with NH 10 in the Northwest (minutes)
                               • Outcome indicator 2 - Pollutants removed by wastewater treatment plant (tons per year of BOD5)
                               • Outcome indicator 3 - People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (number, sex-and age
                                  disaggregated) (Corporate Scorecard Indicator)
                               • Outcome indicator 4 - Operationalization of integrated flood risk management system for the historical city
                                  center of Hai Phong (Yes/No)

                               D. Project Description

                           18. Component 1: Thuy Nguyen Integrated and Resilient Urban Infrastructure Development.


                          12
                               https://vietnam.incorp.asia/hai-phongs-megacity/

                                                                                                                                                  Page 7



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                                i.   Constructing selected sections of Ring Road 3 and associated bridges
                               ii.   Supporting land acquisition, compensation and site clearance required for Component 1 of the Project.


                          19. Component 2: Re River Environmental Improvement.

                               i.    Sub-component 2.1: Supporting Re River infrastructure upgrades through the construction and upgrading of
                                     selected sections of a river management road and river embankment.
                               ii.   Sub-component 2.2: Supporting environmental sanitation upgrades in the Re River basin through: (a) the
                                     construction of a WWTP; (b) the construction of wastewater interceptor sewers and pressure mains
                                     connecting to the WWTP; (c) the construction of wastewater pumping stations along the Re River; (d) the
                                     construction of tertiary sewers for wastewater collection network; and (e) the provision of equipment to
                                     support flood risk management system, the monitoring of wastewater and air quality at the WWTP, and the
                                     monitoring of water quality at selected water bodies.
                              iii.   Sub-component 2.3: Supporting land acquisition, compensation and site clearance required for Component 2
                                     of the Project.

                          20. Component 3: City Center Flood Reduction. Supporting the reduction of flood risk in the city center of Hai Phong




_For Official Use Only_
                              City through: (a) the construction of selected sluice gates; (b) the construction of a storm pumping station; (c) the
                              construction of a box culvert; (d) the upgrading of secondary and tertiary combined sewers system to collect
                              wastewater in the sub-catchment area of the Hai Phong City’s historical city center; and (e) the construction of
                              wastewater pumping stations and transmission pipelines connecting to an existing wastewater treatment plant.

                          21. Component 4: Systems and Capacity Development to Improve Urban Resilience.

                               i.    Sub-component 4.1: Enhancing Hai Phong City’s urban flood management capacity through: (a) the creation
                                     and calibration of a dynamic hydraulic model for flood forecasting and early-warning scenarios; (b) the
                                     development of procedures for operating sluice gates and stormwater pumping station in the city center area
                                     when extreme conditions are predicted; (c) the establishment of a framework and information system for
                                     improving operations and maintenance of the flood control structures; and (d) the provision of training,
                                     workshops and technical assistance to city officials to enhance their capacity on flood risk management,
                                     including incorporating nature-based solutions into flood control infrastructure.
                               ii.   Sub-component 4.2: Developing water and air quality monitoring systems at the WWTP, and developing
                                     procedures for improving the operations and maintenance of wastewater services.
                              iii.   Sub-component 4.3: Supporting Project management and implementation, including, inter alia detailed
                                     engineering designs, construction supervision, and contract management.


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                                               Page 8



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                           Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          22. The Project’s environmental risk is rated Substantial. The project involves construction of urban roads, bridges, river
                              embankments, drainage systems, wastewater facilities, and sluice gates within the project area. Construction-phase
                              risks include air and noise pollution, dust and emissions, impacts on water quality and aquatic habitats, partial loss
                              of river protection forest leading to erosion, dredging and disposal of excavated materials, and potential soil and
                              water pollution. Operation-phase risks include traffic-related pollution, odor and sludge management at wastewater
                              treatment systems, occupational health and safety concerns, and pollution risk from system failure. These impacts
                              are moderate to substantial but largely reversible and can be mitigated through sound design, construction practices,
                              and ESMP measures. The project’s social risk rating is High, primarily due to significant land acquisition and
                              resettlement (LAR), permanently affecting approximately 197 hectares of lands from 2,460 households. Of these




_For Official Use Only_
                              approximately 280 will need to be relocated. Beyond LAR, the project is expected to cause major disruptions to urban
                              livelihoods and business activities during sewer system and road improvement works; risks associated with land
                              acquisition for developing resettlement sites and potential delays in site development; impacts from labor influx,
                              community health and safety concerns, and traffic safety issues; disproportionate impacts on households that squat
                              or encroach for livelihoods or residential purposes; relocation of a significant number of graves. Construction
                              activities may further pose community health and safety risks, while operational phases carry risks like traffic
                              accidents and other hazards. Furthermore, the influx of labor could give rise to risks including sexual exploitation and
                              abuse/sexual harassment (SEA-SH), spread of sexually transmitted and communicable diseases. Additionally, there
                              may be uneven access to project benefits among disadvantaged households who may face difficulties connecting to
                              the domestic sewage system.

                          E. Implementation

                          Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          23. The HPCPC is the project executing agency and will be responsible for overall project management and oversight,
                              coordination of the activities of central and local authorities and other relevant organizations and ensuring
                              compliance with the World Bank requirements. The HPCPC will approve the project Feasibility Study and arrange city
                              counterpart funds as required by the project with support from relevant city departments.

                          24. The HPCPC has appointed the Hai Phong Transport Construction and Agriculture Project Management Unit (Hai
                              Phong PMU) to be responsible for approval of detailed engineering designs, cost estimates, and bidding documents,
                              and project implementation.




                                                                                                                                                  Page 9



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)


                          25. The project will adopt a Project Implementation Plan (PIP). The PIP describes details of the activities supported under
                              the project and their locations as well as all relevant stakeholders' processes, roles, and responsibilities. In addition,
                              each year during the project implementation period, the implementing agency will also prepare and adopt an Annual
                              Work Plan (AWP) acceptable to the World Bank, summarizing the implementation progress of the project for the
                              year and the project activities to be undertaken in the following calendar year, including the proposed annual budget
                              and any necessary updates to the phased implementation plans.


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank
                            Pratap Tvgssshrk
                            Senior Transport Specialist

                            Cuong Duc Dang
                            Sr Urban Spec.




_For Official Use Only_
                            Phyrum Kov
                            Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Hai Phong City People's Committee

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                        Pratap Tvgssshrk, Cuong Duc Dang, Phyrum Kov

                          Approved By


                                                                                                                                                  Page 10



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)




                          Practice Manager/Manager:              Benedict L.J. Eijbergen   22-Jan-2026

                          Country Director:                      Mariam J. Sherman         06-Feb-2026




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                Page 11



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
