Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)




                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Project Information Document (PID)


            _For Official Use Only_
                                                       Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 13-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01466




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                         EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                         Burundi Water Supply and
                          Burundi                                                      P507207
                                                         AFRICA                                                       Sanitation Access Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         08-Oct-2025                   10-Dec-2025                    Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Republic of Burundi -          Ministry of Mines, Energy,
                          Ministry of Finance, Budget    Industry, Trade and
                          and Digital Economy            Tourism, REGIDESO




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To increase access to climate-resilient water supply and sanitation services and to strengthen the capacity of water
                          operators

                          Components
                          Component 1: Strengthening National WASH Platform, Governance and Reforms
                          Component 2: Service Providers Performance Improvement
                          Component 3: Leveraging Finance to Increase Climate-Resilient WASH Access
                          Component 4: Project Coordination and Management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                             90.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                  90.00
                                       of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                     80.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00


                                                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                           DETAILS
                              World Bank Group Financing
                                International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                               80.00
                                   IDA Grant                                                                                                                              80.00
                              Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                       10.00
                                   Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                                     10.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                            Decision
                            The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context
                          1.       The Republic of Burundi is a low-income country whose economic growth is recovering. As of 2023, 62.1 percent
                          of its 13.2 million people live below the international poverty line1 of US$2.15/day, and 75 percent live in multi-
                          dimensional poverty (as of 2021/2022).2 Burundi is one of the most densely populated countries in the world, with a
                          population density of 442 people per square kilometer, exacerbating pressure on arable land. It ranks near the bottom for
                          all global measures of human capital, with a Human Development Index of 0.42, making it one of the least developed
                          nations.3 Gender disparities remain high in Burundi, ranking low on the Gender Inequality Index, placed 132nd out of 170
                          countries.
                          2.     The country has an undiversified economy heavily reliant on public services and agriculture.4 It’s multi-
                          dimensional fragility results in political, economic, and security risks.5 The political crisis of 2015 halted 11 years of
                          growth, and Burundi’s GDP per capita - declining over 2016-2023 - was only US$ 2006 (2023), roughly one-eighth of the


                          1 World Bank Macro Poverty Outlook update (April 2024).
                          2 UN Human Development Index Report 2021/2022. Table 6.
                          3 https://data.undp.org/countries-and-territories/BDI (2022)
                          4 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/burundi/overview#1
                          5 World Bank Burundi Country Economic Memorandum (2022). Republic of Burundi - Country Economic Memorandum (CEM): the challenge of achieving stable and
                          shared growth (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
                          6 World Bank data (2023) (https://data.worldbank.org/country/burundi)


                                                                                                                                                                              Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          Sub-Saharan Africa average (US$ 1,637).7 A peaceful transfer of power in June 2020 marked a turn toward peace and
                          stability, but challenges remain. Although economic growth in 2024 is expected to improve to 3.8 percent, this is
                          insufficient to cope with rapid population expansion. Potential challenges include regional instability, influenced by the
                          recent influx of refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo, postponed exchange rate unification, and restricted
                          external financing.
                          3.      Burundi remains largely rural, with only a 15 percent urban population. However, it is one of the fastest-growing
                          urban populations, growing by 5.7 percent per year between 2000 and 2021. The current urban population of 2 million
                          will double by 2050. Approximately 58 percent of the urban population lives in unplanned areas, often under-resourced,
                          exposed to disaster risks, and without adequate basic services. Bujumbura, the largest city, where 61 percent of the urban
                          population lives, could play a key role supporting the economic drivers in the country. Gitega, the country’s political capital
                          and second largest city, faces a similar rapid urbanization process.
                          4.       Burundi has embarked upon a territorial reform that took effect after the July 2025 municipal and parliamentary
                          elections. The administrative set-up has been consolidated from 18 provinces and 119 communes to five provinces and
                          42 communes with enlarged competencies. The aim is to streamline governance, improve resource allocation at the local
                          level, and enhance service delivery, though such reforms may take several years to mature.
                          5.       Although Burundi has the lowest per capita greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) globally; climate change poses a
                          serious threat to its weak infrastructure and livelihoods. Changes in rainfall patterns have led to increased frequency of




_For Official Use Only_
                          extreme weather events such as floods, storms, landslides, and prolonged dry spells, which harm crop yields and threaten
                          food security, especially in the northeastern part of the country. Water levels in Lake Tanganyika surged to their highest
                          level in 60 years due to heavy rains in early 2024, forcing over 230,000 people to relocate. The existing pumping station
                          that provides 90 percent of the water supply to the city was under threat of inundations during the 2024 floods, and part
                          of the existing water distribution network got damaged during flashfloods in October 2024.


                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          6.      Despite the country's considerable water endowments,8 a lack of investments and poor governance have led
                          to widespread water insecurity. Over the past decade access to water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services
                          barely saw improvement, with population growth absorbing gains. An instruction issued in 2021 by the Ministry of Interior,
                          Communal Development and Security9 halted water fee collection at public standpipes, causing rural service providers to
                          face financial strain, resulting in dismantling of community operators and the collapse of services. As of 2024, only 65
                          percent of the population have access to basic10 water supply (urban: 91 percent; rural: 61 percent), and 45 percent have
                          access to basic sanitation (urban: 42 percent; rural: 45 percent).
                          7.      Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for Universal Access to WASH by 2030 requires drastic
                          acceleration. Yearly, over 1 million must gain access to basic sanitation, seven times faster than 2010-2020 progress. For
                          water, over 0.8 million annually, three times faster than the past decade. In urban areas, only 55 percent have household
                          connections, with less than half having a regular daily water supply. This reflects the situation in the main cities of
                          Bujumbura and Gitega where water production capacity is largely insufficient and water is rationed, with rotations to

                          7 GDP in current prices; World Bank data (2023) (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=ZG)
                          8 Estimated at a total renewable water resources availability of 1,002 m3/inhabitant per year (2021) and with a low water stress indicator of 10 percent, reflecting that
                          only 10 percent of freshwater resources are withdrawn for usages (AQUASTAT 2021); (https://data.apps.fao.org/aquastat).
                          9 Letter Minister of Interior, Communal Development and Security 530/10544/CAB/2021, dated October 19, 2021. Suspension of collection of funds from households
                          10 As per Joint Monitoring Program of UNICEF/WHO, https://washdata.org/ . For drinking water, a basic water supply means access to an improved source (standpost,
                          protected spring, borehole) within 30 minutes return trip (including waiting time), while a safely managed water service means access at the premises/yard, availability
                          when needed (> 16 hours a day), and free of contamination. A basic sanitation service means household level access (no sharing) to an improved facility that safely
                          separates feces from human contact. A safely managed sanitation service requires an improved sanitation facility that is not shared with other households and where
                          excreta are safely disposed of in situ or treated off site. Basic hygiene means presence of a handwashing facility with water and soap.


                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          different quarters every 2-3 days. In rural areas, only 3 percent of the population has access to a household connection.
                          Only 2 percent of the urban population is connected to a sewer, and even then, sewage treatment is not guaranteed.
                          8.      Lack of WASH services disproportionally impacts women and girls, with 78 percent of women responsible for
                          water collection versus 17 percent of men. This highlights a deeply rooted inequality in the distribution of WASH-related
                          domestic labor, with 40 percent of women fetching water for longer than 30 minutes per trip, exposing them to risks of
                          gender-based violence (GBV).11 Poor WASH services are a main contributor to diarrheal disease, the leading cause of child
                          mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).12 Moreover, drought further exacerbates the time burden on women and girls,
                          compared to boys and men13. Access to water and sanitation in schools is about 45 percent14 and only 18 percent have
                          handwashing facilities with soap, which negatively impacts school attendance, especially of girls during their periods.
                          Malnutrition, which is linked to poor WASH services, stands at 53 percent15.
                          9.      The Government’s Vision "Burundi Emerging Country 2040, Developed Country 2060" prioritizes water supply
                          and sanitation (WSS) services to support urbanization, economic growth, health, and social stability. The National
                          Development Plan (NDP) for Burundi 2018-2027 plans investments in water supply, digital operations, sanitation facilities,
                          and reforms. Public expenditure on WASH is modest at 1.5 percent of total spending, or US$ 6.6 million in 2022-2023.
                          Development partners' spending in WASH, mostly off-budget, was US$7 million in 2022-2023. The government’s vision is
                          to enable Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) and sectoral reforms to improve the investment climate.
                          10.      The Ministry of Mineral Resources, Energy, Industry, Trade and Tourism (Ministère des Ressources Minières,




_For Official Use Only_
                          Energétiques, de l’Industrie, du Commerce et du Tourisme, MINMREICT) oversees the water supply sector and sanitation
                          sector16. The Water Supply and Sanitation Department (Direction Générale de l’Eau Potable et de l ’Assainissement,
                          DGEPA) under MINRMEICT plays the leading role in the development of new policies and legislation for the sector, sector
                          coordination and planning. The existing law that organizes the water supply sector stems from 200017, while a proposed
                          new law is currently with the Council of Ministers for consultation and is expected to be promulgated later in 2025. The
                          proposed new law clarifies service delegation arrangements by the state and communes to operators and expands the
                          role of the private sector in service delivery beyond production as per the existing law. Operators include the REGIDESO
                          (Régie de Production et de Distribution de l’Eau et de l’Électricité), a state-owned water and electricity company, overseen
                          by its Board of Directors under tutelage of the MINRMEICT. Outside of REGIDESO urban service areas, communes are
                          responsible, delegating service delivery to private or not-for-profit operators or directly en regie.

                          11.      A key bottleneck for the sustainability of the sector is the lack of cost reflective tariffs, both in urban and rural
                          areas. The DGEPA is developing a WSS tariff policy to be submitted to the Council of Ministers later in 2025. This policy
                          will be the basis for the Authority for Regulation of Water and Energy Sectors (Agence de Régulation des Secteurs de
                          l’Energie et de l’Eau Potable, AREEN) to develop the regulatory instruments to review and determine tariffs. The rural arm
                          of MINRMEICT E is the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (Agence de l’Hydraulique et de l’Assainissement en Milieu
                          Rural, AHAMR), responsible for construction and rehabilitation of rural water systems and sanitation activities. AHAMR is
                          in the process of decentralizing to the commune level, where it will provide technical support to communes and back-
                          stopping to rural operators. Going forward, it is critical that in the delegation contracts between communes and operators,



                          11 The World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/data/interactive/2024/03/13/gendered-burden-of-water-collection-in-afe-afw-sub-saharan-africa
                          12 Ngabo F, et al Can routinely collected national data on childhood morbidity and mortality from diarrhea be used to monitor health impact of rotavirus vaccination
                          in Africa? Examination of pre-vaccine baseline data from Rwanda. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2014 Jan;33 Suppl 1: S89-93.
                          13 See https://datatopics.worldbank.org/sdgatlas/goal-5-gender-equality/?lang=en
                          14 https://washdata.org/data/school#!/dashboard/new
                          15 National Nutrition Survey (2024)
                          16 Through decree 100/018 of September 17, 2025, concerning the modification of decree 100/002 of August 5, 2025 defining the structure, functioning and
                          missions of the government.
                          17 With several amendments to this law and a new law on the electricity sector approved in March 2024.


                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          the role of AHAMR, and the responsibilities for O&M and capital maintenance are well defined in guidelines and by-laws
                          and that financing mechanisms for capital maintenance and infrastructure development are put in place.

                          12.     REGIDESO provides water services in Burundi’s urban centers through 137,500 private connections and 880
                          water kiosks, which represents just 8.5 percent of the country’s population. Non-Revenue Water (NRW) is estimated at
                          40 percent (2019), bill collection efficiency is around 80 percent (2023). REGIDESO has benefited from long-standing World
                          Bank support and a vision for its performance improvement trajectory of electricity services18, articulated in a national
                          energy pact, developed as part of the Mission30019. A diagnostic for REGIDESO’s water services and a Performance
                          Improvement Plan (PIP) is under development. REGIDESO has implemented an enterprise resource management system
                          that would enable separate accounts for water and energy services, with the aim to gradually remove cross-subsidies.
                          Financial modelling for REGIDESO’s water operations in Bujumbura illustrates an operating deficit, underscoring the
                          necessity of tariff revisions - especially as water tariffs have not changed since 201220 - combined with service
                          improvements to ensure sustainable O&M. The Board’s adoption and regular review, including independent audits, of key
                          performance indicators (KPIs) in the PIP would be an important step towards transforming REGIDESO’s water services.
                          13.      The urban sanitation sector is fragmented and suffers from a lack of clarity on institutional mandates and
                          coordination. Investments by development partners, government and the private sector are negligible due to
                          sustainability concerns, due to the ack of a viable revenue model. The Burundian Urban Planning, Housing, and
                          Construction Agency (Office Burundais de l'Urbanisme, de l'Habitat et de la Construction, OBUHA) under the Ministry of




_For Official Use Only_
                          Infrastructure, Social Housing, Transport and Equipment (Ministère des Infrastructures, des Logements Sociaux, du
                          Transport et de l’Équipement, MILSTE) is responsible for the operation of wastewater treatment plants and sewer
                          networks in Bujumbura and Gitega, executing its tasks in collaboration with private fecal sludge emptiers. A roadmap to
                          address obstacles in the sanitation sector is under preparation. The mandate for water resources management and
                          protection of ambient water quality rests with the Department for Water Resources and Forestry (Direction de la
                          Promotion des Ressources en Eau et des Forêts, DPREF), under the Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and Livestock
                          (Ministère de l’Environnement de l ’Agriculture et de l’Élevage, MINEAGRIE)

                          14.      Through its WASH Coordination Group, MINRMEICT leads the coordination mechanisms between various
                          government stakeholders, development partners, civil society and private enterprises in the sector. The government is
                          preparing a National WASH Program and Investment Plan. A Presidential Pact on WASH has been drafted, awaiting
                          signature, that commits to the establishment of a national WASH platform to monitor the implementation of the program,
                          sector reform measures, investments and results. Key partners in the Burundi WASH sector are the European Union (EU),
                          the African Development Bank (AfDB), UNICEF, Amazi Water, an NGO, and the German Development Bank (Kreditanstalt
                          für Wiederaufbau, KfW).

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                           To increase access to climate-resilient water supply and sanitation services and to strengthen the capacity of water
                           operators

                             Key Results


                          18 Through the Jiji and Mulemwba Hydropower project (P133610) and the ASCENT project (P181494)
                          19 https://mission300africa.org/energysummit/about-mission-300/
                          20 An increasing block tariff is applied with the first domestic consumer block of 20 m3 charged at BIF 310/m3 (US$ 0.10/ m3). Non-domestic customer categories are
                          charged higher rates. REGIDESO is self-reporting that the cost of production is over BIF 600 m3.


                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 5



                                                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                               •    PDO Indicator 1: People provided with water supply services. Disaggregated by gender, youth, level of service (%
                                    at least basic, and % safely managed) (number); Baseline 0; Target: 530,000 people
                               •    PDO Indicator 2: People provided with sanitation services. Disaggregated by gender, youth and level of service (%
                                    at least basic) (number); Baseline 0; Target: 60,000
                               •    PDO indicator 3: People with enhanced resilience to climate risks, disaggregated by gender, youth, of which people
                                    benefiting from climate-resilient infrastructure. Disaggregated by gender, youth (number): Baseline: 0; Target:
                                    530,000
                               •    PDO indicator 4: Transboundary aquifer management plan for climate-resilient water supply completed and
                                    submitted for adoption to relevant authorities (number); Baseline: 0; Target: 1
                               •    PDO indicator 5: Reduction in Non-Revenue Water Ratio of REGIDESO in Bujumbura compared to the baseline (%);
                                    Baseline: 0; Target: 10%
                               •    PDO indicator 6: Water operators under a public service delegation contract in rural areas achieving an Operating
                                    Cost Coverage Ratio of at least 100% (Number); Baseline 0; Target: 1

                            D. Project Description


                          15.      The Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (BWSSAP) is phase III under the Accelerating Access to




_For Official Use Only_
                          WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (P512763). The GoB priorities are
                          twofold: i) the urgent expansion of climate-resilient water supply services in Bujumbura, the largest city and economic
                          capital, thereby reducing flooding risk impacting service delivery; and ii) the provision of climate-resilient water and
                          sanitation service in rural communes exposed to drought risks and water insecurity. In Bujumbura, the project will improve
                          access to safely managed water supply, through connecting previously unserved people, and through improving the
                          quality of existing services through safe and available water supply access at home. The project will improve access to at
                          least basic water supply and basic sanitation services in the rural commune of Butihinda, prioritized by the GoB given
                          based on criteria including the number of people without access, poverty levels, and population density.
                          16.     The project will develop a National WASH Program and prepare for later investment phases to scale-up impact,
                          while possibly mobilizing private capital and development partner financing. The GoB envisions mobilizing private capital
                          in the medium term and the project will prepare the necessary studies to develop a hybrid PPP approach for a future bulk
                          water treatment plant in Gitega, the country’s capital, that suffers an acute water production deficit. Potentially, the
                          hybrid-PPP model could be replicated for other bulk water treatment plants in Bujumbura-Nord, as the water supply
                          masterplan includes additional water treatment plants to serve the expansion of the northern part of the city. Provided
                          the performance of the project is satisfactory and availability of additional resources, investments in water supply
                          expansion in Gitega through a hybrid PPP, as well as scale-up of WASH services in rural areas may be considered21.
                          17.    The total project costs are US$ 90 million, with US$ 80 million equivalent in IDA funds and US$ 10 million
                          equivalent as a national government contribution. The government’s counterpart financing will be provided in local
                          currency and will contribute to operating costs, resettlement costs and local currency expenditure of works contracts
                          under component 3.
                          18.     Component 1: Strengthening National WASH Platform, Governance and Reforms (US$2.6 million IDA). This
                          includes activities that are MFD-enabling and consists of two subcomponents [mapped to Pillars 1 and 2 of MPA P512673].
                          • Subcomponent 1.1 – Strengthening National WASH Programming and Platform (US$1.4 million). This subcomponent
                             finances technical assistance, training and equipment for: (i) the preparation of a national WASH program and

                          21 During a scale-up phase this would be expanded to the prioritized communes of Muyinga, Rwibaga, and Mugere.


                                                                                                                                                   Page 6



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                            investment plan; (ii) the coordination and the establishment of a national WASH platform; (iii) the development of a
                            Management Information System (MIS) for the WASH sector; (iv) a water supply masterplan for Gitega; (v) preparatory
                            technical and financial studies, including for affermage contracts for rural areas and for potential PPPs for urban areas.
                          • Subcomponent 1.2 – Advancing Governance and Reforms (US$1.2 million) to increase institutional capacity and
                            resilience to climate change impacts: this subcomponent finances technical assistance, training, and equipment for the
                            implementation of sector reforms and improvement of sector governance notably for: (i) support for the drafting and
                            dissemination activities of implementation regulations of existing laws/and of the new law if ratified;; (ii) the revision
                            and/or development of new policies for water and sanitation (iii) institutional support, capacity building, and tariff
                            studies to develop a tariff framework and new tariff structures and awareness campaigns; (iv) institutional support and
                            capacity development of key stakeholders, inter alia MINRMEICT, AHAMR, AREEN, and commune administrations,
                            including the provision of office equipment, motorbikes and vehicles; (v) knowledge exchange visits to countries with
                            private capital mobilization22 and participation in international trainings and forums, and enabling participation in
                            knowledge and learning activities under the Regional MPA.
                          19.       Component 2: Service Providers Performance Improvement (US$10.0 million IDA) [Mapped to Pillar 3 of MPA
                          P512673]. This component aims to enhance service delivery by improving sustainability, efficiency, social inclusion and
                          climate resilience of water operations in both urban and rural areas. In urban areas the aim is to improve the performance
                          and financial viability of REGIDESO, while in rural areas, the aim is to support the implementation of a commune-wide
                          professional management model through delegation contracts (affermage) with domestic private operators. It consists of




_For Official Use Only_
                          two subcomponents.
                          • Subcomponent 2.1 – Support to REGIDESO (US$8.8 million): this finances technical assistance, training, works, and
                             equipment for: (i) institutional strengthening, including (a) the provision of equipment and vehicles for REGIDESO, and
                             (b) professional development of REGIDESO staff, inter alia through courses on digitalization, water quality and NRW;
                             (ii) enabling improvements in customer engagement and female employment in technical and managerial positions,
                             (iii) support to organizational development and restructuring as needed; (iv) measures identified in the PIP, inter alia
                             to reduce NRW, implement digital applications and automatic control systems, improve water quality management
                             systems, increase energy efficiency and climate resilient operations; (v) improvements to the existing water treatment
                             plant and pumping stations to increase energy and operational efficiency; (vi) private connections for selected
                             households (estimate at 35,000) in Bujumbura; (vii) support the preparation and implementation of a REGIDESO pro-
                             poor connection policy and fund and awareness campaigns;
                           • Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for Rural Water Service Providers (US$ 1.2 million) contributing to reduced climate
                             vulnerability and increased capacity: this finances technical assistance, training, works, and equipment specifically for:
                             (i) transaction advisory to communes and AHAMR to prepare and supervise the affermage contracts; (ii) business
                             incubation support, capacity development and coaching of domestic private service providers; (iii) development and
                             delivery of vocational courses and internships on solar pumping, plumbing and management of water operations in
                             collaboration with Rusi Vocational Training Center23; (iv) communication campaigns and mobilization on the new
                             management model and tariffs; (v) support for installation of connections for selected households (estimate 2,000).

                          20.      Component 3: Leveraging Finance to Increase Climate Resilient WASH Access (US$ 72.2 million out of which
                          US$66.6 million IDA, and US$5.6 million equivalent counterpart financing) [Mapped to Pillar 4 of MPA P512673]. It
                          includes two subcomponents:
                          • Subcomponent 3.1 Climate-Resilient Water Access in Urban Areas (US$ 62.3 million IDA), thereby reducing flood
                              risks and drought vulnerability. This subcomponent finances technical assistance, works, training and equipment for


                          22 Such as for example Kenya, Tanzania, Senegal and Uganda.
                          23 Centre Public de Formation Polytechnique et de Reconversion Professionnelle de Rusi.


                                                                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                                climate-resilient water supply distribution and production systems for Bujumbura. It includes (i) construction and one-
                                year operation of a new water intake, water treatment plant (60,000 m3/day) and pumping stations in Bujumbura-
                                Sud and capacity building for REGIDESO staff to take on its operations; (ii) construction and/or rehabilitation of
                                REGIDESO’s urban drinking water systems, including transmission lines, reservoirs and distribution mains; (iii)
                                preparation and implementation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and Resettlement Action
                                Plans (RAP) for Bujumbura water supply investments; (iv) supervision costs for construction; (v) technical preparation
                                studies for priority water supply investments in Gitega, inter alia hydrogeological studies and PPP-studies, and
                                transaction advisor support and (vi) support for stakeholder workshops in support of the Tanganyika transboundary
                                aquifer assessment and management plan in collaboration with AUDA-NEPAD.
                          •     Subcomponent 3.2 – Climate-resilient WASH Access in Rural Areas (US$ 4.3 million IDA), thereby reducing drought
                                vulnerability. This subcomponent finances technical assistance, works, training and equipment for (i) the
                                rehabilitation, expansion and construction of new gravity-fed and/or solar-pumped climate-resilient rural water
                                systems in the selected communes and associated preparation studies, including ESIA and RAPs as needed; (ii)
                                supervision costs of construction; (iii) community mobilization and stakeholder engagement, including consultation
                                with women on the public water points; (iv) community-led total sanitation (CLTS) activities, including material
                                support for durable latrine construction; (v) supporting education sessions for girls on menstrual hygiene
                                management.




_For Official Use Only_
                          21.      Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$ 5.2 million, out of which US$ 0.8 million IDA and
                          US$ 4.4 million counterpart financing). This component finances all project coordination, management, communication,
                          implementation, monitoring and evaluation costs, and coordination costs related to the Regional MPA for the proposed
                          Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the MINRMEICT (Subcomponent 4.1) as well as a proposed PIU within REGIDESO
                          (Subcomponent 4.2).

                              Project Beneficiaries

                          22.      The main beneficiaries will be people that will be provided with access to water supply, i.e. with basic water
                          services through public standposts in rural areas and certain urban quarters, and with safely managed water in majority
                          of the urban areas and the denser parts of rural communes through household connections. In addition, there will be
                          people in urban areas who will move from a basic to a safely managed level of water supply services, specifically as water
                          availability has been a problem and many quarters in Bujumbura are only served once every few days. The project aims
                          to reach 530,000 beneficiaries with at least basic access to water, out of which 470,000 in urban areas (Bujumbura) and
                          60,000 in rural areas, and out of which a total of 400,000 with safely managed water services (85 percent). A total of
                          60,000 people will be provided with basic access to sanitation in the rural areas. Given the gendered burden of water
                          collection, these improvements are expected to have a disproportionate positive impact on women’s time savings. The
                          project targets marginalized and vulnerable populations through selecting rural communes with higher-than-average
                          poverty rates and high absolute numbers of poor people due to high population density24. The project will support
                          REGIDESO to implement a social connection policy and fund to facilitate household connections for the poorest. In
                          addition, the project will be educating 40,000 girls on menstrual health and hygiene25. The project is therefore expected
                          to bring significant positive public health and human capital impacts by reducing incidence of waterborne diseases,
                          lowering healthcare costs, and increasing productivity.


                          24 For the communes in the north-east the poverty rate (people living below US$ 2.15/day) falls between 60-80 percent, while the population density varies from
                          400-700 people/km2.
                          25 Through collaboration with the Human Capital Development Project (P180925), the installation of WASH facilities in rural schools and health centers provided with
                          water connections under the project will be pursued.


                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 8



                                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          23.      The project will focus on building the capacity of water operators to deliver sustainable services, both domestic
                          private operators as well as REGIDESO. The project will benefit REGIDESO by improving its technical capacity to supply
                          water and reduce NRW, while expanding its production facilities and service area, thereby increasing its financial viability.
                          In rural areas, an incubation, coaching and a skills-building program will be launched to support the professionalization of
                          domestic water operators. The project will strengthen operators’ capacity to engage customers, strengthen their systems
                          for soliciting and responding to customer feedback, and as well as strengthen the capacity of AREEN to oversee, monitor
                          performance and determine tariffs thus enabling O&M investments and cost recovery. In addition, it will strengthen the
                          capacity of the MINRMEICT, AHAMR, selected commune administrations, specifically their WSS units.

                           Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners

                          24.      The World Bank’s engagement is grounded in its comparative advantage in supporting complex, infrastructure
                          programs in FCV and low-capacity environments. The Bank brings extensive global and regional experience in designing
                          and implementing WASH programs, particularly in contexts requiring institutional and governance reforms. With BWSSAP
                          as phase 3 under the regional WASH Access MPA, Burundi will benefit extensively from phase 1 of the MPA (P506439),
                          implemented through the Africa Union Agency for Development- new Partnership for Africa’s Development (AUDA-
                          NEPAD). AUDA-NEPAD will engage global and regional knowledge partners to deliver knowledge, analytics and peer-to-
                          peer exchanges through a learning agenda tailored to the Burundi context. Thus the Bank’s involvement is critical to assist
                          the GoB with state-of-the art knowledge: (i) to support institutional reforms and advance regulatory competencies; (ii)




_For Official Use Only_
                          professionalize rural water supply management models; (iii) to lift utility performance through energy efficiency,
                          digitalization, and NRW measures; (iv) to promote and prepare hybrid PPPs in the medium term under a One WBG
                          approach; (v) to integrate climate adaptation and mitigation measures in infrastructure design and operations; and (vi) to
                          leverage impact at-scale for human capital outcomes through cross-sectoral engagement in education and health.
                          25.      The World Bank is an active participant in the WASH Sectoral Coordination Group, which ensures alignment of
                          development partner interventions and government priorities. The World Bank’s convening and technical leadership
                          roles are instrumental in harmonizing efforts and scaling up impact in the sector. The project is designed to complement
                          and leverage the efforts of key development partners active in Burundi’s WASH sector, specifically: (i) European Union
                          (EU) through aligning investments in the rural water supply sub-sector and providing technical assistance for improving
                          the legislative framework; (ii) UNICEF through joint support in the preparation of the National WASH Program as well as
                          the National Sanitation Roadmap; (iii) AfDB through aligning investments in rural water and delivery models; and (iv) KfW
                          through coordinating investments and support for REGIDESO. To scale-up urban water supply and sanitation investments
                          in Bujumbura, in the medium-term co-financing through EU grants and European Investment Bank (EIB) loans may be
                          considered, provided fund availability and a conducive macro-fiscal environment.



                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




                                                                                                                                                   Page 9



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          Potential environmental risks/impacts are expected for the activities under components 2 and 3 which include
                          investments in water systems/production and sanitation in Bujumbura and Gitega (the latter city only studies at this
                          stage). Key anticipated direct, indirect and cumulative risks and impacts associated with water and sanitation investments
                          will entail : temporary disruption of utility services in the project area; traffic disruption as the excavation of trenches and
                          laying of pipeline work will be done along main roads and streets; interference with fish and other aquatic organisms at
                          intake sites; risk of increased turbidity and sedimentation downstream that may affect aquatic habitats; risk of pollution
                          and oil spill; management of chemicals; waste generation; occupational and health and safety for workers; community
                          safety due to active construction sites and activities within the community. The project will also support Technical
                          Assistance (TA) activities of Types 1, 2 and 3 under components 1 and 2 which include the preparation of investment plans,
                          preparation studies, transactions advisory services, capacity building, development of national legal and regulatory text
                          and policies, etc. TA activities may have potential downstream environmental risks as a result of potential new
                          investments. However, the E&S risk level of these activities is not expected to exceed Substantial. This classification takes
                          also into account the capacity of the Borrower, as well as all stakeholders involved in this project, including public and
                          private entities to manage potential risks. Potential social risks associated with the project include the exclusion of women
                          and members of vulnerable groups from project benefits and activities such as training and capacity building and
                          household connections under components 1 and 2, work opportunities under components 3 and 4. Planned civil works
                          under component 3 also present the risks associated with influx of labor such as SEA/SH, communicable diseases, and




_For Official Use Only_
                          labor, social conflicts, economic and physical displacement (mostly temporary), and community health and safety impacts.
                          As indicated in the Environmental risk section, TA activities of Types 1, 2 and 3 under components 1 and 2 are likely to
                          carry downstream impacts and the capacity of the foreseen Borrower will likely be low and will need substantial capacity
                          building. To manage these risks/impacts, including those related to ancillary works, an Environmental and Social
                          Assessment will be conducted through several instruments. Considering that the specific locations of some project
                          investments are not yet known at this stage, the Borrower is preparing an ESMF, a draft of which will be available by the
                          end of appraisal. The ESMF will establish the procedures and guidelines for screening sub-projects, conducting site-specific
                          assessments, and developing appropriate mitigation measures. It will also include a capacity-building action plan to
                          strengthen the borrower’s capacity to manage ES risks and impacts according to the ESF. For investments in the water
                          supply system for Bujumbura, including the water intake in Lake Tanganyika, the construction of pumping station, the
                          construction of the water treatment plant, reservoirs and distributions networks, for which feasibility studies are already
                          under preparation, the ESIA/ESMP and RAP will be prepared during implementation. The Project will include SEA/SH
                          Action Plan as well. Regarding TA activities proposed under components 1, 2 and 3, the Borrower will prepare Terms of
                          Reference (ToRs) and outputs acceptable to the Bank and will need to be consistent with the environmental and social
                          provisions of ESSs 1-10. To date, no associated facilities have been identified under the project. However, if an associated
                          facility is identified during the preparation of the specific activities, an assessment of its potential environmental and social
                          risks and impacts will be reflected in the relevant instruments (ESIAs, ESMPs) to be prepared by the project during its
                          implementation. The Borrower has prepared, jointly with the Bank team, an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                          (ESCP). The ESCP includes the materials measures and actions required to address the identified ES risks and impacts,
                          timelines, responsible parties and monitoring indicators.

                           E. Implementation




                                                                                                                                                     Page 10



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements


                          26.      The Project is anchored within the MINRMEICT who takes the lead role in coordination of the project through
                          its PIU (MINRMEICT-PIU). The implementation of the project will be the responsibility of two PIUs, namely the
                          MINRMEICT-PIU and a second PIU hosted within REGIDESO. The MINRMEICT-PIU will be responsible for overall
                          coordination, overall progress reporting, consolidation of annual workplans and budgets, functioning as secretariat for
                          the Project Steering Committee (PSC), and coordinating the regional activities with the regional MPA. MINRMEICT-PIU will
                          be responsible for implementing Component 1 (national level), Subcomponent 2.2 and Subcomponent 3.2 (rural areas)
                          and Subcomponent 4.1 (project coordination/management). The MINRMEICT-PIU will be staffed with the required
                          specialists in advance of Project effectiveness26. The REGIDESO-PIU, staffed in advance of project effectiveness27, will be
                          responsible for coordinating and reporting progress to MINRMEICT-PIU and for implementing the activities that are
                          related to REGIDESO, namely Subcomponent 2.1, Subcomponent 3.1, as well as Subcomponent 4.2 (project management).
                          The financing agreement between IDA and the Recipient (through the Ministry of Finance, Budget and Digital Economy
                          (Ministère des Finances, Budget et Economie Numérique, MINFBEN), will be complemented through a project agreement
                          between the IDA and REGIDESO. A subsidiary agreement between MINFBEN and REGIDESO will be signed in advance of
                          project effectiveness.
                          27.      Capacities of MINRMEICT and REGIDESO were assessed and staffing requirements for the MINRMEICT-PIU and
                          the REGIDESO-PIU have been identified. Given the fact that MINRMEICT-DGEPA has no prior experience with IDA-




_For Official Use Only_
                          financed projects, the MINRMEICT-PIU will be staffed with consultants in identified PIU positions, with detailed Terms of
                          References in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). In line with IDA-financed projects in the energy sector, the
                          staffing of the REGIDESO- PIU will consist mainly of salaried REGIDESO staff, assigned on a full-time basis28, and based on
                          evaluation of competencies to fulfill the terms of references, as detailed in the PIM. To strengthen its capacity, the
                          REGIDESO-PIU will be supported through external consultants, including an environmental and social specialist, a financial
                          management specialist and international technical assistance on procurement, the latter supporting both PIUs
                          28.      A Project Steering Committee (PSC) including all relevant line ministries involved in the Project will be set up to
                          provide strategic guidance during project implementation. The PSC will be chaired by MINRMEICT and will be responsible
                          for overall oversight and strategic direction of the proposed project, in line with national strategies and policies. The PSC
                          will be composed of representatives of MINRMEICT, MINFBEN, MILSTE, MINEAGRIE, Ministry of Education, Science and
                          Research (Ministère de l ’Education Nationale et de la Recherche Scientifique, MINENRS), the Ministry of Public Health
                          (Ministère de la Santé Publique, MINSP), and REGIDESO. The PSC can invite representatives from agencies or directorates
                          under the tutelage of the PSC ministries, e.g. AHAMR, AREEN, OBUHA or others. Responsibilities of the PSC are detailed
                          in the PIM.
                          29.      A Technical Committee (TC) will be set up consisting of senior management staff of various entities that will be
                          responsible for the day-to-day coordination of project activities with the MINRMEICT-PIU and the REGIDESO- PIU. The
                          TC will include members including but not limited to AHAMR, REGIDESO, AREEN, OBUHA, and relevant departments within
                          MINEAGRIE29, MINENRS30, and MINSP31. TC members are responsible for ensuring that staff of their respective entities


                          26 Namely, a project coordinator, procurement specialist, financial management specialist, environmental specialist, a social development/GBV specialist, and a water
                          supply and sanitation specialist.
                          27 Namely, a REGIDESO project coordinator, a procurement specialist, financial management specialist, an environmental specialist, a social development/GBV
                          specialist, and a water supply engineer.
                          28Assigned on a full-time basis to support the implementation of the project, through an instruction of REGIDESO’s CEO.
                          29 Namely the Directorate for Water Resources and Forestry (DPREF, and the National Environmental Protection Agency (Office Burundais pour la Protection de
                          l’Environnement, OPBE)
                          30 Namely the Directorate for Primary and Secondary Education (Direction Générale de l'Enseignement Fondamental et Post-Fondamentale, DGEFPF)
                          31 Namely, the Directorate for Health Promotion (Direction de la Promotion de la Santé, DPS)


                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 11



                                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          are participating in the necessary tasks to deliver the project. The roles and responsibilities of the TC members are detailed
                          in the PIM.
                          30.      A Commune Cooperation Agreement will be signed within three months after project Effectiveness. The
                          cooperation agreement will reflect the roles and responsibilities of the selected commune in the implementation of the
                          activities under Subcomponent 3.2, including the requirements to put in place service delegation contracts between the
                          communes and the selected private operators and the articulation of AHAMR’s supporting role. A template of the
                          cooperation agreement will be included in the PIM.
                          31.     To ensure coordination of the knowledge and technical assistance activities under phase I of the Regional WASH
                          Access MPA a representative of MINRMEICT will be included in the Regional Project Advisory Committee. In addition,
                          selected members of the Technical Committee will constitute the Country Coordination team for Burundi, to ensure that
                          regional activities are well coordinated, scoped and adding value to the BWSSAP project.

                           Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

                          32.      The MINRMEICT-PIU will be responsible for overall monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project. The
                          MINRMEICT-PIU will have a dedicated M&E specialist and will closely coordinate with the REGIDESO-PIU, and its M&E
                          officer, to track indicators under the results framework to ensure timely and accurate data flows. Capacity building for
                          M&E staff and – as needed - independent baseline, midline and endline data collection will be financed under Component




_For Official Use Only_
                          4. The MINRMEICT- PIU will establish a robust M&E system and be responsibility for:
                              •   Regular data collection and reporting on PDO and intermediate indicators, disaggregated by gender, age, and
                                  urban/rural location.
                              •   Use of Management Information Systems (MIS) developed under Component 1 to consolidate data from
                                  implementing partners, REGIDESO, and rural service providers.
                              •   Beneficiary surveys and technical audits to validate service delivery outcomes, including feedback from
                                  women/girls on time-burden for water collection
                              •   Mid-term and end-of-project evaluations to assess impact, sustainability, and lessons learned.

                           Sustainability

                          33.     Institutional Sustainability: The project supports the operationalization of the sectoral legal framework,
                          strengthens the regulatory authority (AREEN), and builds capacity within MINRMEICT, REGIDESO, domestic private
                          operators and WSS units within the commune administrations. These reforms aim to clarify mandates, improve
                          accountability, and enhance service delivery oversight.
                          34.      Financial Sustainability: The project promotes cost recovery through tariff reforms, preparation of a new tariff
                          framework, the implementation and monitoring of the REGIDESO PIP and awareness campaigns as required to accompany
                          tariff adjustments. In rural areas, affermage contracts with private operators will be supported with proposed tariffs for
                          standposts and household connections and community engagement to ensure willingness-to-pay. The reversal of free
                          water at standposts is introduced as a disbursement condition for the rural civil works and the project will help to establish
                          financing mechanisms for major repairs and maintenance at the commune level.
                          35.     Technical Sustainability: Investments in climate-resilient infrastructure, digital tools (e.g., SCADA, MIS), and
                          vocational training for local technicians will enhance the durability and maintainability of WASH systems. Designs for the
                          water treatment plant in Bujumbura will ensure adequate location choice and protection measures against flooding
                          induced by rising levels of Lake Tanganyika, informed by flood analysis carried out as part of the Urban Resilience Project.
                          Capacity building will be ensured through a one-year operation period of the water treatment plant in Bujumbura-Sud, as


                                                                                                                                                   Page 12



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)


                          part of the works contract, to ensure knowledge transfer to REGIDESO to operate the new plant that will introduce a new
                          treatment technology in Burundi.
                          36.      Environmental and Social Sustainability: Environmental and social standards are integrated into project design,
                          with ESMF, ESIA/ESMPs and community engagement plans ensuring inclusive and responsible implementation. These
                          instruments will include measures to address SEA/SH risks as well. The project supports REGIDESO with technical
                          assistance to set up its own internal revolving financing mechanism and pro-poor policy for private connections to ensure
                          continued service expansion by reducing liquidity barriers for households. The project will also include capacity building
                          of beneficiaries for ownership and participatory management for the maintenance and servicing of infrastructures to be
                          installed and above all avoid wasting water and other natural resources.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Susanna Smets
                             Senior Water Specialist

                             Feriha Mukuve Mugisha




_For Official Use Only_
                             Senior Water Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Republic of Burundi - Ministry of Finance, Budget and Digital Economy

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Ministry of Mines, Energy, Industry, Trade and Tourism

                            REGIDESO

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                           APPROVAL


                           Task Team Leader(s):                       Susanna Smets, Feriha Mukuve Mugisha

                           Approved By

                                                                                                                                               Page 13



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project (P507207)




                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Soma Ghosh Moulik           20-Sep-2025

                          Country Director:                       Kofi Nouve                  13-Oct-2025




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                   Page 14



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
