Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 10/07/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04508




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 12, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507207                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       BWSSAP                      2026

                     Operation Name            Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Burundi                   Burundi                                 EASTERN AND                  Water
                                                                                       SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Burundi -     Ministry of Infrastructure, Social      08-Oct-2025                  10-Dec-2025
                     Ministry of Finance,      Housing, Transport and Equipment,
                     Budget and Digital        REGIDESO
                     Economy




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     29-Sep-2025               90,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To increase access to climate-resilient water supply and sanitation services and to strengthen the capacity of water
                     operators


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project aims to increase access to climate-resilient water supply and
                     sanitation services and to strengthen the capacity of water operators. The project aims to provide safely managed
                     drinking water services to previously unserved populations and to improve the quality of services from basic to safely
                     managed drinking water services in Bujumbura through expanding production capacity , distribution systems and
                     household connections. For rural areas, the project aims to improve access to at least basic water supply and sanitation

                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     services in selected communes prioritized by the government. Moreover, the project will improve access to water,
                     sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) facilities in selected schools and health centers within the rural communes. Aligned with
                     the regional Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (MPA) on Accelerating Access to WASH services in the Eastern and
                     Southern Africa (AFE) region - the AFE WASH Access MPA, the proposed components are the following: Component 1:
                     Strengthening National WASH Platform, Governance and Reforms. Subcomponent 1.1.National WASH Programming and
                     Platform is aligned with pillar 1 of the AFE WASH Access MPA and finances technical assistance, training and equipment
                     to develop and implement sector-wide monitoring platforms for WASH access, medium term investment plans, joint
                     sector reviews and future investment preparation studies, such as for Gitega. Subcomponent 1.2 Advancing Governance
                     and Reforms is aligned with pillar 2 of the AFE WASH Access MPA and finances technical assistance, training and
                     equipment to address governance bottlenecks and support the implementation of reform measures to enable private
                     capital mobilization for investments in the sector in the medium term. This includes the development of regulatory
                     instruments and policies, tariff studies, transaction advisory services, capacity development for sector ministries, the
                     national water and sanitation regulatory entity and other sector stakeholders, as well as selected communes benefiting
                     from investments. Component 2: Service Providers Performance Improvement: This component, mapped to pillar 3 of
                     the AFE WASH Access MPA, finances works, equipment, technical assistance, training for the national water utility
                     REGIDESO as well as for rural water supply providers and the rural water agency. Subcomponent 2.1 finances the
                     implementation of REGIDESO's Performance Improvement Action Plan, including Non Revenue Water (NRW),
                     digitalization, and water quality management improvements, household connections and technical advice for REGIDESO
                     to develop a pro-poor household connection policy and funding mechanism. Subcomponent 2.2. finances the
                     preparation of delegation contracts between communes and private water operators, capacity development for
                     professionalization of domestic private water operators, household connections for rural population, as well as




Public Disclosure
                     vocational and professional development programs for job creation in the water sector. Component 3: Leveraging
                     Finance to Increase Climate-Resilient WASH Access . This Components aligns with Pillar 4 of the AFE WASH Access MPA.
                     Subcomponent 3.1 finances infrastructure investments in climate -resilient urban water supply distribution and
                     production systems for Bujumbura, including civil works for a new water intake and water treatment plant, pumping
                     station(s), transmission mains, reservoirs and distribution network, as well as related electro-mechanical equipment and
                     SCADA systems. Subcomponent 3.2 finances rehabilitation and construction of solar-based climate-resilient rural water
                     systems in selected commune(s), behavior change campaigns, material support for durable sanitation facilities, and
                     education activities for girls on menstrual hygiene management. Component 3 also finances resettlement costs related
                     to the water supply infrastructure investments. Component 4: Project Management and Coordination. This component
                     finances the overall project management, monitoring and coordination costs, including operating costs and
                     participation in international and regional knowledge and learning activities. It also finances the coordination costs for
                     Burundi stakeholders related to their effective participation in the AFE WASH Access MPA.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Burundi is an FCV context, and it is one of the seven member states of the East African Community (EAC). The country is
                     part of the Albertine Rift, the western extension of the Great Rift Valley, and is situated on a rolling plateau in the center
                     of Africa. The average elevation of the central plateau is 5,600 feet (1,707 meters), with lower elevations at the borders.
                     The highest peak, Mount Heha, at 8,810 feet (2,685 meters), is located southeast of the capital, Bujumbura. Repeated
                     episodes of conflict and fragility have created an uncertain and risky environment which has constrained investment,
                     leading to low performing and volatile economy.


                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     The proposed Project is Phase 3 under the Accelerating Access to WASH in the Eastern and Southern Africa Region MPA
                     (P512763), which is scheduled for Board approval in September 2025. The Project will include infrastructure investment
                     in water supply systems in urban and rural areas, WASH facilities in schools and health centers and household latrine
                     construction in rural areas and technical assistance to support technical studies, capacity building, reforms and policies.
                     The Project will be implemented in Bujumbura and in rural communes prioritized by the Government that include
                     Bituhinda, Muyinga, Rwibaga and part of the commune of Mugere. The focus of the project is on : (i) water supply
                     investments in the city of Bujumbura and measures (provision of equipment, technical assistance) to improve the
                     performance of REGIDESO water operations; and (ii) the rehabilitation/expansion of existing and construction of new
                     water systems in the four (04) rural communes. The implementation of the rural water supply works will exclude
                     remote or highly isolated areas, thereby restricting the potential risks, benefits and impact on communities residing in
                     isolated regions.

                     Water supply investments will involve the use of waters in the Lake Tanganyika. Lake Tanganyika and its Basin are
                     endowed with exceptionally large and highly diverse heritage of flora and fauna. The lake is a global hotspot of
                     biodiversity and an extremely valuable aquatic ecosystem containing almost 17% of the global available surface
                     freshwater supply and some of the largest freshwater fisheries on the African continent. The lake and its Basin provide a
                     diverse range of ecosystem services that sustain the livelihoods of millions of people. Lake Tanganyika borders Burundi
                     for a distance of approximately 150 kilometers of coastline, mainly along the western coast of the country, from the
                     northern border with the Democratic Republic of Congo to the southern tip towards Tanzania. This portion represents a
                     significant part of the country's lakefront, although Burundi holds only about 8% of the total area of the lake (about
                     2,632 km² of the 32,900 km² of Lake Tanganyika).




Public Disclosure
                     Burundi has the lowest per capita greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) globally. Climate change poses a serious threat to its
                     weak infrastructure and livelihoods. Changes in rainfall patterns have led to increased frequency of extreme weather
                     events such as floods, storms, landslides, and prolonged dry spells, which harm crop yields and threaten food security,
                     especially in the northeastern part of the country. The feasibility studies and the APS for the selected systems are
                     expected by December 2025. The APD and the ESIAs will be completed by March 2026. Based on feasibility studies,
                     specific rural sites will be defined and assessed accordingly.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will be implemented through two (02) dedicated Project Implementation Units (PIUs) : (i) the PIU hosted
                     within the Ministry of Mineral Resources, Energy, Industry, Trade and Tourism (MINRMEICT) in charge of project
                     activities under component 1, subcomponent 2.2, subcomponent 3.2 and subcomponent 4.1; and (ii) the PIU embedded
                     within the state-owned utility REGIDESO for project activities under subcomponent 2.1, subcomponent 3.1 and
                     subcomponent 4.2. Although the MINRMEICT-PIU will be responsible for overall coordination, both will oversee
                     procurement, financial management, and environmental and social compliance of investments under their
                     responsibility.

                     MINRMEICT and REGIDESO have limited capacities in managing project E&S risks, particularly under ESF. The
                     preliminary assessment of their capacities carried out during preparation has identified the staffing needs of the
                     implementation units of MINRMEICT and REGIDESO. The MINRMEICT-PIU will include three (3) E&S specialists for which
                     an environmental specialist and a social development specialist have already been recruited. The GBV specialist will be



                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     hired shortly. The REGIDESO-PIU will include salaries REGIDESO’s E&S staff, strengthened by an external consultant in
                     charge of building their capacity in E&S risk management under ESF for 24 months.
                     Various ministries and public entities will be involved at national, provincial, and communal levels, a capacity
                     assessment for E&S risk management will be conducted as part of the Environmental and Social Management
                     Framework (ESMF) and a capacity-building action plan proposed. The Burundian Office for the Protection of
                     Environment (OBPE) regulates Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and issues Environmental
                     Compliance Certificates under the Ministry of Agriculture and Environment. A collaboration arrangement will be signed
                     with the Burundian Office for the Protection of Environment (OBPE) no later than 30 days after the Effective Date to
                     manage E&S risks and impacts of the Project.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     The Environmental Risk Rating is considered Substantial. The primary environmental risks and impacts are anticipated
                     from activities under components 2 and 3. These activities involve construction and rehabilitation of water
                     infrastructure, including water intakes, treatment plants, pumping stations, transmissions lines, reservoirs,
                     distribution networks, and sanitation facilities in Bujumbura as well as water supply investments in Gitega. Key
                     anticipated direct, indirect, and cumulative risks and impacts include potential impacts on water resources and
                     aquatic habitats due to water abstraction from Lake Tanganyika and other sources, temporary disruption of utility



Public Disclosure
                     services in the project areas, traffic disruption due to excavation of trenches and pipeline laying along main roads and
                     streets, potential for increased turbidity and sedimentation downstream affecting aquatic habitats, risks of water
                     pollution from construction activities, potential spills and inadequate wastewater management, risks related to
                     chemical and hazardous material management, waste generation, occupational, health and safety risks for workers
                     during construction and operation, community health and safety risks associated with the construction sites and
                     increased traffic and potential land degradation due to the extraction of construction material. The project will also
                     support technical assistance (TA) activities of Types 1, 2, and 3 under components 1, 2 and 3, which include the
                     preparation of investment plans, feasibility studies, investment preparation studies, transaction advisory services,
                     capacity building, and the development of national legal and regulatory texts and policies. While these activities
                     themselves may not have direct environmental impacts, they could lead to downstream environmental risks due to
                     potential new investments that need to be assessed and managed. This classification also considers the capacity of
                     the Borrower and all stakeholders involved in this project, including public and private sector companies, to manage
                     potential risks.
                                                                                                                                   Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is considered to be Substantial, given the nature of the activities and their implementation in
                     densely populated urban areas of Bujumbura, and in the four selected rural communes, and also considering the
                     downstream impacts of the planned TA activities, which are not expected to exceed the substantial risk profile either.
                     The key social risks associated with the Project identified include (i) potential exclusion of women and members of
                     vulnerable groups from project benefits (which may included displaced population and indigenous peoples), along
                     with potential elite capture, especially from activities such as training and capacity building and the equitable


                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     household connections under component 3 and 4; (ii) community health and safety risks, including those associated
                     with the labor influx associated with the civil works, which may increase the transmission of communicable diseases
                     and the level of SEA/SH risk; (iii) potential for land acquisition and economic displacement, temporary and
                     permanently, particularly in relation to the activities planned to be supported under components 3.1 and 3.2; (iv) risks
                     associated with the downstream impacts of the TA activities to be supported, including those related to the policy
                     reforms to be supported, some of which may potentially experience stakeholder opposition to some of the proposed
                     policy reforms; (v) potentially adverse economic impacts on vulnerable groups during the transition from unpaid to
                     paid access to drinking water, particularly if differentiated approach for them, like social tariffs, are not adequately
                     considered during the reform process.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The project will finance investments in water systems/production and sanitation in Bujumbura and Gitega (only
                      studies at this stage) that may have potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts. The main potential
                      E&S risks and impacts are on water resources and aquatic habitats due to water abstraction from Lake Tanganyika
                      and other sources, disruption of traffic in the project area, potential for increased turbidity and sedimentation
                      downstream affecting aquatic habitats, risks of water pollution from construction activities, potential spills and
                      inadequate wastewater management, chemical management, waste generation, occupational health and safety risks



Public Disclosure
                      for workers during construction and operation, community health and safety risks associated with the construction
                      sites and increased traffic and potential land degradation due to the extraction of construction material. To manage
                      these risks and impacts, including those related to ancillary works, an Environmental and Social Assessment will be
                      conducted through several instruments. Considering that the specific locations of some project investments are not
                      yet known at this stage, the Borrower is preparing an ESMF, a draft of which will be available by the end of appraisal.
                      The ESMF will establish the procedures and guidelines for screening sub-projects, conducting site-specific
                      assessments, and developing appropriate mitigation measures. It will also include a capacity-building action plan to
                      strengthen the borrower’s capacity to manage ES risks and impacts according to the ESF. For investments in the water
                      supply system for Bujumbura, including the water intake in Lake Tanganyika, the construction of pumping station, the
                      construction of the water treatment plant, reservoirs and distributions networks, for which feasibility studies are
                      already under preparation, the ESIA/ESMP and RAP will be prepared during implementation and disclosed prior to
                      the commencement of bidding processes. In the case of the RAP, its compensation measures will need to be carried
                      out prior to civil works in the affected areas. The instruments will include a SEA/SH Action Plan as well. Regarding the
                      TA activities proposed under components 1, 2 and 3, the Borrower will prepare Terms of Reference (ToRs) and
                      outputs acceptable to the Bank and will include environmental and social considerations that are consistent with ESSs
                      1-10. To date, no associated facilities have been identified under the project. However, if an associated facility is
                      identified during the preparation of the specific activities, an assessment of its potential environmental and social
                      risks and impacts will be reflected in the relevant instruments (ESIAs, ESMPs) to be prepared by the project during its
                      implementation. The Borrower has prepared, jointly with the Bank team, an Environmental and Social Commitment
                      Plan (ESCP). The ESCP includes the materials measures and actions required to address the identified ES risks and
                      impacts, timelines, responsible parties and monitoring indicators. As required by the ESCP for E&S staff, the


                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      MINRMEICT-PIU will include three (3) E&S specialists for which an environmental specialist and a social development
                      specialist have already been recruited. The GBV specialist will be hired shortly. Two (02) salaried REGIDESO E&S staff
                      will be appointed for the REGIDESO-PIU, supported by an external consultant to strengthen their capacity on E&S risk
                      management.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                    Relevant

                      To ensure stakeholder involvement throughout the project cycle, the Project preparation Team has organized site
                      visits and consultative meetings with institutional stakeholders, to inform project design and the preparation of the
                      E&S risk management instruments. Once technical studies are finalized and detailed information on project sites is
                      available, the team will continue engaging with communities through meaningful interactions, ensuring timely,
                      understandable and accessible information. The engagement must be free of manipulation, interference, coercion,
                      discrimination, and intimidation. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) shall outline the characteristics and
                      interests of relevant stakeholder groups, including commune administrations, local water committees, beneficiaries
                      (with a special focus on women), and directly impacted project-affected persons and vulnerable groups including
                      Batwa and refugees. The SEP will be disclosed prior to Appraisal, and will include a record of stakeholder engagement
                      activities carried out during so far during preparation, and the activities planned during project implementation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                          Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The project will engage direct workers, contracted workers and potentially primary supply
                      workers involved in the provision of essential goods/materials. Government civil servants within MINRMEICT,




Public Disclosure
                      AHAMR, AREEN, and REGIDESO will also be involved. The Borrower will prepare labor management procedures (LMP)
                      to address key worker issues, such as working conditions, worker relationships, workforce protection, non-
                      discrimination, child and forced labor prevention, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) requirements, and guidance
                      for employing youth and women (except minors, since child labor will be prohibited). The LMP will feature a labor-
                      specific grievance mechanism sensitive to SEA/SH, based on national laws, ESS2 provisions, and labor issue
                      management. It will also include a code of conduct prohibiting SEA/SH and sanctions for misconduct. Occupational
                      Health and Safety (OHS): To ensure the health and safety of workers during the construction and operational phases,
                      requirements for Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) will be developed through specific ESIAs/ESMPs and
                      contractors will develop and implement site specific Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) plans in line with World
                      Bank Group Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines (for construction activities), for water and sanitation
                      and other relevant International Good Practices. The plan will include procedures on incident investigation and
                      reporting, recording and reporting of non-compliance, emergency preparedness and response procedures and
                      continuous training and awareness to workers. OHS requirements will be incorporated in the bidding documents and
                      contracts. Workers Accommodation: where on-site accommodation is confirmed, a Labor Camp Management Plan
                      will be required as part of the Contractor-ESMP (C-ESMP). The LMP shall be prepared no later than 30 days after the
                      Effective Date.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                           Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant. Investments under this project will entail risks and impacts relevant to ESS3 requirements, which
                      include raw material and resource use, energy use, generation of hazardous/non-hazardous waste, handling and use
                      of hazardous materials, increased water demand, noise and air pollution. Assessment of risks and impacts and


                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      proposed mitigation measures will be included within scope of the ESMF, and in site specific ESIAs/ESMPs, as
                      relevant. These instruments will include standard operating procedures and good construction management
                      practices, including those proposed in WBG EHSGs. Resource Efficiency Measures: The project will incorporate
                      measures for energy efficiency, particularly in urban water systems managed by REGIDESO. This includes optimizing
                      existing water treatment plant capacity, reducing Non-Revenue Water (NRW) through digital applications and
                      automatic control systems (SCADA), and increasing energy efficiency in pumping stations. Water conservation
                      strategies, including NRW reduction and efficient water use practices, will be explored. Considering that construction
                      and rehabilitation activities will require materials which include stones, sand, concrete blocks and timber, the
                      Borrower will request all contractors to obtain these materials obtain from legally established quarries and certified
                      suppliers, without any risk of conflict. Air emissions: during the construction phase, air emissions will include exhaust
                      from vehicles and machinery, and fugitive dust generated by construction activities. Those most likely to be affected
                      are workers and people living within proximity of the work sites. The implementation of mitigation measures such as
                      dust suppression and vehicle maintenance will be applied to minimize the impact of air emissions during construction
                      and transportation of material; residual impacts are expected to be limited in scope and duration. Noise: During the
                      construction phase, noise could be generated from construction machinery and vehicle movements. This noise
                      pollution relating to the construction work would be limited to the duration of the work. However, appropriate
                      measures must be taken during the operation phase of certain infrastructures such as water treatment plants to
                      minimize noise pollution for nearby residents. The ESMF and ESIA/ESMP will include mitigation measures to minimize
                      and manage the noise levels such as by applying standard restrictions on working hours on site. Water use : water
                      production capacity is largely insufficient in Bujumbura and Gitega and less than half of the people connected to the
                      water network have regular daily water supply. Water use efficiency will be taken into account in the technical




Public Disclosure
                      designs of water and sanitation infrastructure. The Borrower will assess the potential cumulative impacts of water
                      consumption on communities, others users and the environment, and will identify and implement appropriate
                      measures identified as part of the ESIA. Since the project supports investments to increase access to drinking water
                      supply and sanitation (WSS) services in targeted areas of Bujumbura and Gitega, a water balance will be assessed as
                      part of site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs and adequate measures will be proposed to minimize the depletion of water
                      resources. Water Pollution Prevention: Measures will be implemented to prevent contamination of surface and
                      groundwater from project activities. This includes managing runoff from construction sites and ensuring proper
                      wastewater management from water treatment plants and sanitation facilities. Specific measures will be detailed in
                      the ESMP. Waste management: construction/rehabilitation activities will generate solid and liquid waste, which will
                      primarily consist of excavated soil, and hazardous waste such as hydrocarbon oils from construction machinery and
                      vehicles as well as waste from the water treatment facilities. The waste generated by construction works will largely
                      be disposed of at approved sites in accordance with national laws and regulations. Appropriate mitigation measures
                      to manage hazardous and non-hazardous wastes will be included in the ESMPs. These will detail specific procedures
                      for waste generation, collection, storage, transportation and disposal. In the event that the works require the
                      replacement of asbestos pipe networks, an Asbestos and other fibrous materials Management Plan will be prepared
                      and implemented before starting any field work. Hazardous materials management: During the operation of water
                      treatment facilities, chemicals will be used in water treatment. Protocols for the safe handling, storage, transport,
                      and disposal of any hazardous materials will be established in line with World Bank Group Environmental, Health and
                      Safety (WBG EHS) Guidelines as part of the site-specific ESIA/ESMP. GHG emissions: The analysis conducted during
                      preparation shows that the project is not expected to generate significant GHG emissions. Pesticides: The project is
                      not expected to include the procurement or use of pesticides.



                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. Project activities may have negative risks and impacts on the health and safety of the communities
                      surrounding the work sites. Anticipated risks and impacts include community health and safety risks associated with
                      construction and rehabilitation work, traffic safety, community exposure to labor influx, downstream water pollution,
                      exposure to diseases, noise, dust, vibration, hazardous materials, emergency preparedness and response, and
                      transmission of communicable diseases. There are also risks associated with SEA/SH. As part of the ESMF, the
                      borrower will conduct an assessment of the potential impacts of the project activities on the health and safety of the
                      communities. Other assessments will be conducted through site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs to be prepared by the
                      borrower. These instruments will include standard operating procedures and good construction management
                      practices, include those proposed in WBG EHS Guidelines and the SEA/SH Action Plan. Project-related vehicle
                      movements, particularly during construction, will increase traffic and pose risks to pedestrian safety. Excavation of
                      trenches and pipeline laying along main roads and streets will cause traffic disruption. In addition, increased
                      movement of vehicles transporting equipment and materials on roads near communities, particularly schools, may
                      pose safety issues. A traffic management plan will be developed as part of site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs to manage and
                      minimize traffic disruption due to excavation of trenches and pipeline laying along main roads and streets. The Plan
                      will be developed in consultation with local authorities and communities and will include measures such as speed
                      limits, signage, traffic diversions, and pedestrian safety measures. Road safety awareness campaigns will be
                      conducted to educate the public about safe driving and pedestrian practices. During operation phases, repair and
                      maintenance of pipelines and manholes may pose safety risks to local communities from open ditches and open
                      manholes etc. Appropriate measures will also be developed in the operation’s ESMP to protect the communities from
                      being injured during construction, rehabilitation and repair and maintenance works and incorporated under the



Public Disclosure
                      contractor C-ESMP, as part of the operations and/or defect liability period. Any incidents or fatalities on any of the
                      sites will be immediately reported to the Bank team during project implementation. The project will ensure that
                      project infrastructure is designed to be accessible to all community members, including people with disabilities. This
                      will include incorporating universal access principles into the design of water points, sanitation facilities, and other
                      infrastructure. Consultations with people with disabilities will be conducted to ensure that their needs are addressed.
                      The project will develop an Emergency Response Plan (ERP) to address potential accidents, natural disasters, and
                      project-related emergencies affecting communities. The ERP will include procedures for communication, evacuation,
                      and medical response. Emergency drills will be conducted to ensure that communities are prepared for emergencies.
                      The project will also support community-based disaster preparedness initiatives. The project may involve the
                      handling, storage, transport, and disposal of hazardous materials, posing risks to communities. The project will
                      develop and implement a Hazardous Materials Management Plan, which will include procedures for safe handling,
                      storage, transport, and disposal of hazardous materials. Workers will be trained in hazardous materials management
                      procedures. The project will also ensure that communities are informed about potential risks and mitigation
                      measures. The project will implement measures to prevent the spread of communicable or vector-borne diseases due
                      to project activities. This may include measures to prevent stagnant water, improve sanitation, and promote hygiene.
                      The project will also work with local health authorities to monitor and respond to any outbreaks of disease. Education
                      programs for girls on menstrual hygiene management will be implemented.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant because project activities excepted under components 3 and 4 may require some land acquisition for
                      water supply infrastructure in rural and urban areas, the installation of the water pipes along the right-of-way may

                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      affect homes, assets and economic activities of the local populations, as part of the planned works in urban areas and
                      rural communes, may potentially lead to land acquisition and economic activity disruption on a temporary and
                      permanent basis. While technical and the feasibility studies are still ongoing, no specific cases requiring physical
                      resettlement have been identified yet. Once studies triggered the need of land acquisition and/or created economical
                      displacement, base on the scope, during the implementation, as indicated in the ESCP, that the social impacts
                      mitigation measures must be handle through the preparation of the ESMPs, for indirect economic impacts not
                      associated with physical resettlement, and/or resettlement actions plans to be prepared during implementation and
                      their compensation measures implemented prior to the commencement of civils works in the affected areas.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant. The project activities are mainly taking place in inhabited urban and rural areas to meet their water
                      and sanitation needs and are not expected to take place in or near protected areas or critical habitats. However,
                      potential impacts on aquatic ecosystems could arise from the construction of water intake structures in Lake
                      Tanganyika or other water sources. These structures may interfere with fish and other aquatic organisms. Increased
                      turbidity and sedimentation downstream of construction sites could also negatively affect aquatic habitats. The
                      project will apply the mitigation hierarchy and precautionary approach to address potential impacts on biodiversity.
                      The precautionary approach will be applied where impacts are uncertain. A screening process will be put in place to
                      improve project sites selection to avoid selecting areas with high biodiversity values. A negative list will be included in
                      the ESMF to exclude any activity or subprojects that would involve significant conversion or degradation of critical
                      habitat or take take place within protected areas. With the aims of achieving net gains and no significant degradation



Public Disclosure
                      or conversion of critical habitats, a Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) will be prepared as part of the ESIA/ESMP
                      for the construction works of the water supply distribution and production systems in Bujumbura in a manner
                      acceptable to the World Bank. The BMP will consider relevant threats to biodiversity and ecosystem services,
                      especially focusing on habitat loss, interference with fishing, degradation and fragmentation, invasive alien species,
                      over-exploitation, hydrological changes, nutrient loading, and pollution. It will outline specific measures to mitigate
                      and manage biodiversity impacts, including habitat restoration, species protection , and monitoring programs. The
                      project will assess the sustainability of natural resource sourcing by primary suppliers, if relevant. This may include
                      assessing the environmental practices of suppliers of construction materials and other inputs.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is relevant. Batwa communities are present in Burundi. Project activities will be carried out in urban and
                      rural areas, where Batwa families are often integrated into broader Burundian communities that include Batwa and
                      non-Batwa groups. The applicability of ESS7 will be confirmed based on the information to be provided in the context
                      of the site-specific technical and feasibility studies. Project activities will not cause relocation or impact cultural
                      heritage resources of Batwa groups, and are not expected to cause other significant adverse impacts either. Thus, the
                      need for Free Prior and Informed Consultations (FPIC) is not anticipated, in accordance with the provissions of ESS7.
                      Once studies are finalized, assessments will analyze potential adverse impacts on Batwa communities or barriers to
                      their access to project benefits, and adopt the necessary measures. If the presence of indigenous communities or
                      other groups that meet the characteristics set out in ESS7 were to be identified in the project area during
                      implementation, the Borrower will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) consistent with ESS7 that includes


                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                       Page 10 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      culturally appropriate and participatory consultations, considering the socioeconomic and cultural impacts of the
                      project activities on them, and engaging them according to their norms and traditions. The SEP also includes
                      provisions for culturally-appropriate consultation with Batwa persons who may be present in the project’s area
                      works, ensuring meaningful consultations considering their specific sociocultural situation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      ESS8 is relevant. The project will support civil works activities that will include land excavations works that may have
                      adverse impacts on tangible cultural heritage. Through the ESMF and ESIA/ESMP to be prepared by the borrower, the
                      project will confirm the existence of intangible and tangible cultural heritage in the rural areas of the project,
                      including sacred forests, groves, among others and propose appropriate measures to mitigate the risks related to
                      ESS8. A chance find procedure will be developed and incorporated into these instruments. It will be required to
                      provide guidance for notifying, evaluating, recording and managing previously unknown artifacts that may be
                      discovered during construction. Contractors will be required to develop a site-specific ‘’Chance find’’ procedure as
                      part of their ESMPs.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      No FI are involved in the project



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



Public Disclosure
                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No
                       N/A


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The following E&S risk management instruments are expected to be disclosed by the end of Appraisal:
                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)



                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     The following instruments are expected during project implementation (or earlier):
                     - SEA/SH Action Plan
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     - ESIAs/ESMPs (one for Bujumbura and one for Gitega) during implementation including grievance management
                     procedure prior to starting bidding processes.
                     -Biodiversity Management Plan to manage Biodiversity risks from Lake Tanganyika during the potential disruptions
                     from construction phase.
                     -Emergency Preparedness and Response Plans
                     - Resettlement Action Plans(s) - RAPs, if the need for involuntary resettlement is confirmed.
                     - Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), if the presence of communities meeting the criteria defined in ESS7 were to be
                     identified during project implementation.

                     Also, ToRs of documents for TA activities will need to be reviewed to ensure consistency with the ESF.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Susanna Smets                         Title:          Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  ssmets@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                      TTL Contact:            Feriha Mukuve Mugisha                 Job Title:      Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  fmugisha@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Susanna Smets, Feriha Mukuve Mugisha

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Christophe Ngongo Muzyumba

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Abdoul Wahabi Seini




                    Oct 12, 2025                                                                                               Page 12 of 12
