Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01285




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                          Operation ID              Operation Name
                                                                                         NP Modernization of Rani
Nepal                          SOUTH ASIA                      P507433                   Jamara Kulariya Irrigation
                                                                                         Project - Phase 3
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date        Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               03-Apr-2025                     29-May-2025               Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Ministry of Energy Water
                               Resources and Irrigation,
Ministry of Finance            Department of Agriculture,
                               Department of Water
                               Resources and Irrigation

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve irrigation services and agricultural productivity in the target areas.

Components
Irrigation improvement and development
Watershed management
Agriculture support services
Institutional Support and Project Management

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          135.00

  Total Financing                                                                                               135.00


                                                                                                                   Page 1
       The World Bank
       NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                        135.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00

 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                                        135.00
        IDA Credit                                                                                                      135.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Substantial


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




 Other Decision (as needed)



 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.       Nepal’s growth rate accelerated to 3.9 percent in Fiscal Year (FY) 24, up from 2 percent in FY23. The services
sector was a key driver, fueled by a surge in tourist arrivals that boosted activities in transportation, accommodation, and
food services sub-sectors. Paddy production, one of the three principal cereal crops in terms of area coverage, increased
by 4.3 percent, further supporting economic growth in FY24. On the demand side, high remittance inflows bolstered
private consumption while public investment remained subdued due to persistently low execution of the capital spending
budget. Growth accelerated due to a lower inflation environment. Average headline inflation moderated to 5.4 percent
in FY24, down from 7.7 percent in FY23, falling below the central bank’s ceiling of 6.5 percent. A drop in non-food and
services inflation primarily drove this decline. However, food prices remained elevated, driven by higher vegetable and
cereal inflation. The current account balance turned positive in FY24 for the first time in eight years, leading to a significant
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves enough for 13 months of imports – well above the policy threshold of 7 months.
2.      The fiscal deficit dropped sharply from 5.8 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in FY23 to 2.6 percent of
GDP in FY24 as spending contracted, while revenue stabilized at its lowest point in eight years. Government spending
decreased from 25.2 percent of GDP in FY23 to 21.9 percent in FY24, driven by a reduction in fiscal transfers to subnational

                                                                                                                            Page 2
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


government recurrent spending. In addition, lower-than-expected revenue collection contributed to reduced capital
spending, particularly in construction projects. Conversely, federal government revenue (including grants) remained
stagnant at 19.4 percent of GDP, marking an eight-year low in FY24. This stagnation reflected a decline in other revenues,
which offset the increase in income tax collection. Public debt decreased slightly to 42.7 percent of GDP in FY24 from 42.9
percent in FY23, primarily due to the lower fiscal deficit and higher growth rate. According to the latest joint IMF-World
Bank debt sustainability analysis (June 2024), Nepal remains at low risk of debt distress for both external and overall public
debt.
3.       Nepal’s growth outlook is positive, with growth expected to accelerate to 5.5 percent by FY26. The services
sector is expected to remain the main driver of growth in the medium term. Accommodation and food services are
expected to benefit from a surge in domestic and international tourism, supported by the government’s initiative to attract
1.6 million international visitors in FY25 through various tourism promotion programs. In addition, Nepal's industrial sector
is projected to grow, driven by significant expansions in electricity and construction, with the government aiming to exceed
11,700 MW of installed electricity capacity by FY29. Furthermore, the recent loosening of monetary policy by the central
bank, relaxed regulatory requirements, and eased working capital requirements are expected to bolster private-sector-
led growth.
4.        Although Nepal’s medium-term growth outlook remains generally positive, it is subject to several downside
risks. Increased vulnerabilities in the financial system, such as a rise in non-performing loans, could curtail private-sector
credit. Policy discontinuity resulting from frequent changes in political administrations, along with the short tenures of
officials, might deter investors. Delays in implementing capital expenditure could hinder infrastructure development,
negatively impacting growth. Externally, regional instability and trade disruptions could reduce tourism and domestic
demand. Natural disasters pose additional risks to sustaining welfare gains. There is also a risk of a growth slowdown in
the event of economic shock in migrant-receiving countries. However, Nepal's robust track record of maintaining
macroeconomic stability during periods of significant exogenous shocks demonstrates its growing capacity to navigate
future macroeconomic risks.
5.       Nepal’s political system is democratic and has a coalition-based government. Nepal has had four successive
coalition governments that took office since the federal and provincial elections held in November 2022. The current
coalition took over on July 14, 2024, led by the two largest parties in parliament. At the sub-national level, seven provinces
and 753 local governments manage funds, functions, and staff for which legislation, institutions, and administrative
procedures are in place as constitutionally prescribed while the task of enacting new laws and amending existing ones in
line with the 2015 constitution is still in progress.
6.      Nepal is highly vulnerable to climate change. With a climate that varies considerably both seasonally and
geographically, warming in Nepal is projected to be higher than the global average.1 Nepal ranks 10th in the world as a
country most affected by past climate hazards according to the Climate Risk Index.2 With the gradual increase in
temperature3 and increases in the occurrence of erratic rainfall patterns, Nepal is facing challenges from both rapid and
slow-onset climate-change exacerbated hazards. The former include floods, landslides, and heatwaves, while the latter
comprises mainly droughts. The proposed project, with its focus on climate-resilient irrigation and agriculture, is relevant
not only to Nepal’s growth but also to its capacity to adapt to climate change.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context



1 The annual mean temperature of Nepal is increasing at the rate of 0.28 °C per decade (DHM, 2017), which is above the global average of 0.2 °C per decade (IPCC,

2018)
2 https://germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202021_1.pdf
3 https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/




                                                                                                                                                               Page 3
            The World Bank
            NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


7.      Agriculture is central to Nepal’s economy and integral to poverty reduction. In 2022, it accounted for over 60
percent of employment and nearly 24 percent of GDP.4 But the productivity and level of income from agriculture remain
below potential because of underinvestment in critical enablers, such as irrigation services, climate-smart agriculture,
value chains, and watershed services. The result is persistent food insecurity (3.8 million people as of 2022, which
represents over 12 percent of the population)5 and rising food imports (150 percent increase since 2014)6 , while the
population has increased by only 7 percent. Climate change threatens the natural resources on which agriculture depends.
8.      The sector is characterized by conventional farming practices, a large share of small-holder farming, and farmer-
managed irrigation systems. It primarily produces food grains, livestock, and cash crops, but the share of higher-value
crops has been rising gradually. Post-harvest value-chain services such as cold storage and market access are some key
constraints to diversification. Further agricultural productivity growth requires reliable year-round irrigation, climate-
smart agricultural services, high-yielding varieties, improved fertilization, mechanization, and the assurance among
farmers that such investments are profitable.
9.       Irrigation systems in Nepal fall under four distinct categories: (1) traditional farmer-managed irrigation systems
(FMIS) developed and managed by the communities; (2) a range of small to large-scale surface systems developed with
full or partial support from the government; (3) government-developed tube-well/lift schemes; and (4) individually-owned
and operated tube wells and pumps, primarily utilizing shallow aquifers, streams, ponds, and dug wells.
10.      Nepal is rich in water resources but only uses about 10 percent of it due to inadequate infrastructure. Nepal has
a total of 3.55 million ha of arable land, of which 2.53 million ha is irrigable arable land. About 62 percent of net irrigable
land (about 1.56 million ha) is irrigated, of which less than 40 percent has access to year-round irrigation.7 Thus, Nepal’s
agriculture productivity remains highly vulnerable to seasonal climate variability in addition to climate extremes.
11.     Climate change will worsen the spatial and temporal variability of precipitation in Nepal, increasing
vulnerability.8 The projected agricultural losses by 2050 under the high-emission scenario (RCP 8.5) are three times higher
than in the low-emission scenario (RCP 4.5).9 Western provinces face severe drought risks, threatening productivity.
Often, farmers get unreliable rainfall, with both droughts and floods occurring in the same season. Thus, transforming
the agriculture sector requires expansion and upgrade of the irrigation systems to regulate supply. With reliable and
equitable irrigation systems, farmers could then focus on complementary inter-farm/farm-level investments such as
improving agricultural techniques, inputs, and cropping intensity.
12.     Rises in maximum and minimum temperatures are expected to be stronger than the rise in average
temperature. Temperature is projected to increase by 0.92-1.07 0C in the medium-term (2016-2045) and 1.3-1.80C in the
long-term (2036-2065) compared to the baseline period of 1981-2010. This will increase the risk of glacial lake outburst
floods and landslides in the short to medium run and cause significantly less dry-season streamflow in the medium to long
run once the glaciers recede—worsening the seasonal variability of water further.10 Drought frequency, duration, and
severity across Nepal increased between 1987–2017.11 The number of consecutive dry days is estimated to be over 60
days in the project area, Kailali district, which has one of the highest drought-proneness in Nepal. It is at risk of greater
seasonal and agricultural drought under climate change and is expected to face moderate to extreme droughts in the

4
    -Ministry Of Finance- Economic Survey 2021/22
5 Ministry of Health and Population, New ERA, and ICF. 2023. Nepal Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2022.
6 Derived from countries’ reporting to the United Nations Statistical Division (COMTRADE) | https://atlas.cid.harvard.edu/explore
7 Irrigation Master Plan 2019 (updated 2024)
8
    Climate Change Scenarios for Nepal for National Adaptation Plan (NAP), Ministry of Forests and Environment, Kathmandu
9 Nepal Country and Climate Development Report (CCDR, 2023)
10 Bolch, T., J. M. Shea, S. Liu, F. M. Azam, Y. Gao, S. Gruber, W. W. Immerzeel, A. Kulkarni, H. Li, A. A. Tahir, G. Zhang, and Y. Zhang. 2019. “Status and Change of the

Cryosphere in the Extended Hindu Kush Himalaya Region.” In The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment, edited by P. Wester, A. Mishra, A. Mukherji, and A. Shrestha,
209–55. Switzerland: Springer, Cham.
11 Hamal, K., Sharma, S., Pokharel, B., Shrestha, D., Talchabhadel, R., Shrestha, A. and Khadka, N., 2021. Changing pattern of drought in Nepal and associated

atmospheric circulation. Atmospheric Research, 262, p.105798.


                                                                                                                                                                       Page 4
         The World Bank
         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


winter.12 The impacts of climate change in the water sector are worsened by the lack of adequate water storage systems,
low institutional capacity for adaptation, and improper land-use planning and development works such as road
constructions that disrupt water sources and degrade watersheds.
13.     Evidence from similar regions in western Nepal shows that irrigation access is a key driver of food security.
Studies across Asia confirm that poverty levels are lower in irrigated areas compared to rain-fed zones and that the indirect
economic benefits of irrigation often surpass the direct gains in crop productivity. However, investments in irrigation are
most effective when coupled with complementary agricultural support. A study comparing the productivity gains in RJKIP
1 and 2, which have agricultural components, to two other irrigation schemes in the region without agricultural
interventions, highlights that integrating irrigation with agricultural interventions yields higher productivity gains.
Conserving forests and watersheds are crucial for maintaining a steady water supply for irrigation, and this relationship is
reciprocal; droughts and insufficient irrigation can, in turn, contribute to increased deforestation and the encroachment
of wetlands.
14.     Based on evidence from the region and beyond, there is a compelling case for financing for the proposed
project. It seeks to deliver essential infrastructure and services with significant capital requirements, ensuring equitable
access to water and agricultural services, where the market typically does not invest. It has the potential to reduce poverty
and inequality. Additionally, it seeks to mitigate environmental and climate risks, generating substantial positive
externalities for the broader economy. By improving water resource management in an agricultural area without year-
round irrigation, the project will enhance the resilience of households that lack the means to cope with rainfall variability
and that face challenges in agricultural production, value addition, and access to markets.
15.      GoN has developed a new irrigation policy and irrigation master plan in 2019 (updated 2024). The Irrigation
Policy 2023 aims for higher year-round irrigation. It has introduced significant reforms for managing Joint Management
Irrigation Systems (JMIS), where the federal Irrigation Agencies (IAs) are responsible for higher-order canals and Water
User Associations (WUAs) for lower-order distribution networks. Moreover, the policy makes a new provision for
establishing an operational linkage with the respective local governments for efficient management, operation, and
maintenance (MOM) of irrigation systems, especially enabling stronger enforcement of irrigation service fee (ISF) by
linking its collection to the local land tax collection system. The primary objective of these new policy provisions is to
increase collection rates. However, the necessary act and regulation required to institutionalize the policy have yet to be
finalized. Currently, there is significant variation in WUA capacity for MOM. Traditionally, FMISs have outperformed
agency-managed systems in terms of irrigation service delivery, fee collection rates, and overall system maintenance.
However, with increasing labor migration, many FMISs suffer from lower participation in management and rehabilitation
and need additional support from local governments and IAs.
16.      The Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project (RJKIP) is one of the GoN’s national pride projects in Sudurpaschim
province—the province with the highest rate of poverty in Nepal (34.2 percent). The Ministry of Energy, Water
Resources, and Irrigation (MoEWRI) oversees irrigation provision, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
Development (MoALD) undertakes on-farm interventions and agricultural support services. Both ministries coordinated
to implement the RJKIP. The Bank supported both Phase 1 (2012-2017) and Phase 2 (2018-2025) of RJKIP, modernizing
the irrigation infrastructure on 14,300 hectares, building capacity of WUAs, enhancing flood and erosion control, providing
agricultural support services and improving rural roads and bridges for better connectivity and market access. The Bank’s
support to RJKIP Phase 1 and 2 has benefited over 157,000 people. RJKIP Phase 3 will scale up the impact, expanding year-
round irrigation to another 17,500 hectares, with complementary agricultural and watershed interventions, reaching an
additional 160,000 people.



12 GoN, 2021. Vulnerability and risk assessment and identifying adaptation options: summary for policy makers. MoFE, Government of Nepal.




                                                                                                                                            Page 5
          The World Bank
          NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
 To improve irrigation services and agricultural productivity in the target areas.


   Key Results

     •     Farmland benefiting from year-round irrigation services – 17,500 ha
     •     People benefiting from increased agricultural production (65,000)13
     •     People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience – 160,000 (CSC indicator)

   D. Project Description


17.     The proposed project is phase 3 of the IDA-supported RJKIP. Phase 1 closed in 2017, and phase 2 is scheduled
to close on July 15, 2025. Phase 1 focused on the modernization of the higher-order irrigation infrastructure (feeder and
secondary canals, main hydraulic structures, and related flood protection), enhancement of the capacity of WUAs for
MOM, and preparation and initiation of an agricultural development program. Phase 2 focused on (i) modernization of
the lower-order irrigation systems of RJKIP; (ii) command area protection (flood and erosion control and environment
protection); (iii) rural infrastructure improvement, including roads and bridges; (iv) continuation of the WUA support
program; and (v) implementation of a comprehensive agricultural improvement program.
18.     RJKIP 3 will build on these achievements, expand access to irrigation services, increase farm productivity,
enhance climate resilience, and boost rural incomes in Kailali district, Sudurpaschim Province. The completion of the
water intake and the main canal has laid the groundwork for constructing the distribution network westward, along with
complementary investments in agriculture. The project scope will thus include the extension of the feeder canal and the
command area development, the continuation of the WUA support program, and the implementation of an agricultural
improvement program. It will also incorporate measures for resilience, such as building small storage facilities and
augmentation of existing small water bodies to reduce seasonal variability in water balance. Phase 3 is aligned with Nepal’s
Green Resilience and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach to ensure the sustainability and resilience of irrigation
schemes and livelihoods. The Phase 3 activities will make the targeted area residents more resilient to climate change–
exacerbated floods, landslides, and droughts, thereby contributing to their water and food security as well as their
wellbeing.
19.     This project will benefit 160,000 people with improved irrigation and agricultural services as well as watershed
management. These include the farming population of the Pathariya regions in Kailali district in the Far Western Province
across five palikas: three at the township levels and two at the village level.14 Most of the beneficiaries belong to the
indigenous Tharu community (42 percent). The rural poverty rate in Sudurpaschim province is 40.21 percent, 10
percentage points higher than the urban poverty rate in the province and 15 percentage points higher than the national
rural poverty rate.15 Rural poverty rates in the country tend to be the highest among the landless and decrease with the

13 Increased agricultural production is defined as increased production resulting from project interventions including but not limited to agriculture

assets, improved technologies and services, finance etc. Interventions are aimed at households. Total beneficiaries are calculated assuming average
household size of 4.5.
14 Palikas are the local governments (urban or rural municipalities). At the township level: all wards in Bhajani, 5 wards in Ghodaghodi, 1 ward in Lamki Chuwa. At the

village level, all wards in Joshipur and Bardagoriya palikas.
15 Nepal Living Standards Survey IV 2022-23




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 6
          The World Bank
          NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


size of landholding. Although over 97 percent of the farmers in Kailai own their land, 72 percent own 1 ha or less and only
5 percent own 2 ha or more.16 About 12 percent of the farmers own less than a tenth of a hectare.

20.       The project will have four components: (i) Irrigation improvement and development, (ii) Watershed Management,
(iii) Agriculture support services, and iv) Institutional Support and Project Management.

21.      Component 1: Irrigation improvement and development (US$90 million): This component aims to expand and
improve the irrigation network across approximately 17,500 ha of existing agricultural land in Pathariya, where farmers
do not have access to year-round irrigation and the availability of water is expected to be further exacerbated by climate-
induced changes in rainfall patterns and an increased likelihood of droughts. The component will distribute part of the
existing intake discharge of 80 m³/s drawn at Chisapani from Karnali River. The main canal bifurcates to supply the allotted
40 m³/s to the RJK area and the remaining 40 m³/s to Lamki and Pathariya. From that point, the GoN has completed the
construction of the Lamki feeder canal and is in the process of developing distribution networks in its command area.
However, the feeder canal and distribution networks in the Pathariya area (17,500 ha) have yet to be developed, which
this project aims to complete. These investments will enable farmers in that region to access their designated canal water
supply throughout the year and increase cropping intensity, thereby enhancing the resilience of beneficiaries to climate
shocks and contributing to climate adaptation. The component will extend the feeder canal by 13km and carry out
command area development activities, which include the construction of secondary, sub-secondary, and tertiary canals.
WUAs are responsible for works at the watercourse level. GoN will finance the cost required for tree clearance, land
acquisition, or other expenses that IDA does not fund.


22.      This component will finance (i) supporting the design, construction, rehabilitation and/or modernization of
irrigation and drainage infrastructure, including canals and related hydraulic structures, such as weirs, siphons, cross
regulators, and head regulators, considering current and projected climate change impacts17; (ii) improving, upgrading,
and maintaining rural service roads and construction of culverts with due consideration to climate and disaster risks which
will allow all-weather transport and market access to beneficiaries; (iii) supporting new construction or renovation of canal
operator houses. The implementation of each of these activities will include an Environment and Social Management Plan
(ESMP) and Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP). All the major irrigation structures shall be designed to withstand 100-year
return period floods. The design of internal drainage systems, and additional structures or measures will be designed as
per site conditions to protect the irrigation infrastructures and command area against flooding and erosion. Overall, this
component focuses on improving the irrigation network to ensure climate-resilient, reliable, and equitable water access
all year round, water drainage management and protection measures in the command area (to increase flood and
landslide resilience), mitigation of environmental and social impacts during construction, and operation, improved market
linkage for agricultural production, and efficient canal operation services. With year-round irrigation, farmers will be able
to achieve a cropping intensity of around 226 percent when complemented with intensified agricultural services, thereby
significantly increasing their resilience to climate change–exacerbated droughts.18
23.      Component 2: Watershed management (US$10 million): This component will finance various watershed
management activities to prevent soil erosion and waterlogging, conserve watershed areas, and mitigate the impact of
floods and droughts on agricultural productivity at the command area level. The project area has about two hundred
natural lakes and wetlands that community user groups have been using for irrigation, tourism, and fisheries, which need
to be improved and rehabilitated. The component will support the rehabilitation and augmentation of some of these

16 Based on the 2019 feasibility study (Main Report Vol I)

17
     This activity will comprise about 95 percent of the component budget.
18 From the DoWRI feasibility study of the Pathariya RJKIP Phase 3



                                                                                                                        Page 7
       The World Bank
       NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


existing small-sized multipurpose lakes that capture monsoon precipitation to provide supplementary irrigation water to
the Pathariya command area in addition to the surface water provided through component 1, thus increasing resilience
to droughts. This component will also include technical experts' services for assessing the proposed designs, the required
studies, and the dam safety standards and guidelines during the design and implementation. Given the seasonal variability
in water availability, it is crucial to develop sustainable water storage solutions that align with the principles of watershed
management, which are essential for the long-term sustainability of irrigation systems and the protection of agricultural
command areas against climate change risks. This component will finance the following activities: i) supporting riverbank
protection of the rivers within the project areas; ii) supporting soil conservation activities within the catchment areas of
water storage, such as landslide and gully control, check dams, and afforestation; and iii) supporting the augmentation
and rehabilitation of storage systems for sustainable water storage systems to mitigate the seasonal variability in
precipitation. All three activities will reduce the flood and erosion risks of the targeted command areas as well as the risk
of droughts, thereby increasing the resilience of farmers.
24.      Component 3: Agriculture support services (US$10 million): This component will serve the command areas
covered by the RJK irrigation system, including the area from RJKIP Phases 1 & 2, and Pathariya. The objective of this
component is to enhance the productivity, capacity, and resilience of the farmers to floods and droughts through value
addition, postproduction support, market access, and adoption of modern technologies on a demand-driven basis. Based
on the implementation experience in Phase 2, activities will include (i) strengthening and mobilization of local
cooperatives, adoption of modern technology, promoting mechanization, promotion of climate-smart agricultural (CSA)
practices, nursery establishment, commercial farming targeting high-value crops, (ii) providing of grants and (iii) providing
postproduction support for storage, processing and marketing of targeted agricultural produce; (iv).providing training and
capacity building, including study tours . Postproduction support will allow the beneficiaries to safely store their produce
and mitigate the potential impact of climate change-induced risks such as extreme rainfall, enhancing their climate
resilience. As in Phase 2, the project will provide equal opportunity for women and youth to take-up demand-based
agricultural services. High priority will be given to crops such as spring rice, wheat, potato, maize, and vegetables, which
will contribute to increased cropping intensity and food security. The component will promote climate-smart agricultural
(CSA) practices such as integrated farming, on-farm water resource management, laser-land leveling, and precision
planting which increase water-use efficiency and enhance climate adaptation. Grants will be provided to eligible farmers
from the project command area for that will contribute to PDO. Implementation modalities, eligibility criteria, and cost-
sharing arrangements for these demand-driven activities will be detailed in the project implementation manual (PIM).
25.     Component 4: Institutional Support and Project Management (US$10 million): This component will finance the
capacity building and institutional strengthening of WUAs in the project area and DoWRI, as well as project management
support and capacity building of the Project Implementation Office (PIO). The component will have two sub-components:
   a. Sub-component 4.1- Institutional Support and Capacity Building of WUAs (US$3 million): This sub-component will
      include capacity-building programs for WUAs to strengthen their ability to assume the responsibility for MOM of
      improved and modernized irrigation, storage systems and cold storage. This will require greater skills beyond the
      current capacity of WUAs. Currently, they are capable of mobilizing members to carry out channel excavation and
      desilting works, but the new and modernized system requires more technical and organizational skills. The sub-
      component will finance the following activities:
       i. Support the preparation and institutionalization of the MOM plans for the sustainable management of
          modernized irrigation systems in Pathariya. The MOM plan will include (a) the canal operation and asset
          management plans, (b) the resources management strategy and related plan for financial sustainability, and (c)
          devise the roles and responsibilities of WUA, local government, and irrigation agency for the sustainable
          management of the modernized irrigation systems. A federated WUA, representing all the WUAs in Pathariya,
          will be formed and strengthened under a joint management model. For the Phase 1 and Phase 2 areas where


                                                                                                                          Page 8
       The World Bank
       NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


          MOM plans have already been prepared, this sub-component will strengthen its implementation and
          institutionalization.
      ii. Providing training programs and knowledge exchange for PIO and WUAs, for MOM implementation,
          management and operational skills such as resources management (fee setting and collection, improved record
          and account management), and planning and decision-making, including for climate adaptation and resilience,
          with improved and inclusive gender and citizen participation. The training programs will embed aspects to
          ensure gender-responsive WUAs, with at least one-third representation of female landholders in WUA executive
          committee positions.
     iii. Supporting annual assessments to measure service delivery performance and governance of WUAs where
          irrigation schemes have been completed.
     iv. Constructing or renovating of WUA offices and the acquisition of equipment for office management and MOM.
      v. Developing a geo-enabled digital Management Information System (MIS), andinstitutional strengthening and
         capacity building on MIS, including for DoWRI.
     vi. Providing design guides, manuals and capacity building on watershed management, storage management, and
         dam safety.
   b. Subcomponent 4.2 Project Management (US$7 million): This sub-component includes (i) consulting services for
      project survey, engineering design, and construction supervision including an external E&S supervision firm (ii)
      consulting services and institutional strengthening for implementation of Environmental and Social Commitment
      Plan(ESCP) and environment and social (E&S) monitoring and management and the establishment of a Grievance
      Redress Mechanism (iii) capacity building on procurement and financial management; and (iii) development and
      preparation of future investment projects in the sector and related E&S studies.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


26.       The environmental risk is classified as substantial based on the potential impacts identified, the scale, and the
nature of the activities involved. Key risks associated with developing irrigation schemes and water storage facilities
include deforestation, habitat fragmentation, biodiversity loss, pollution, and occupational health and safety (OHS)
concerns. Specifically, the project involves the clear felling of 3,900 trees and the construction of irrigation canals and
reservoirs near wildlife habitats, which may disrupt migratory routes and local biodiversity. Additionally, the construction
and operation of irrigation systems and water storages may lead to issues such as siltation and flooding. The water storage
facilities also present risks associated with dam safety. During the construction phase, significant civil works will be
involved, including the construction and rehabilitation of canals, distribution networks, and water storage facilities. Key
environmental risks and impacts during this phase include air and noise pollution, water contamination, soil erosion, waste
generation, and biodiversity disruption. The project will also require substantial resource materials, adding to the
environmental impact. The project poses risks to the health and safety of workers and nearby communities during both

                                                                                                                        Page 9
       The World Bank
       NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


construction and operation phases. During the operation phase, the project will continue to pose environmental risks,
although these are generally more manageable. Key risks and impacts include water resource depletion, water quality
issues, flooding, dam safety, biodiversity disruption, and community health and safety concerns. The operation of
irrigation systems may lead to overexploitation affecting water availability. Canals can disrupt wildlife migration and serve
as death traps for animals seeking water. The operation of these facilities poses ongoing risks to the health and safety of
workers and nearby communities.
27.      The social risks are considered substantial due to potential impacts from the construction of the main canal
extension and water reservoirs. A government-approved EIA for Component 1 highlights potential physical displacement
and impacts on private, agricultural, and forest lands. A subsequent rapid social screening informed technically feasible
modifications to the canal alignment with the existing road, significantly reducing the need for physical relocation from
163 houses to just 15 household structures scattered over four locations. This adjustment further avoids impacts on
religious sites and minimizes forest impacts. Of the 15 affected households, 3 Indigenous Peoples (IP) households will be
impacted, with only 1 requiring relocation. The project will ensure that the relocation, especially of the IP households,
utilizes available replacement land in the vicinity to avoid disrupting their current livelihood sources and social networks.
The new alignment will primarily impact agricultural lands and fields of 242 households, involving about 288 hectares of
land, mostly through partial land acquisition. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP)
will be prepared, informed by a detailed social assessment. The RAP will detail the categories of affected persons and the
extent of their losses. The rapid social screening indicated that most households, including IPs, have individual
registered/titled land holdings. Vulnerable groups, including Dalits and landless farmers, may hold non-titled use rights to
public land and are likely to be further marginalized if significant portions are affected. The project will explore the
availability of in-situ alternative lands for these farmers to avoid relocation from the command area. Due to the
predominance of the Tharu ethnic group in the project area, Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 7 is relevant, and
the social assessment will also inform the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). The project is expected to avoid
culturally significant areas and adverse relocation of IPs away from traditional lands. Phase II social assessments showed
no differentiated adverse impact or exclusion of IP groups in the governance structure of the irrigation systems. Instead,
they represent over 71% of Water User Association (WUA) functionaries. The project Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
outlines the strategy for culturally sensitive consultation with affected IPs and their representatives. No land acquisition
is envisaged for Components 2 and 3. The reservoirs under Component 2 are largely used for irrigation, fish farming, and
recreation, with no evidence of disputes among users. The project will implement a negative list for selecting water
reservoir locations to minimize impacts on communities, cultural heritage, and critical habitats, supporting only dams with
low downstream consequences. Downstream impacts in the event of dam failure will be addressed as part of the proposed
dam safety measures led by a dam safety expert, enhancing training among local authorities, federal agencies, and
communities. Additional social risks include labor influx, occupational and community health and safety risks, SEA/SH, and
gaps in community engagement. To address these risks, a SEP and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) have been
prepared and disclosed before appraisal. A supplementary social assessment will be prepared as an addedum to the
national EIA. A RAP, including a Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP) will be prepared and disclosed before carrying out any
sub-projects that require displacement, ensuring that the RAP is implemented and compensation fully provided before
taking possession of the site.. An IPP and a SEA/SH action plan will be prepared post-appraisal, with the timeframe
specified in the project Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


 E. Implementation Arrangements

28.   The project will continue the existing implementation arrangements from Phase 2, with The Project
Implementation Office (PIO) under the Department of Water Resources and Irrigation (DoWRI) and the Agriculture
Component Implementation Unit (ACIU) under the Department of Agriculture (DoA). The DoWRI will be responsible for

                                                                                                                        Page 10
       The World Bank
       NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


implementing the project. The Deputy Director General (DDG) of the Multipurpose and Irrigation Division will be the
project focal person at the DoWRI, and the DDG of the Planning, Monitoring, and Management Division will be the focal
person at the DoA. The PIO will be the primary implementing agency for components 1,2 and 4. The ACIU will be the co-
implementing agency for component 3. The PIO and ACIU will have separate financial arrangements. However, both
parties will be working under the same umbrella of PIO’s mandate and accountability. The Project Steering Committee
(PSC), formed under RJKIP 2 and chaired by the Secretary of MoEWRI, will continue to provide overall policy guidance and
ensure coordination between the related agencies to support the project. The PSC comprises the senior management
staff of the Ministry of Finance (MoF), MoALD, Ministry of Forest and Environment, the National Planning Commission,
DoWRI, DoA, PIO and ACIU.
29.       DoWRI will depute staff to the PIO, including a Class I level Project Director (PD), a deputy Project Director (DPD),
and staff for engineering, procurement, financial management (FM), environmental and social (E&S), monitoring and
evaluation (M&E), and the Association Organizer (AO). The AO will be responsible for liaising with WUAs to implement the
institutional strengthening and capacity development program. For FM, the PIO shall be staffed by the Under Secretary
(Accounts), Accounts Officer, and FM Consultant. The PIO will also be supported by teams of consultants for survey design
and construction supervision. A liaison office in DoWRI will continue to facilitate approval processes, assist with preparing
annual work plans, and communicate with other agencies, as needed, on behalf of the PIO.
30.     A Class II level Officer will head the ACIU as the coordinator. Agriculture officers will support the coordinator along
with the Junior Technicians and Junior Technical Assistants. To continue post-irrigation support services in the Rani,
Jamara, and Kulariya in RJKIP2 command areas, a liaison unit will be maintained in Tikapur with the required numbers of
technical staff. ACIU will maintain an Accounts Officer and an experienced FM Consultant. FM Consultant in ACIU is crucial
to support the ACIU in managing their full responsibility for FM.
31.     The PIO and ACIU will source specialists from the market on full/intermittent basis, as per their needs. They will
also be equipped with the required logistics to carry out field activities and monitoring visits.
32.     As in the previous phases, the PIO includes a Social, Environmental, and Institutional Development Unit (SEIDU).
The staffing comprises Senior and Junior Sociologists, along with individual consultants such as a Biodiversity expert, an
environmental expert, and an independent consultant for third-party monitoring, some of whom support project
implementation on an intermittent basis. Frequent changes in E&S officers at the PIO and delays in appointing
replacements, along with poor contract management, affected E&S performance at the contractor level. Both the
supervision consultant and contractor experienced frequent resignations of E&S staff. The Bank has since worked with the
PIO to improve E&S performance. Both units are well-staffed and have gained significant project management experience
from RJKIP 1 and 2. The Bank will provide additional training to enhance ESF skills. E&S consultants that will be supporting
PIO and ACIU should be experienced and engaged on a full-time basis.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank




                                                                                                                         Page 11
     The World Bank
     NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)


 Rubika Shrestha
 Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 Maha Ahmed
 Senior Agriculture Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance
 The Secretary
 Ministry of Finance
 fso@mof.gov.np

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Energy Water Resources and Irrigation
 The Secretary
 Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
 moewrai555@gmail.com

 Department of Agriculture
 Director General
 Department of Agriculture
 doa.agri2014@gmail.com

 Department of Water Resources and Irrigation
 Director General
 Department of Water Resources and Irrigation
 dg_pasection@dwri.gov.np

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Rubika Shrestha, Maha Ahmed

Approved By


                                                                                       Page 12
     The World Bank
     NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                        Preeti Arora                           01-Apr-2025




                                                                                              Page 13
