Public Disclosure Authorized




                                    Government of Sierra Leone



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  Ministry of Water Resources and
                                             Sanitation




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH
                                Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                                 STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        PLAN (SEP)



                                            April 14, 2025


                                                  0
                                                          Table of Contents
   Acronyms .................................................................................................................................... 2
   1.        Introduction/Project Description ........................................................................................ 3
   2.        Objective/Description of SEP ............................................................................................ 7
   3.        Stakeholder Identification and Analysis per Project component........................................ 7
   4.        Stakeholder Engagement Program ..................................................................................... 8
   4.1.          Consultations undertaken during project preparation and e&s instruments development
                 8
4.1.1..          Stakeholder Consultation: Project Preparation phase, October 2024 ............................ 8
4.1.2.           Key feedback from the workshop .................................................................................. 9
   4.2.          Bank Task Team Consultations (Successive Project Preparation Missions) ................. 9
4.3.         Stakeholder Consultation during E&S Instruments Preparation, April 2025 ..................... 9
        4.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for
        stakeholder engagement...................................................................................................... 11
        4.3. Proposed strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups ........................... 13
   6.        Resources and responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement ..................... 14
        5.1. Implementation Arrangements and Resources .......................................................... 14
        5.2. Budget for SEP Implementation ................................................................................. 14
   7.        Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)............................................................................ 15
        6.1. Description of the Project GRM .................................................................................. 15
   8.        Monitoring and Reporting ................................................................................................ 18
        7.1. Summary of how SEP will be monitored and reported upon (including indicators)
        ............................................................................................................................................... 18
        7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups ........................................................................ 19
   Annexes ..................................................................................................................................... 20

List of Tables
Table 1: SEP Summary Table ....................................................................................................... 12
Table 2: SEP Budget Summary ..................................................................................................... 14
Table 3: Illustrative Table on the GRM Steps ............................................................................... 16




                                                                           1
Acronyms
CSO        Civil Society Organization
EPASL      Environmental Protection Agency Sierra Leone
ESF        Environmental and Social Framework
ESCP       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
EWRC       Electricity and Water Regulatory Commission
E&S        Environmental and Social
FCC        Freetown City Council
FGD        Focus Group Discussion
FSTP       Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant
GBV        Gender Based Violence
GoSL       Government of Sierra Leone
GRC        Grievance Redress Committee
GRM        Grievance Redress Mechanism
IEC        Information, Education and Communication
IWRM       Integrated Water Resources Management
GVWC       Guma Valley Water Company
LMP        Labor Management Procedures
MECC       Ministry of Environment and Climate Change
MPA        Multi-Phase Approach
MoF        Ministry of Finance
MWRS       Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation
NGO        Non-Governmental Organization
PAPs       Project Affected Persons
PPP        Public-Private Partnerships
NWRMA      National Water Resources Management Agency
RF         Resettlement Framework
RP         Resettlement Plan
SALWACO    Sierra Leone Water Company
SEA/SH     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual Harassment
SEP        Stakeholder Engagement Plan
WASH       Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene
WASHIT     Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project Implementation Team
WRM        Water Resources Management
WARDC      Western Area Rural District Council




                                          2
1. Introduction/Project Description

The Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588) (WASH
Project or the Project) will support Sierra Leone’s sustainable Water Resources Management
(WRM) and long-term inclusive Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) program
prioritizing interventions to improve water and sanitation services and water sector performance,
while at the same time undertaking protection of the water resources in the country. The proposed
Project aims at prioritizing urban water supply services improvement and sanitation development.
It will focus on the Western Area, which is composed of the Freetown City Council (FCC) and the
Western Area Rural District Council (WARDC). The Project has a strong focus on the institutional
strengthening and capacity building of the Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation (MWRS),
including its WASH Project Implementation Team (WASHIT), all sector institutions as well as
the FCC and WARDC. It is expected to strengthen the knowledge, management, and monitoring
capacity of efficient and resilient water supply service delivery; improve fecal sludge management;
and develop strategic studies to support the Country’s long-term engagement for inclusive,
affordable, sustainable, and resilient WASH services.

The Project is the first phase of a Multi-Phase Approach (MPA) aiming at enhancing water
resources mobilization and management; improving the operational performance of water supply
services providers, and increasing access to WASH services in Sierra Leone.
The Project is designed to increase access to water supply and sanitation services, improve the
operational performance of water service providers, and enhance water resources management in
Sierra Leone. Its components are mutually reinforcing, creating a platform for both immediate
service improvements and long‐term capacity building that will drive water security. The proposed
Project is structured in six components:
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$ 10 million). This component
will be implemented by the MWRS. Activities supported by this component will include technical
assistance, equipment and consulting services.
Subcomponent 1.1: Policy, Institutions, Regulation Strengthening (US$2.2 million) will: (i)
review, complete and consolidate existing sector policies and regulations including the draft 2021
WASH Policy; (ii) develop sanitation and Fecal Sludge Management (FSM) guidelines and design
standards for energy-efficient and climate-smart WASH systems; (iii) support the MWRS in
operationalizing its absorption of sanitation mandate by developing its organizational structure,
responsibility-sharing arrangements and essential management systems and tools to be able to
deliver on its mandates; (iv) logistical support to strengthen routine monitoring and sector data
collection and consolidate sector data into a national monitoring and evaluation platform; (v)
strengthen the role of the MWRS in coordinating WASH sector interventions across national and
local governments; and (vi) establish a Donor coordination group involving all development
partners and NGOs involved in the sector to ensure information sharing, promote coordinated
approaches and ensure alignment with the government’s priorities. (vii) develop sanitation and
FSM guidelines and design standards for energy-efficient and climate-smart WASH systems.
Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity Building and Knowledge Development (US$2.0 million) will assess
the institutional and staff capacity building needs of MWRS, NWRMA, GVWC, SALWACO,
EWRC, FCC and WARDC. It will develop a comprehensive institutional and staff capacity
building plan and design adapted delivery mechanisms for each institution and agency involved.
This sub-component will include equipping one or more existing training centers and develop
training material and curriculum for entry level staff, vocational and on-the-job trainings for

                                                3
existing personnel and leadership and evidence-based decision-making course for executives and
senior officials. It will also seek to develop or strengthen partnerships with academic institutions
to design curriculum for a master’s degree programs on water management with the university of
Sierra Leone, to train future water professionals, including on climate change adaptation in the
water sector. This component will also develop a web-based system consolidating knowledge
documents and sector data. Parts of the capacity building activities may be inserted in PPPs for
WASH service improvement and extension.
Subcomponent 1.3: Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (US$1.6 million). This sub-
component will strengthen the national water quality monitoring and surveillance system. The
MWRS will provide laboratory equipment to allow regular water quality measurements to detect
pollutants from industrial or domestic activities.
Subcomponent 1.4: Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) for WASH Service Delivery (US$1.2
million) will review policies and regulations and advise on PPP options to leverage private sector
value addition to improve the quality-of-service delivery and to extend access to WASH services
in Sierra Leone.
Subcomponent 1.5: Construct a WASH Administrative Center (US$3.0 million) will procure and
construct a WASH Administrative Center to host the MWRS, NWRMA and EWRC, as the
previous MWRS building burnt down in 2023. This Administrative Center will seek to showcase
good water and wastewater management and energy efficiency (e.g. rainwater harvesting for toilets
and watering green areas), so it can act as a demonstration and learning site. Component 1 will
enhance the country’s resilience to climate change–exacerbated risks such as floods, droughts,
extreme heat, and landslides by improving water governance, capacity building and strengthening
relevant government institutions. Improved governance will contribute to watersheds and
ecosystems preservation, and higher water quality.
Component 2: Water Resources Management Improvement (US$7 million). This component will
be managed by the NWRMA, with support and oversight by the MWRS. It will support activities
to improve water resources planning and mobilization and to protect the Western Area Peninsula
National Park—the only water resource for the Western Area. This will be done through technical
assistance and consultants services, based on a collaborative and consultative approach. This
component will also promote data-driven decision-making, stronger regulation, and community
engagement—key pillars in improving WRM in Sierra Leone.
Subcomponent 2.1: National Water Resources Master Plan and Sector Knowledge Enhancement
(US$5 million). Activities under this subcomponent will develop a national Water Resources
Master Plan. The process will include updating the existing national inventory of ground- and
surface water abstraction points in Sierra Leone, informing the hydrological and hydrogeological
characteristics, determining the water balance in the country’s various River Basins, estimating the
water resources and groundwater potential of each River basin, and mapping and documenting land
and water use patterns of major River Basins. The masterplan will also examine concrete measures
to enforce the implementation of existing WRM Regulations, in particular the annual ‘licensing to
operate’ for all drilling companies operating in Sierra Leone, and the need to obtain a permit and
to register any new borehole into the national inventory. This activity is a prerequisite to securing
the water resources necessary for the subsequent phases of the Program.
Subcomponent 2.2: Raising awareness, catchment protection and rejuvenation need (US$2
million). This subcomponent will include three main activities. First erecting billboards on the
greenbelt boundary to inform that any activity beyond that point is encroaching and may be liable

                                                 4
to prosecution. Second erecting physical fences to protect the catchment of selected water supply
weirs either in the buffer zone outside the greenbelt or within it and which are under increasing
encroachment pressure, for instance the Hasting Police Training Center weir located in the buffer
zone. Third, to prepare a map suggesting catchment restorative nature-based solutions (e.g.,
afforestation, soil conservation) to be implemented to restore the forest cover of the greenbelt in
places where it has been degraded. These activities will be implemented through a collaboration
between MWRS, NWRMA and GVWC as well as with the MoECC, the National Protected Area
Authority and NGOs active in this field such as Catholic Relief Services. By enhancing water
resources planning, monitoring, and protection, Component 2 will ensure long-term water security.
In addition, it will improve resilience to floods—by reducing the potential impact of floods
(because water will be less contaminated) and droughts, as enough clean water will become
available when and where needed, and water supply service disruptions will be significantly
reduced.
Component 3: Priority Investments in Urban Water Supply (US$30 million). This component will
be implemented by GVWC, with oversight by the MWRS. It will finance works, goods and
consultants’ services aiming at improving GVWC’s operational efficiency, water supply service
delivery in Greater Freetown and cost recovery and creditworthiness. It will complement an
ongoing project of AfDB and other development partners to extend access to safely managed water
supply in GVWC’s service area.
Subcomponent 3.1: Strengthening GVWC management tools and improving service efficiency
(US$11.8 million). This subcomponent focuses on updating GVWC’s commercial processes,
improving customer engagement, and expanding metering programs to reduce commercial losses
and boost revenue. This will be achieved by: (i) upgrading the existing Engineering Design And
Management Systems (EDAMS) software to address key business challenges including asset
management, commercial losses and energy efficiency and providing training for GVWC staff; (ii)
procuring about 42,000 smart domestic meters; (iii) implementing parallel PPPs to install smart
domestic meters to generalize metering in GVWC’s service area, thereby reducing commercial
losses and to establish NRW baseline levels to be able to monitor and reduce physical losses (see
subcomponent 3.2); (iv) update customer database and GIS mapping in the process to maximize
revenue generation, which is essential for better demand management as well as increasing cost
recovery and profitability; (v) purchase of water bowser trucks to improve the supply of water to
water kiosks located in low-income communities in the Western Area currently using unsafe water
sources, thereby increasing coverage and lowering vulnerability to water borne diseases; and (vi)
financing feasibility studies, technical designs and tender documents for selected dams and priority
investments, all or part of which could be implemented in phase 2 and/or 3 of the MPA, or through
parallel financing.
Subcomponent 3.2 Reducing NRW and Upgrading Key Infrastructure (US$18.2 million). This
subcomponent will improve service delivery through the construction or rehabilitation of selected
critical infrastructure to increase the reliability of water service delivery, and through leak detection
and the preparation of performance-based PPPs for NRW reduction. Activities could include: (i)
replacement of pipes subject to frequent breakages; (ii) increasing raw water storage reservoir
capacity to increase the reliability of supply in selected areas; (iii) increasing the treatment capacity
and rehabilitating selected treated water service reservoirs and associated multistage-pumping
systems; (iv) expand micro-hydropower generation at the Guma Water Treatment Plant (WTP) and
inject 270kW into the national grid to offset electricity consumption in other places; (v) study the
potential of micro-hydropower generation at charge breaking facilities, of energy efficiency across
GVWC’s distribution network and of solar power generation on water reservoirs at the existing

                                                   5
Guma and Kongo dams and at the open-air Babadorie circular water storage reservoir; (vi)
preparing four parallel performance-based PPPs for NRW reduction, to create an emulation
between the private sector firms for greater and faster impact; (vii) implementing a pilot of network
zoning and District Metering for NRW reduction in a small area of Freetown; (viii) strengthening
active leakage management capacity and on-the job training to reduce NRW, which conserve water
and reduce emissions; and (ix) financing construction supervision of investments to ensure
technical soundness and value for money. By undertaking these strategic investments—ranging
from commercial process improvements and metering to infrastructure upgrades and feasibility
studies—Component 3 will significantly reduce water losses, increase revenue, and improve
overall service reliability, notably in low-income areas, thus making these communities more
resilient to climate change–aggravated droughts. The improved water supply infrastructure is also
less likely to become damaged during extreme precipitation or flooding.
Component 4: Urban Sanitation Service Delivery Improvement (US$10 million). This component
will finance works, goods and consultants’ services.
Subcomponent 4.1: Improving Sanitation in the Freetown City Council Area (US$4.8 million).
This subcomponent will be implemented by the FCC, in partnership with the Sanitation Directorate
of the MWRS. It will: (i) upgrade the existing Kingtom FSTP; (ii) build at least a second FSTP in
Freetown, using a climate-efficient technology such as biogas digestion combined with biochar
generation, which can be used for cooking instead of wood or charcoal, as a way to reduce the
pressure on the Western Area forest cover and National Park; (iii) increase access to improved
sanitation in critical points of Freetown, through the construction of about 100 improved public
toilet facilities with handwashing in selected schools, hospitals/health centers without toilets and
possibly in a few market places, bus stations and parks or recreational areas where people gather
in their free time.
Subcomponent 4.2: Improving Sanitation in the WARDC Area (US$3.7 million). This
subcomponent will be implemented by WARDC, in partnership with the Sanitation Directorate of
the MWRS. It will : (i) build at least one FSTP in the WARDC area, using a climate-efficient
technology such as biogas digestion combined with biochar generation, which can be used for
cooking instead of wood or charcoal, which increases the pressure on the Western Area National
Park forest; (ii) increase access to improved sanitation in critical points of the WARDC area,
through the construction of about 100 improved public toilet facilities with handwashing in selected
schools, hospitals/health centers, market places, bus stations and public institutions.
Subcomponent 4.3: Preparing Nationwide Sanitation Development Campaign (US$1.5 million).
This subcomponent will be implemented by the Sanitation Directorate of the MWRS. It will be
managed by the Sanitation Directorate of the MWRS. It will: (i) develop a City Wide Inclusive
Sanitation (CWIS) plan to structure the sludge management value chain for the safe collection,
transport and treatment of fecal sludge collected from households’ domestic and public toilet
facilities in the Western Area ; and (ii) prepare a national behavior change campaign called “Clean
Salone” to make Sierra Leone Open-Defecation Free. These activities will enhance resilience to
climate change by improving public health outcomes through reduced open defecation, reduced
risk of fecal contamination and pollution of water sources, reduced fugitive GHG emissions from
open latrines and/or septic tanks, as well as gains from resource efficiency and re-use of bio-
digested by-products. Moreover, less contamination of surface and groundwater will reduce the
potential impact of floods, which will carry less pollutants.
Component 5: Project Management (US$3 million). This component will finance fiduciary,
safeguards, and technical expenditures related to Project implementation, including operations

                                                 6
costs of the WASHIT, which will be set up within MWRS and will work in close partnership with
other implementing agencies. This component will fiduciary, safeguards, and technical
expenditures It will also finance a consultants and/or technical assistance support to the WASHIT,
matching Ministry and agencies’ staff with consultants to ensure on-the-job training for knowledge
transfer and capacity building. It may also finance limited equipment.

Component 6: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$0 million). Following an
eligible crisis or emergency, the recipient may request the World Bank to reallocate Project funds
to support emergency response and reconstruction consistent with the PDO. This component
would draw from uncommitted grant resources under Project components and will reallocate them
to cover emergency response.

The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for this Project is designed to enable an effective
platform for productive interaction between the Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) and the
potentially affected parties and persons as well as institutions with interest in the implementation
and outcomes of the Project. It identifies the major stakeholders affected by the Project either
directly or indirectly (including vulnerable and marginalized groups) as well as those with other
interests that could influence decisions about the Project. The SEP is also prepared to demonstrate
the GoSL’s commitment to best practices in project management and compliance with the World
Bank’s corporate requirements on citizen and stakeholder engagement and information disclosure.
The Project is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF).
2. Objective/Description of SEP
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including
public information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP
outlines the ways in which the Project will communicate with stakeholders and includes a
mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about
activities related to the Project. The SEP specifically emphasizes methods to engage groups
considered most vulnerable and that are at risk of being left out of Project benefits.

3. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis per Project component
The Project’s SEP is informed by a set of principles which define its core values underpinning
engagement with identified stakeholders. Common principles based on “International Best
Practice” include: a) Demonstrated commitment on the need to identify, understand, and engage
stakeholders meaningfully; b) Integrity, mutual respect, and trust in the stakeholder engagement
process; c) Respecting the rights, cultural beliefs, values and interests of stakeholders and affected
communities; d) Transparency in responding to community concerns in a timely, open and effective
manner; e) Inclusivity is encouraged and supported by appropriate participation opportunities; and,
f) Trust is achieved through open and meaningful dialogue that respects and upholds community’s
beliefs, values, and opinions.

An inclusive SEP is prepared, consulted upon and implemented, proportional to the Project's nature,
scale, risks, and impacts. The SEP must be disclosed before Project appraisal, ensuring
consultations are timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible. A documented record of
stakeholder engagement will be maintained and publicly disclosed. A Project-wide Grievance
Redress Mechanism (GRM) will address concerns, including a confidential channel for Gender
Based Violence (GBV) issues.

The Project's stakeholder engagement design must focus on inclusive participation and information
disclosure using appropriate language and media. Key stakeholders include MWRS, NWRMA,

                                                 7
SLEWRC, GVWC, Sierra Leone Water Company (SALWACO), FCC and the sixteen districts of
WARDC. Beneficiaries include communities with access to clean WASH facilities, school
students, hospitals/health centers, water service providers, maintenance workers, and FSTP users.

Other interested parties, other than the directly affected parties, will also take the Project’s
stakeholders domain including Civil Society and Non-Governmental Organizations (CSOs &
NGOs), academia, line ministries, etc.

Within the Project, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include but are not limited to
low-income households; women; youth; the elderly; persons with limited mobility; or persons with
disabilities. Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the Project will be further
confirmed and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate, such as braille, radio, sign
language, etc. Descriptions of the methods of engagement that will be undertaken by the project
are provided in Section 4.3. below.

The Project's geographic reach is the Western Area, which will include Freetown City Council
(FCC) and Western Area Rural District Council (WARDC). The Project incorporates financing
for a range of activities including investments, capacity building, and technical assistance to
support system establishment for WRM and WASH services improvement through two main
aspects: improving Water Security (Components 1 and 2) and improving access and efficiency of
WASH services (Components 3 and 4). During TA activities (mainly Component 1 and 2), the
Study Team/ Consultants, with support from MWRS and its WASHIT Social Specialist, will make
intentional efforts and considerations to ensure inclusion and participation of the
disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals and groups to meaningfully participate during the process of
making policies, strategies, and plans. The same applies to feedback from all stakeholders
regardless of any ground, including race, sex, pregnancy, marital status, health status, ethnic or
social origin, color, age, disability, religion, belief, or culture.

    4. Stakeholder Engagement Program
    4.1.    Consultations undertaken during project preparation and e&s instruments
            development
To date, three sets of stakeholder consultations were undertaken for SL Water Security and WASH
Access Improvement Project. In the below Subsections a summarized findings from these
stakeholder engagement activities are presented.

    4.1.1..      Stakeholder Consultation: Project Preparation phase, October 2024
Following the World Bank’s engagement to support the preparation of Sierra Leone’s National
WASH Development Plan 2025 – 2035, a stakeholder engagement and workshop was held from
October 8 - 13, 2024. The development of the National WASH Sector Development Programme
(NWASHSDP) aims at providing a comprehensive roadmap for increased access to safely managed
WASH services for households (domestic) and institutions. A stakeholder engagement workshop
was held on December 16 – 17, 2024, co-led by the MWRS and the World Bank, gathered 63
participants representing all water sector institutions. It had the following objectives: (i) Consult
key people, the MWRS, as well as other key partners and stakeholders to inform about the
preparation of the proposed program; (ii) Discuss the preliminary content of the NWASHSDP,
solicit stakeholder inputs and fill requisite gaps; (iii) Present the program preparation timeline.




                                                 8
    4.1.2.        Key feedback from the workshop
  ▪ There are fragmented information and documents regarding the WASH sector development in
    Sierra Leone. The NWASHSDP presents a good opportunity to harmonize these pieces into
    one coherent document.
  ▪ There are misunderstandings in the sector’s decision-making structure as presented in the
    workshop’s institutional working group. This was described as unreflective on how the recent
    institutional change envisions the sector.
  ▪ There was an agreement on the Goal and Vision of the NWASHDP. However, further
    discussions need to be held to firm up realistic targets for the development of the plan.
  ▪ The is a strong sense of ownership and commitment. The thematic working groups provided
    respective inputs on the key challenge, strategies and priority actions critical to the
    development of the Sierra Leone WASH sector.

   4.2. Bank Task Team Consultations (Successive Project Preparation Missions)
As part of the Project preparation, the Task Team has conducted three missions with several
meetings with government counterparts within and beyond the MWRS, Bank colleagues working
in related sectors, development partners and NGOs active in the sector. As part of the SL Water
Security and WASH Access Improvement Project Preparation Missions, team members drawn
from the World Bank and implementing agencies, visited Kingtom FSTP, potential sites for FSTP
in WRRD C and FCC as well as different relevant governmental institutions were visited and
assessed the implementation capacity and commitment towards the E&S requirements were
examined.

Below are the Consultations Outcomes:
 ▪ The team integrated the feedback received from stakeholders in the program and kept close
   contact and structured engagement with core program and Project teams.
 ▪ The team followed up and organized virtual interviews with key persons in the sector beyond
   the MWRS.

    4.3. Stakeholder Consultation during E&S Instruments Preparation, April 2025
During this RF and ESMF preparation, two stakeholder consultations were undertaken Western
Area Rural District Council - WARD C (at Water Loo) and Freetown at Brookfields Hotel, 9th –
10th of April 2025 respectively. The stakeholder consultation meetings were attended by a diverse
group of stakeholders, including, Community leaders (Headmen) and members, Ward Councilors
and devolve functions representatives (WARD C), Water Catchment Committee Members,
Representatives from civil society organizations (CSOs), Women and youth representatives,
Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation and its agencies (SALWACO, GUMA, NWRM and
EWRC).

A total of 110 participants took part in the two consultation sessions. These sessions were aimed to
ensure stakeholder participation, raise awareness, and gain feedback and support from local
stakeholders and affected communities. The main objectives include:
    ▪ To introduce the proposed project overview, its subcomponents, institutional arrangements
      and the required E&S instruments that are relevant to the project.
    ▪ To identify potential environmental and social risks and mitigation strategies.
    ▪ To gather feedback from stakeholders and incorporate local perspectives into project
      planning.
    ▪ Strengthen collaboration with local communities and build stakeholder ownership.




                                                 9
These sessions have demonstrated strong interest and willingness among community members to
support the Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project. The detail
insights and recommendations received are under compilation and will be further integrated into
the subsequent project’s E&S instruments and stakeholder engagement strategies.

The below bullet points are presented to show case the main extracts from these sessions.
   ▪ Stakeholders share their routine experiences on the challenges of access to WASH
     infrastructures as a result of non-functionality. In addition, based on their past lessons,
     workable and coordinated strategy is required from the SL Water Security and WASH
     Access Improvement Project for enduring operation and maintenance. It was suggested to
     examine, refine and adopt the experiences of some of the non-governmental organizations
     working on the field in SL. Community-Based O&M strategy recently developed by MWRS
     in support by UNICEF, as well as best practices by GOAL SL, World Vision SL and CRS
     were cited as best practice reference points. Participants were also emphasized that adequate
     and regular monitoring at all levels (including users) is an essential aspect for the sustainable
     utilization of projects’ investment. In this connection, several participants recommended of
     forming a local level monitoring committee (e.g. district level Community Liaison
     Committee) to support the project implementation in general and E&S safeguards
     performance compliance in particular.
   ▪ Participants of the consultations stressed the priority for employment opportunities for local
     youths and women in the project activities, as relevant and appropriate (30% female
     employment ratio, as supported by SL law, shall be maintained, and explicitly indicated in
     project documentations).
   ▪ Involvement/ participation of the private sector in the operation and maintenance of the
     WASH facilities (Nigerian best practice was cited by participants in managing public toilets
     by the private sectors). To this end, a guideline should be developed on how to manage such
     WASH schemes in a sustainable manner.
   ▪ Capacity enhancement programs should be designed and implemented for district councils
     in the areas of WASH O&M. On the other hand, future technicians from the beneficiary
     communities should be organized and trained, from the outset.
   ▪ The project’s WASH infrastructure design shall take into account of disability conditions.
   ▪ Consider representation of WASH Users Associations as member of the Steering Committee
     to be established for the SL Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project.
   ▪ Grievance redress mechanism should be in place prior to the start of project works in the
     target areas, with multiple channels including toll-free telephone hotline through Afri-Cell
     and Orange telecom service providers.
   ▪ Child friendly GRM to be employed in the schools to be selected for improved public toilets
     with handwashing facilities (World Vision SL was cited as a best practice).
   ▪ Prior and sufficient consultations of the community before sending contractors to our
     villages. Contractors shall also be properly instructed prior to engaging them to project
     works, thus shall adhere to local contexts, beliefs, customs, values, etc.
   ▪ Generally, all participants reflected on the beneficial impacts of the proposed project and
     expressed their enthusiasm for its realization in their respective localities.
   ▪ Proper planning of the resettlement operation and livelihood restoration programs as the
     project is seemingly requiring land for its operation. The GRM will be an important milestone
     in managing resettlement related complaints.
   ▪ Waste management in general and future decommissioning of FSTPs in particular were
     raised as concerns to some of the participants for envisaging appropriate planning
     beforehand.
   ▪ Ensure timely disclosure of project information and E&S requirements and commitments by
     responsible actors, including users.

                                                 10
   ▪ Conduct further targeted engagement sessions for vulnerable and marginalized groups.


      4.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for
      stakeholder engagement.
Table 1 below outlines the engagement process, methods, including sequencing, topics of
consultations and target stakeholders.




                                            11
Table 1: SEP Summary Table
   Project stage                  Target stakeholders                 Topic of consultation /                Method                  Responsibilities     Frequency/Timeline
                                                                             message

Project preparation All stakeholders including Project Affected ▪ Present the Project & its       Focus Group Discussions            MWRS            in Prior to       Project
stage               Persons (PAPs) including water & sanitation activities, potential E&S         (FGDs),             community      collaboration with Appraisal
                    facilities users, households to be affected due risks & impacts and           consultations,            formal   FCC           and
                    to land take for FSTPs development, MWRS, receive           feedback    on    meetings, virtual discussions,     WARDC.
                    MOF, MLGCD, MECC, MLCP, MBSSE, MOH, aspects of the proposed                   surveys,            one-on-one
                    MGCA,          MWRS, NWRMA, GVWC, Project.                                    interviews, site visits, email.
                    SALWACO, SLEWRC, FCC, WARDC, ▪ Information on Project
                    NWRMA, EPASL/ MECC, selected schools, GRM
                    hospitals, public parks, fish landing sites, ▪ Solicit feedback to inform
                    touristic and recreational areas (200 biogas Project                design,
                    toilets - targeted for the construction of implementation, M&E.
                    improved public toilet facilities), vulnerable/
                    disadvantaged individuals/ groups and other
                    Civil Society and Non-Governmental
                    Organizations (CSOs & NGOs), working on
                    the water sector as well as E&S policy issues
                    e.g. gender, disability, etc.), Community and
                    religious leaders, Chiefdoms.
Project             Stakeholders stated above plus MWRS Topics stated above plus                  Methods stated above plus          MWRS-WASHIT          Continuous    during
Implementation      WASHIT and Project Management Consultant GRM procedures, GRM                  MWRS, MoF, other Sector            in collaboration     Project
Stage               (PMC), members of Donor Coordination contact                     addresses,   Institutions’ websites,            with FCC &           implementation
                    Group to be established by MWRS under Accessibility of services               (links will be included where      WARDC in the         phase.
                    Component 1, Grievance Redress Committees (esp. for vulnerable &              available),                        respective Project
                    in the respective Project sites (GRCs), Water disadvantaged        groups/    training material,                 sites.
                    User Associations, Academic institutions,       individuals                   Information, Education and
                    private sectors (via PPP arrangement),                                        Communication           (IEC)
                    Development Partners                                                          materials,
                    Religious and community-based institutions                                    E&S performance Reports,
                    (churches, mosques, local level youth/ women                                  posters/ pamphlets/ notice
                    associations)                                                                 boards, workshops/ seminars/
                                                                                                  social media (in particularly
                                                                                                  to Subcomponent 4.3.)



                                                                               12
        4.3. Proposed strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups
The following measures will be taken to remove obstacles to full participation / access to
information for all including identified vulnerable or disadvantaged groups.

The Project will seek the views of all water and sanitation users residing in FCC and WARDC,
Local Authorities, other Government officials/entities, and the local communities. Stakeholder
engagement will include elderly people, persons with disabilities, women, etc. through public
consultations, media, public announcements, in-person meetings, use of local radio stations, etc.

The Project will take special measures to ensure that members of disadvantaged and vulnerable
groups have equal opportunity to provide feedback on the mechanism during Project preparation
and implementation to incorporate stakeholders’ views, voices, and needs. Meeting venues will be
considered taking into view the access needs of persons with disabilities while information
dissemination will also consider communicating with persons with hearing disabilities (e.g.
ensuring there is sign language translation during meetings). In addition to English, the
consultations will be held in Krio, a widely spoken language in Western Area Rural and greater
Freetown.

The principle of inclusiveness will guide stakeholder engagements, particularly with respect to
vulnerable individuals and groups. In cases where vulnerable status may lead to people’s reluctance
or physical incapacity to participate in large-scale community meetings, the Project will hold
separate small group discussions with them at an easily accessible venue. This way, the Project will
reach out to groups who, under normal circumstances, may be insufficiently represented at general
community gatherings.


Regarding GBV/SEA, the SEP will be recognizing the gender relations and cultural contexts of the
given community and how they may participate comfortably and conveniently. It is key to ensure
that suitable spaces are made available for disabled, elders, women, and other vulnerable/
disadvantaged groups and individuals that will be affected by the Project to be participated in
consultations. Some strategies to be adopted to reach out to these groups and to ensure inclusiveness
include:

      ▪ Identifying vulnerable and marginalized groups, their location, and associations (if
        available) to reach out to these groups,
      ▪ ensure that community engagement teams are gender-balanced and promote women’s
        leadership within these
      ▪ Ensuring easy and safe access to Project sites (water and sanitary facilities) and training
        venues,
      ▪ Providing disability friendly training materials, braille, radio, sign language,
      ▪ Ensuring GBV codes of conduct and monitoring mechanisms are in place,
      ▪ Engaging community leaders, CSOs and NGOs working with vulnerable groups,
      ▪ Organizing face-to-face focus group discussions, accompanied by sign language
        interpreters, with these populations.

To ensure that the Project maintains information disclosure, and continuous and effective
interaction with all stakeholders, several methods will be used, including:

      ▪ Early notification for consultation sessions and preferably sending out invitations to the
        stakeholders with a clear agenda for discussion,
      ▪ Providing adequate time for preparation before consultative sessions,
                                                13
      ▪ Sharing information for public consumption well in advance and providing opportunities
        for feedback and comments,
      ▪ Choosing appropriate methods of communication, especially for remotely located
        stakeholders, such as the use of local radio, social media, distribution of printed materials,
        visual presentations, notice boards or telephone, etc.,
      ▪ Ensuring concise documentation of all stakeholder engagement sessions with a record of
        minutes, lists of attendance (signed), and photographs for the consultative process,
      ▪ Establishing a well-designed GRM that will enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of
        the Project; and
      ▪ Employing traditional and innovative channels of communications (TV, newspaper, radio,
        dedicated phone-lines, and mail) when stakeholders do not have access to online channels
        or do not use them frequently. Traditional channels can also be highly effective in
        conveying relevant information to stakeholders.
      ▪ Using technology for meetings and consultations such as Zoom, Skype and Microsoft
        Teams, if and as required.

    6. Resources and responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement
        5.1. Implementation Arrangements and Resources
The MWRS will have the overall responsibility for Project implementation, and for carrying out
stakeholder engagement activities and coordination among other sector institutions involved as
technical partners, such as NWRMA, SLEWRC, GVWC, SALWACO, FCC, and the WARDC i.
MWRS will be responsible for E&S safeguards, monitoring and evaluation and reporting to the
Bank, along with other responsibilities.

The overall responsibility for SEP implementation lies with the MWRS and its WASHIT.

        5.2. Budget for SEP Implementation
The total budget estimate for the preparation and implementation of this SEP is US$115,500. The
SEP budget will be revised to reflect actual costs once activities to be implemented are finalized,
WASHIT will revise and submit the revised budget.

Table 2: SEP Budget Summary

                                                              Unit costs              Total costs
                Budget categories                  Quantity    (USD)     Frequency      (USD)        Remarks
Consultations/ Participatory Planning, Decision-
                                                         10    2,500.00 Twice/year
Making Meetings                                                                         10,000.00
Information Communication (Posters, flyers,
                                                          5    2,000.00 Once/year
social media)                                                                           10,000.00
Trainings                                                10    2,500.00 Twice/year      10,000.00
Beneficiary surveys                               5            2,000.00 Once/year       10,000.00
Implementation of Grievance Mechanism (GRC
                                           Lumpsum
formation, stationery, allowances, etc.)                                                25,000.00
Monitoring and evaluation                        20            2, 000.00                40,000.00
Contingency (10%)                                                                       10,500.00
Total Stakeholder Engagement Budget:                                                   115,500.00




                                                   14
   7. Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
GRM is a system that allows not only grievances, but also queries, suggestions, positive feedback,
and concerns of Project-affected parties related to the E&S performance of the Project to be
submitted and responded to in a timely manner.
       6.1. Description of the Project GRM
Table 3 below presents the GRM steps that the proposed Water Security and Sanitation
Improvement Project will follow.




                                               15
    Table 3: Illustrative Table on the GRM Steps
        Step                                    Description of process                                          Timeframe                            Responsibility
GRM implementation     Grievances will be handled at Project sites and addressed by MWRS WASHIT, FCC   5     days      after     Project   MWRS WASHIT – Social Safeguard/
structure              and WARDC through designated channels and Grievance Redress Committees to be    effectiveness      and    before    Development Specialist
                       established as Project starts.                                                  commencement of Project
                                                                                                       activities,            including
                                                                                                       construction       of      water,
                                                                                                       sanitation facilities and FSTP.
Grievance uptake       Grievances can be submitted via the following channels:                         3-5 Days                            MWRS WASHIT – Social Safeguard/
                       ▪ In-person at a physical facility at the Project sites (selected schools,                                          Development Specialist; GRCs at FCC
                         hospitals/health centres, public parks, fish landing sites, touristic and                                         and districts of WARDC.
                         recreational areas where the construction of improved public toilet
                         facilities with handwashing) as well as construction sites for FSTPs in FCC
                         and WARDC.
                       ▪ Grievance or suggestion boxes located in Project Construction sites.
                       ▪ Toll-free telephone hotline: [XXXX##] operated by XXXX.
                       ▪ E-mail to WASHIT, GRCs, FCC, WARDC.
                       ▪ Letter to WASHIT, GRCs, FCC, WARDC.
                       ▪ Social media (e.g. GRC WhatsApp group accounts).
                       ▪ Online form on the MWRS/ MoF/ GVWC/ SALWACO/FCC.
                       ▪ Complaint form to be lodged via any of the above channels. Walk-ins may
                         register a complaint in a grievance logbook at a facility or suggestion box
                       ▪ WBG         corporate     GRS      (http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-
                         operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service).
Sorting, processing    Any complaint received is forwarded to MWRS WASHIT Social safeguard/            Upon receipt of complaint           MWRS WASHIT – Social Safeguard/
                       Development Specialist, logged into the complaint’s logbook and                                                     Development Specialist; GRCs at FCC
                       categorized according to the nature of the complaint as well as the                                                 and respective districts of WARDC.
                       characteristic of the complaints (Project affected person, other interested
                       party/ vulnerable or disadvantage, group or individual).
Acknowledgement and    Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged to the complainant by [insert]         Within 2 days of receipt            MWRS WASHIT – Social Safeguard/
follow-up              Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged to the complainant by MWRS/CUs                                             Development Specialist; GRCs at FCC
                       Social Development Specialist.                                                                                      and respective districts of WARDC/
                                                                                                                                           construction sites.




                                                                                 16
           Step                                     Description of process                                      Timeframe                         Responsibility
Verification,             Investigation of the complaint is led by the Grievance Redress Committees      Within 8 - 10 working days.   GRCs, MWRS WASHIT – Social Risk
investigation, action     (GRCs). A proposed resolution is formulated by the GRCs and                                                  Management Specialist.
                          communicated to the complainant by the GRCs Chairperson or WASHIT
                          Social Risk Management Specialist.
Monitoring          and   Data on complaints is collected in WASHIT and reported to WB and MWRS          On monthly basis to           MWRS       MWRS–Social         Risk
evaluation                every quarter.                                                                 MWRS Management and           Management Specialist.
                                                                                                         quarterly to WB (as
                                                                                                         stipulated in the ESCP &
                                                                                                         per E&S performance
                                                                                                         reporting format).
Provision of feedback     Feedback from complainants regarding their satisfaction with complaint         Within 2 days of a solution   MWRS WASHIT – Social Risk
                          resolution is collected through various feedback mechanisms written, verbal    delivered      to       the   Management Specialist; GRCs at the
                          or other means and recorded in the grievance logbook.                          complainant.                  respective sites.
Training                  Training will be provided to staff/consultants in the MWRS WASHIT,             Bi-annual                     MWRS        WASHIT–Social      Risk
                          Project Institutions and Technical Partners, FCC, WARDC, Contractors and                                     Management Specialist; collaboration
                          Supervision Consultants and GRCs members in the respective Project sites.                                    with CSOs/ NGOs working on the area
                                                                                                                                       of SEA/SH grievance management,
                                                                                                                                       labour and working conditions.
Appeals process           The GM will provide an appeals process if the complainant is not satisfied     End of      Project   GRM     MWRS WASHIT – Social Risk
                          with the proposed resolution of the complaint. Once all possible means to      process                       Management Specialist; GRCs at the
                          resolve the complaint have been proposed and if the complainant is still not                                 respective sites.
                          satisfied, then s/he could be advised of her/his right to legal recourse.




                                                                                   17
The Project will have other measures in place to handle sensitive and confidential complaints,
including those related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in line
with the Sierra Leone legal framework on GBV and the World Bank ESF Good Practice Note on
SEA/SH.

Measures to handle sensitive and confidential complaints, including those related to SEA/SH, will
be identified in the GBV Prevention and Response Action Plan. Concerning GBV-related
complaints, the Project will follow a survivor-centered approach that prioritizes survivors’ dignity,
confidentiality, and safety, and the Project accountability and response framework. The Project
will ensure to have in place referral procedures for public service providers and NGOs that are
experienced in handling GBV cases.
A separate Labor GRM for Project workers will be developed as part of the Labor Management
Procedures (LMP).
    8. Monitoring and Reporting
        7.1. Summary of how SEP will be monitored and reported upon (including
        indicators)
The SEP will be monitored based on both qualitative reporting (based on progress reports) and
quantitative reporting linked to results indicators on stakeholder engagement and grievance
performance.
SEP reporting will include the following:

   (i) Progress reporting on the ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement commitments under the
       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP);
   (ii) Cumulative qualitative reporting on the feedback received during SEP activities, in
        particular: (a) issues that have been raised and can be addressed through changes in Project
        scope and design, and reflected in the basic documentation such as the Project Appraisal
        Document, the Environmental and Social Assessment, the Resettlement Framework (RF),
        the Resettlement Plan (RP), the Social Development Plan; (b) issues that have been raised
        and can be addressed during Project implementation; (c) issues that have been raised that
        are beyond the scope of the Project and are better addressed through alternative projects,
        programs or initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by the Project due to
        technical, jurisdictional or excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes of meetings
        summarizing the views of the attendees can also be annexed to the monitoring reports;
   (iii) Quantitative reporting based on the indicators included in the SEP. An illustrative set of
         indicators for monitoring and reporting is included in Annex 3.
The MWRS, through its WASHIT, will have the overall responsibility for Project implementation,
carrying out stakeholder engagement activities and coordination among other implementing
agencies will monitor the implementation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) by the
requirements of the Legal Agreement and the ESCP. The extension and mode of Stakeholder
monitoring for environmental and social performance will be proportionate to the potential
environmental and social performance risk and impacts of the project and their effects on the
various stakeholder interests.




                                                 18
        7.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups

Specific mechanisms to report back to the stakeholders include, through physical meetings, training
reports and action plan where necessary and one to one consultation. This reporting back to the
stakeholders will be every quarter and on annual basis.
The SEP will be periodically revised and updated, as necessary, in the course of Project
implementation. Quarterly/ annual summaries and internal reports on public grievances, inquiries,
and related incidents, together with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventive
actions, will be collated by responsible staff and referred to head of the WASHIT within MWRS.
The quarterly summaries will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and nature of
complaints and requests for information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a timely
and effective manner. Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project
during the year may be conveyed to the stakeholders in various ways: general meetings, website,
reports, using public notice boards or minutes of meetings.




                                                 19
      Annexes
          •    Annex 1. Template to capture minutes/records of consultation meetings.
          •    Annex 2. Example of a SEP Budget Table.
          •    Annex 3. Sample Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP.
      Annex 1: Template to Capture Consultation Minutes
 No     Stakeholder (Group     Summary of       Response of Project Implementation Team            Follow-up
        or Individual)         Feedback                                                            Action/Next
                                                                                                   Steps
 1
 2

      Annex 2: Example of a SEP Budget Table
                                                                                      Times/
                      Budget categories                       Quantity   Unit costs   Years Total costs Remarks
1. Estimated Staff salaries* and related expenses
1a. E.g., Communications consultant
1b. E.g., Travel costs for staff
1c. E.g., Estimated salaries for Community Liaison Officers
2. Consultations/ Participatory Planning, Decision-
Making Meetings
2a. E.g., Project launch meetings
2b. E.g., Organization of focus groups
3. Communication campaigns
3a. E.g., Posters, flyers
3b. E.g., Social media campaign
4. Trainings
4a. E.g., Training on social/environmental issues for PIU
and contractor staff
4b. E.g., Training on Gender-Based Violence (GBV) for PIU
and contractor staff
5. Beneficiary surveys
5a. E.g., Mid-project perception survey
5b. E.g., End-of-project perception survey
6. Grievance Mechanism
6a. E.g., Training of GM committees
6b. E.g., Suggestion boxes in villages
6c. E.g., GM communication materials
6d. E.g., Grievance investigations/site visits
6e. E.g., GM Information System (setting up or maintenance)
6f. Other GM Logistical Costs
7. Other expenses
7a. …
Total Stakeholder Engagement Budget:
      *Note: Salary costs can be indicative

                                                       20
    Annex 3. Sample Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP

Key            evaluation Specific Evaluation Potential Indicators                                                 Data
questions                 questions                                                                                Collection
                                                                                                                   Methods
GM. To what extent have         • Are       project-affected   • Usage of GM and/or feedback mechanisms            Records from the
project-affected parties been     parties raising issues and   • Requests for information from relevant            implementing
provided with accessible and      grievances?                    agencies.                                         agency and other
inclusive means to raise        • How quickly/effectively      • Use of suggestion boxes placed in the             relevant agencies
issues and grievances? Has        are     the     grievances     villages/project communities.
the implementing agency           resolved?                    • Number of grievances raised by workers,
responded to and managed                                         disaggregated by gender of workers and
such grievances?                                                 worksite, resolved within a specified time
                                                                 frame.
                                                               • Number of Sexual Exploitation, and
                                                                 Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) cases
                                                                 reported in the Project areas, which were
                                                                 referred for health, social, legal and security
                                                                 support according to the referral process in
                                                                 place. (if applicable).
                                                               • Number of grievances that have been:
                                                                 (i) opened, (ii) opened for more than 30 days,
                                                                 (iii) resolved, (iv) closed, and (v) number of
                                                                 responses that satisfied the complainants,
                                                                 during the reporting period disaggregated by
                                                                 category of grievance, gender, age, and
                                                                 location of complainant.
Stakeholder      engagement     • Was there interest and       • Active participation of stakeholders in           Stakeholder
impact on Project design          support for the Project?       activities                                        Consultation
and implementation.             • Were       there      any    • Number of actions taken in a timely manner        Attendance
How have engagement               adjustments made during        in response to feedback received during           Sheets/Minutes
activities made a difference      Project    design     and      consultation sessions with Project-affected
in Project design and             implementation based on        parties.                                          Evaluation forms
implementation?                   the feedback received?       • Number of consultation meetings and public
                                • Was priority information       discussions where the feedback and                Structured surveys
                                  disclosed to relevant          recommendation received is reflected in
                                  parties throughout the         Project design and implementation.                Social
                                  Project cycle?               • Number of disaggregated engagement                media/traditional
                                                                 sessions held, focused on at-risk groups in the   media entries on
                                                                 Project.                                          the Project results
Implementation                  • Were      the  activities    • Percentage of SEP activities implemented.         Communication
effectiveness.          Were      implemented as planned?      • Key barriers to participation identified with     Strategy
stakeholder       engagement      Why or why not?                stakeholder representatives.                      (Consultation
activities    effective   in    • Was the stakeholder          • Number of adjustments made in the                 Schedule)
implementation?                   engagement     approach        stakeholder engagement approach to improve
                                  inclusive              of      Projects’      outreach,      inclusion    and    Periodic Focus
                                  disaggregated groups?          effectiveness.                                    Group Discussions
                                  Why or why not?
                                                                                                                   Face-to-face
                                                                                                                   meetings and/or
                                                                                                                   Focus Group
                                                                                                                   discussions with
                                                                                                                   Vulnerable Groups
                                                                                                                   or their
                                                                                                                   representatives




                                                               21
