Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2024 | Report No: PIDDC01103




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                    Operation Name
Samoa                          P507749                         Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience -
                                                               Samoa
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date        Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          20-May-2025                     28-Aug-2025                    Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Independent State of            Ministry of Natural
Financing (IPF)                Samoa                           Resources and
                                                               Environment, Ministry of
                                                               Works, Transport and
                                                               Infrastructure

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve the capacity of the Government Samoa to prepare for and manage the impacts of natural hazards
effectively, to strengthen the resilience of select urban areas, and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond
promptly and effectively to it.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                              35.28

  Total Financing                                                                                                   35.28
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                      30.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                       Page 1
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                  30.00
        IDA Grant                                                                                                                  30.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Trust Funds                                                                                                                   5.28
        Total Program Cost                                                                                                          5.28




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                               Concept Review Decision
Substantial




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1. Samoa is a lower middle-income small island state located in the South Pacific, highly dependent on remittances
and tourism and agricultural trade, which are critical pillars of its economy. The country has a population of just over
218,000 people and a GDP of about US$1 billion. The Samoan economy grew at an annual average rate of 4.5 percent
until the global financial crisis in 2009, driven by these key sectors and remittances from the Samoan diaspora. However,
in the decade leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, the economy faced multiple economic shocks, resulting mainly from
tropical cyclones, which resulted in more volatile and slower growth, averaging around 2.5 percent per year. These shocks
underscored the economy’s vulnerability to external factors, particularly the devastating impact of natural and climate-
related hazards.

2. Samoa's frequent exposure to severe natural hazards, compounded by climate change, has caused significant
economic damage, and threatens key economic sectors, particularly in vulnerable coastal areas. Over 70 percent of the
population resides in low-lying coastal zones, exposed to floods, droughts, tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and tsunamis.
These events have caused substantial damage and losses over the years, with major disasters occurring at an average rate
of one every three years. Notably, the 2009 tsunami and Cyclone Evan in 2012 caused damages equivalent to 20 percent
and 29 percent of GDP, respectively,1 demonstrating the severe economic impact of disasters. Between 1965 and 2015,
Samoa experienced 56 disaster events, resulting in US$543 million in economic losses, i.e., annual losses averaging 5
percent of GDP. Climate change is expected to worsen the frequency and intensity of natural and climate-related hazards,
further endangering infrastructure and livelihoods, while rising sea levels and increasing temperatures threaten
agriculture, fisheries, and tourism.

3. Samoa’s growing climate vulnerability and disaster risk profile call for increased investments in effective resilience.
Current limitations in development financing and financial protection hinder effective disaster resilience. Samoa's

1 UNDRR (2022). Disaster Risk Reduction in Samoa: Country Update 2022, United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR)



                                                                                                                                     Page 2
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


disaster risk management (DRM) efforts, heavily supported by international partners, focus on flood management,
climate-proofing infrastructure, and enhancing resilience to climate change, disasters, and health-related risks. Current
disaster risk financing instruments include sovereign risk transfer, insurance of public assets, private sector insurance,
contingent and post-disaster financing, and budget provisions/reserves. Despite these efforts, significant gaps remain for
ex-ante resilience building. For example, estimated climate spending needs for 2022-2026 reach US$650 million,
equivalent to about 17 percent of GDP per year, with a funding gap of US$250 million.2 This substantial shortfall poses a
considerable challenge to effectively implementing disaster resilience measures. While Samoa has sovereign risk
insurance, coverage for critical public assets like roads and bridges is not available. The underdeveloped private sector
insurance market limits risk transfer options, leaving critical infrastructure vulnerable to the increasing frequency and
intensity of natural hazards, which could lead to substantial long-term economic setbacks.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context

4. Over the past decade, Samoa’s approach to DRM agenda has evolved, moving from a focus on post-disaster
response to a more balanced approach that includes proactive interventions. This shift has been led by the Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE),3 which is responsible for national disaster management, hazard monitoring,
and operating the country’s multi-hazard early warning systems (MHEWS). MNRE has been supported through initiatives
such as the Bank-financed Pacific Resilience Program (PREP),4 which improved MHEWS, enhanced the resilience of critical
school infrastructure, and contributed to financial protection against disasters. The Government of Samoa has also
ensured that disaster and climate resilience standards are integrated in other sectoral investments to reduce risk
proactively, including those implemented by the Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI) - such as
transport, urban development, and coastal protection projects. Additionally, the Ministry of Finance is implementing a
Disaster Risk Financing Policy (supported by PREP) to guide the utilization of post-disaster financing instruments, such as
contingent financing from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the sovereign parametric
insurance for tropical cyclones and earthquakes provided by the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company. These tools
have provided timely financial resources in the aftermath of disasters and have supported a broader DRM reform agenda,
laying the foundation for a more resilient Samoa.

5. The Government of Samoa is actively implementing a series of measures to improve its management of climate and
disaster risks. The Government has demonstrated a strong commitment to enhancing MHEWS as a critical element of
proactive DRM. In May 2022, the Government approved the National MHEWS Policy to enhance early warning systems
and includes the implementation of impact-based forecasting for specific hazard impacts and recommendations. In
February 2024, the Government approved the Samoa Disaster Risk Management Policy, which outlines a coordinated
approach to addressing climate, natural, and health-related hazards with a focus on community-based preparedness and
awareness of risk. The policy reforms are complemented by investments in MHEWS systems, instrumentation, and
capacity building, including through the PREP project. Data management is also being strengthened to support
comprehensive risk assessments, including for non-financial assets and communities, to increase their resilience to
withstand current and future climate and disaster risk. Meanwhile, the Disaster and Emergency Management Act 2007 is
under review to incorporate lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and consider more proactive DRM approaches.
The Pathway for the Development of Samoa 2021-2026 calls for increased investments in Savai’i, the secondary island of
Samoa, including to build climate and disaster resilience for all Samoans.

2 IMF (2022). Samoa: Climate Macroeconomic Assessment Program (Country Report No. 2022/083). International Monetary Fund
3 The key divisions responsible for Samoa’s MHEWS are the Disaster Management Office, Samoa Meteorological Division, Water Resource Division,

and Information Communications and Technology division.
4 PREP – Samoa Project (P154839)



                                                                                                                                        Page 3
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)



6. Samoa continues to face considerable challenges as residual risks are exacerbated by climate change and increasing
urbanization. The evolving risk landscape makes early warning and response systems essential to safeguarding lives.
Strengthening these systems is not just about immediate safety; it also ensures long-term economic resilience. Continued
investments in MHEWS and strengthening emergency preparedness and response (EP&R) capabilities will better equip
Samoa to protect its communities and economy from the growing impacts of natural and climate-related hazards. Every
dollar spent on these systems, countries can save between US$4 and US$10 in disaster response costs, making them a
critical focus for the country’s resilience strategy.5 Additionally, integrating risk considerations into urban planning—by
avoiding the placement of people and critical assets in exposed and vulnerable areas—will help ensure that Samoa’s
overall risk is carefully managed. Public buildings also need to be better designed to suit Samoa’s climate and risk profile,
including adherence to updated energy and water efficiency standards that also minimize operations and maintenance
costs.

End-to-End Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems
7. The effective use of early warning systems during past disaster events in Samoa has proven to be instrumental in
avoiding loss of life and highlights the potential of such systems; however, significant gaps still need to be addressed.
The Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific 2017-2030 (FRDP) includes a regional commitment to establish
“end-to-end” MHEWS across the Pacific. In Samoa, however, persistent issues such as data transmission failures, outdated
instrumentation and facilities, poor network coverage across the country, and the lack of automated decision support
systems have limited the system’s overall efficiencies. To address these gaps, investments are needed to strengthen the
foundational aspects of the system, including improvements to hazard detection, forecasting accuracy, communication
networks, and early warning dissemination. By enhancing these critical elements, Samoa can ensure that early warnings
are more reliable, timely, and tailored to meet the needs of its communities and last-mile users, thereby enabling more
effective and informed responses to hazards.

8. Furthermore, it is essential for Samoa to enhance the integration of various types of hazards—such as
hydrometeorological, geophysical, climate, and health-related—into a seamless system that spans from "upstream"
hazard detection to "downstream" community response. Samoa has made significant efforts toward impact-based
forecasting, which provides actionable information to guide decision making during emergencies. Regional efforts that
support Samoa include regional seismic hazard monitoring through the Oceania Regional Seismic Network (ORSNET); the
planned Weather Ready Pacific Decadal Programme of Investment that will strengthen the region's ability to manage
high-impact and extreme weather, water, and ocean events; and the Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF),
established to close data gaps in Samoa. Integrating community insights and local traditional knowledge into these
regional systems can improve their relevance and effectiveness.

Emergency preparedness and response (EP&R) capabilities
9. The compounding effects of Tropical Cyclone Harold and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 highlighted the complexity
of managing natural and health-related emergencies simultaneously. The National Emergency Operations Center (NEOC,
funded by the PREP) provided critical facilities to support inter-agency coordination of the disaster events. More strategic
and adaptable EP&R mechanisms are needed, addressing emergency management infrastructure and equipment,
regulatory and policy frameworks, human capacity (emergency personnel and communities), and information systems.
Further investment is needed to strengthen the resilience of key emergency management infrastructure, particularly for
hazard monitoring and emergency services such as firefighting, including at the subnational level. Complementary

5    Hallegatte, Stephane; Rentschler, Jun; Rozenberg,   Julie. 2019. Lifelines:   The   Resilient   Infrastructure   Opportunity. Sustainable
Infrastructure. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                                                                                                         Page 4
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


initiatives such as the Pacific Humanitarian Warehousing Program (PHWP) and the Building Safety and Resilience in the
Pacific II (BSRPII) are contributing to Samoa’s EP&R capabilities through a warehousing facility adjacent to the NEOC and
an emergency operations center in Savai’i, respectively. Investing in the capacity to maintain and operate these systems,
alongside expanding community outreach initiatives, will be critical in ensuring that emergency personnel and the broader
system is equipped to respond effectively to emergencies.
Urban Resilience
10. Samoa was the first country in the Pacific to adopt a systems-based approach to urban management, focusing on
holistic urban planning. This innovative approach led to the development of several district and local level plans that
incorporate good practices in urban planning, including participatory planning. The development of Community Integrated
Management (CIM) Plans brought together government, community, and non-government stakeholders to establish a
shared vision, linking local priorities to national-level development strategies. These plans, such as the Fa’asaleleaga CIM
Plan, prioritize essential infrastructure upgrades and disaster preparedness, including improved drainage and evacuation
routes. The Vaitele Sustainable Management Plan (SMP) and the 2018 Urban Design Standards for the Apia Waterfront
provide guidelines for the specified urban areas to: (i) guide land use; (ii) promote safe, functional, resilient, and
sustainable urban spaces; and (iii) ensure that new urban infrastructure enhances safety and livability. However, the
Planning and Urban Management Act 2004 mandates development policy controls for the entire country, and attention
is needed to develop SMPs for additional priority urban areas.

11. Samoa is experiencing uneven and often unmanaged urbanization, which poses additional challenges, particularly
as it intersects with increasing climate and disaster risks. Official statistics shows rural growth surpassing urban growth,
with Apia's population declining by 3.8 percent between 2016 and 2021. In contrast, the population in the northwest
Upolu pre-urban area and the urban corridor to Faleolo International Airport increased by 17.2 percent. This expansion,
which occurs outside the formal city limits, has led to urban sprawl and leapfrog development along the coastal
infrastructure corridors east towards Vailele Bay and west towards Faleolo International Airport, particularly the highly
urbanized Vaitele area. This pattern of peri-urban development can be attributed to the topography, the distribution of
primary roadways, and the availability of customary land in the coastal plain. Without strategic planning and regulation,
urbanization increases the concentration of people and assets in hazard-prone areas. Therefore, it is critical to integrate
urban infrastructure with national-level adaptation planning to reduce the exposure and vulnerability of priority assets to
climate and natural hazards.

12. Beyond Apia’s expanding footprint, Samoa’s secondary urban centers are located on the main island of Upolu and
in Savai’i, resulting in disparities in educational and employment opportunities, as well as reduced municipal services
on the country’s other inhabited islands. Focusing investments solely in Apia will be insufficient to achieve the goals
outlined in the Pathway for the Development of Samoa (2021-2026). This development strategy emphasizes the need for
long-term planning to achieve a more spatially balanced distribution of economic opportunities across the country, while
promoting overall national economic growth. Recognizing this, the Planning and Urban Management Agency (PUMA)
under the MWTI intends to develop a township plan for Sālelologa on the big island of Savai’i as a key area with strong
economic potential. The plan would act as a catalyst for development, integrating climate and disaster resilience measures
into urban planning. While the National Urban Policy 2013 guides development in Apia, there are no policies to guide and
regulate future growth in Samoa’s secondary urban areas, especially to manage urban amenity, address climate and
disaster risk, and ensure environmental and social safeguards.

13. Integrating climate and disaster resilience into the development of Sālelologa proactively is critical, given its
growing population and exposure to natural and climate-related hazards. Between 2016 and 2021, the population of
Savai’i grew by 3.7 percent, reaching 45,175 (one-fifth of Samoa’s population), with 34 percent of the island’s population


                                                                                                                        Page 5
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


residing in Sālelologa’s district of Fa’asaleleaga. However, Sālelologa is in a low-lying area, parts of which lie within the
tsunami evacuation zone, and is exposed to flooding, coastal erosion, and landslides. The town’s key infrastructure—
including its wharf, ferry terminal, airport, fire stations, market, schools, public library, and substation—is crucial for the
community’s daily life and economic activity, making it essential to integrate climate and disaster resilience into its future
development – including public buildings and spaces. Yet these critical public assets remain vulnerable to hazards, since
they are often not designed to suit Samoa’s climate and disaster risk profile (e.g., improper design standards and
construction practices). Environmentally sustainable designs that adapt to the changing climate and assist in mitigating
Samoa’s risk profile, as well as universal accessibility standards to ensure the inclusion of all, are also needed.
 Relationship to CPF

14. The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank Group’s mission of creating a world free of poverty on a livable
planet, through reducing disaster-related economic and livelihood losses. It is consistent with the World Bank’s Pacific
Islands Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) FY17-FY23 (Report No. 120479) that covers nine Pacific Island Countries
(PICs): Kiribati, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Nauru, Republic of Palau, the
Independent State of Samoa, the Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. In particular, the proposed project contributes
to the achievement of Objective 3.1: Strengthened resilience to natural disasters and climate change and mainstreaming
disaster risk and climate change considerations in development planning and investments. It would also align with
Objective 2.1: Increased resilience of infrastructure and Objective 2.2: Greater preparedness for shocks in the draft RPF
FY25-29.

15. The proposed project is consistent with Samoa’s climate and disaster resilience strategies, including its Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDC), long-term development strategies, National Adaptation Plans, national climate
change policies, and other relevant strategies. The project supports the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, a
comprehensive and long-term plan committed to addressing regional challenges including climate change and disasters.
The project’s alignment also further extends to various national long-term strategies, including Samoa’s Pathway for the
Development of Samoa (2021-2026), MHEWS Policy (2023), Second NDC (2021), and Climate Change Policy (2020). In
addition, it aligns with the National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) and the National Action Plan for Disaster Risk
Management (NAP), which define the disaster risk management framework and its implementation, as well as Samoa
2040, which links climate resilience and disaster risk objectives to sustainable development goals. This proposed project
also directly supports sector-specific goals communicated in Samoa’s climate adaptation strategies, especially to
strengthen community preparedness and response capacities.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 16. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the capacity of the Government Samoa to
 prepare for and manage the impacts of natural hazards effectively, to strengthen the resilience of select urban areas,
 and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.

  Key Results (From PCN)

17. The project is expected to benefit a total of approximately 218,000 people (the total population of Samoa). PDO-level
indicators could include:
     a. People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number, disaggregated by gender) corporate indicator.
     b. People in high-risk areas with access to, and enhanced understanding of, multi-hazard early warning systems
         (percentage, disaggregated by gender).


                                                                                                                          Page 6
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


     c. People in high-risk areas with access to an enhanced emergency response system (percentage, disaggregated by
        gender).
     d. People living in urban areas guided by a sustainable management plan incorporating land-use strategies and risk
        considerations (percentage, disaggregated by gender).
 D. Concept Description

18. The proposed project is structured under four components as described below, with tentative funding to be
confirmed during project preparation. Activities would be determined based on: (i) strategic alignment with national
development planning and DRM strategies; (ii) recommendations from technical assessments and diagnostics;6 (iii)
funding availability; and (iv) complementarity with other DRM programs and initiatives.

Component 1: Strengthening Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems

19. Activities under Component 1 will invest in global, regional, and country-level decision support systems,
instrumentation, and capacity and institutional strengthening for MHEWS, supporting both climate-related and
geophysical hazards. This includes strengthening the “upstream” end of effective MHEWS through investments in
observations and forecasting, including for the Global Basic Observation Network (GBON).7 Potential activities include
early warning delivery systems, monitoring and communication equipment, and institutional strengthening and capacity
building.

Component 2: Emergency Preparedness and Response

20. Activities under Component 2 will enhance national- and community level response capacities to better prepare
for, and respond to, future disasters. This will be achieved through supporting the “downstream” end of effective
MHEWS, particularly investments in dissemination and communication, and EP&R at the country and community levels.
Potential activities include emergency management infrastructure, emergency management capacity, and dissemination,
education, and outreach.

Component 3: Urban Resilience

21. Activities under Component 3 will invest in national and local activities to reduce the exposure and vulnerability of
priority assets to climate and natural-related hazards. This will be achieved through the risk-informed town planning,
strengthening of critical public facilities, physical climate adaptation measures, and institutional strengthening related to
infrastructure resilience. Potential activities include planning and institutional strengthening, and resilient public facilities
investments.

Component 4: Project Management and Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)

22. Activities under Component 4 will support project management across components and a CERC. Responsibilities
would include environmental and social management, procurement and contract management, financial management,


6 Such as the Bank’s ongoing Emergency Preparedness and Response Diagnostic and Urban Resilience Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment and Investment

Options for Sālelologa, and the SOFF Country Hydromet Diagnostic.
7 GBON is a fundamental element of global weather forecasting systems based on the international exchange of observational data, which underpin

all weather, climate, and water services and products. SOFF is facilitating implementation of GBON in the Least Development Countries and Small
Island Developing States, including Samoa, to generate and internationally exchange the required GBON station data.

                                                                                                                                          Page 7
      The World Bank
      Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


communication, monitoring and evaluation, and training. This component could include a CERC that could be activated
following an eligible emergency.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                    No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                              No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
  Yong Jian Vun
  Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

  Vica Rosario Bogaerts
  Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

  Jessica Rachel Schmidt
  Urban Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Independent State of Samoa

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                               Page 8
     The World Bank
     Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa(P507749)


 Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
 Lealaisalanoa Frances Debra Brown-Reupena
 Chief Executive Officer
 fran.reupena@mnre.gov.ws

 Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure
 Fui Tuapi Mau Simanu
 Chief Executive Officer
 mau.simanu@mwti.gov.ws

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Yong Jian Vun, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Jessica Rachel Schmidt

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Bjorn Philipp                           26-Sep-2024

Country Director:                       Stephen N. Ndegwa                       28-Oct-2024




                                                                                                       Page 9
