Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2024 | Report No: PIDDC01100




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                    Operation Name
Nepal                          P507433                         NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation
                                                               Project - Phase 3
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date        Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
SOUTH ASIA                     03-Apr-2025                     30-May-2025                    Water
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance             Ministry of Energy Water
Financing (IPF)                                                Resources and Irrigation ,
                                                               Department of Agriculture,
                                                               Department of Water
                                                               Resources and Irrigation

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve irrigation services, agricultural productivity, and climate resilience in the target areas.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                               150.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                    150.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   150.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   150.00


                                                                                                                        Page 1
         The World Bank
         NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)


          IDA Credit                                                                                                                                    150.00




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                          Concept Review Decision
Substantial




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

    1. Nepal is a landlocked country along the Himalayan Mountain range, with a population of 29.2 million. The
    country has seen immense socio-economic and political transformation in the last two decades. Real gross domestic
    product (GDP) growth averaged 4.5 percent over the last decade despite stagnation in 2016 (due to the earthquakes)
    and a recession in 2020 (due to the COVID-19 pandemic).1 Average headline inflation moderated to 5.4 percent in FY24,
    down from 7.7 percent in FY23. However, public debt has risen to 42.7 percent of GDP in FY23, up from 25.6 percent
    in 2015, caused by fiscal reforms post-federalization, rising expenditure on imports, and spending related to COVID-19
    recovery and relief programs.2 The poverty rate has dropped largely due to remittances, with one-fifth of the
    population living in poverty under a newly revised 2023 poverty line.3 Nepal's Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)
    also shows a reduction from 30 percent to 17 percent between 2014 and 2019,4 signaling broader welfare
    improvements beyond just income. Overall, Nepal’s growth outlook is positive, with growth expected to accelerate to
    5.5 percent by FY26. The services sector is anticipated to remain the main driver of growth in the medium term.

    2. Politically, Nepal's federal structure continues to evolve. Nepal’s political system is democratic with a coalition-
    based government. Nepal has had four successive coalition governments that took office since the federal and
    provincial elections held in November 2022. The current coalition took over on July 14, 2024 led by the two largest
    parties in parliament. The change in government has impacted the provincial government set up as well. At the sub-
    national level, funds, functions, and staff are managed by the seven provinces and 753 local governments for which
    legislation, institutions, and administrative procedures have been formalized as constitutionally prescribed while the
    task of enacting new laws and amending existing ones in line with the 2015 constitution is still in progress.

    3. Nepal is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Every year, the country suffers substantial socio-
    economic loss and damage because of natural and climate-induced hazards. The country ranks 139 out of 182 in terms

1 Economic Survey Report 2023, Ministry of Finance, GoN
2 Economic Survey Report 2023, Ministry of Finance, GoN
3 Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS). 2023. Nepal Living Standard Survey IV - 2022/23. CBS of the Government of Nepal, Kathmandu.
4 Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI). 2021.Nepal Multidimensional Poverty Index: analysis towards

action. CBS of the Government of Nepal, Kathmandu


                                                                                                                                                               Page 2
          The World Bank
          NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)


    of exposure, sensitivity, and ability to adapt to the negative impacts of climate change 5. Disasters such as the 2017
    floods, the 2021 Melamchi disaster, and the recent 2024 floods caused massive damage to infrastructure, including
    hydropower facilities. They severely impacted the economy while also killing hundreds of people and displacing
    thousands. Climate change is expected to increase the intensity and frequency of extreme events, with drier winters
    and wetter monsoons. The number of people affected by such events is projected to rise to 350,000 by 2030, more
    than double the number impacted in 2010.

    4. Nepal faces significant structural constraints such as weak infrastructure, a weak labor market, and inadequate
    public provision of essential services like electricity and water. Addressing these bottlenecks is crucial to achieving
    inclusive growth and poverty reduction. Ensuring fiscal sustainability while promoting equitable growth, especially in
    rural areas, remains a key priority. The country also faces significant risks from climate change, necessitating a focus
    on resilient infrastructure and sustainable practices in sectors like water and agriculture. The Government of Nepal
    (GoN) adopted the Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach in September 2021 to address the
    interrelated challenges of achieving a durable economic recovery from COVID-19, climate risks, natural capital
    depletion, and the exclusion of vulnerable people from economic opportunities. The government’s program centers
    on mainstreaming ten priority transitions from the GRID Strategic Action Plan (SAP) into national development efforts,
    which include investments in irrigation and agriculture support services.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

    5. Agriculture is central to Nepal’s economy and integral to poverty reduction. It accounts for over 60 percent of
    employment and nearly 24 percent of GDP in 2022.6 But the productivity and level of income from agriculture remain
    below potential because of underinvestment in critical enablers, such as irrigation services, climate-smart agriculture,
    value chains, and watershed services. The result is persistent food insecurity (3.8 million people as of 2022)7 and rising
    food imports (2.5-fold increase since 2014)8. Climate change also threatens the very natural resources base on which
    agriculture depends.

    6. The sector is characterized by conventional farming practices, a large share of small-holder farming, and farmer-
    managed irrigation systems. It primarily produces food grains, livestock, and cash crops, but the share of higher-value
    crops has been rising gradually. Agricultural productivity growth requires crop diversification, high-yielding varieties,
    improved fertilization, mechanization, reliable year-round irrigation, and the assurance among farmers that such
    investments are profitable. The lack of year-round irrigation, climate-smart agricultural services, and post-harvest
    value-chain services such as cold storage and market access are some key factors hindering agricultural productivity
    growth.

    7. Irrigation systems in Nepal fall under four distinct categories: (1) traditional farmer-managed irrigation systems
    (FMIS) developed and managed by the communities; (2) a range of small to large-scale surface systems developed with
    full or partial support from the government; (3) government-developed tube-well irrigation schemes; and (4)
    individually-owned and operated tube wells and pumps, primarily utilizing shallow aquifers, streams, ponds, and dug
    wells. About half of net irrigable land (about 1.56 million ha) is irrigated of which less than 40 percent has access to



5 Amadio, M., Behrer, A.P., Bosch, L., Kaila, H.K., Krishnan, N. and Molinario, G., 2023. Climate Risks, Exposure, Vulnerability and Resilience in Nepal.
6 -Ministry Of Finance- Economic Survey 2021/22
7 Ministry of Health and Population, New ERA, and ICF. 2023. Nepal Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2022.
8 Derived from countries’ reporting to the United Nations Statistical Division (COMTRADE) | https://atlas.cid.harvard.edu/explore




                                                                                                                                                            Page 3
           The World Bank
           NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)


      year-around irrigation.9 Thus, Nepal’s agriculture productivity remains highly vulnerable not only to climate shocks but
      also to intra-annual climate variability.

      8. Nepal is rich in water resources10 but only uses about 10 percent of its water resources due to inadequate
      infrastructure. Climate change will worsen the spatial and temporal variability of precipitation in Nepal, increasing
      vulnerability. The projected agricultural losses by 2050 under high-emission scenarios (RCP 8.5) could lower GDP by 2.2
      percent, three times higher than in low-emission cases.11 Western provinces face severe drought risks, threatening
      productivity. Often, farmers get unreliable rainfall, with both droughts and floods occurring in the same season. Thus,
      transforming the agriculture sector requires expansion and upgrade of the irrigation systems to regulate supply. With
      reliable and equitable irrigation systems, farmers could then focus on complementary inter-farm/farm-level
      investments such as improving agricultural techniques, inputs, and cropping intensity.

      9. GoN has recognized this challenge and developed a new irrigation policy and irrigation master plan 2019
      (updated 2024). The Irrigation Policy 2023 aims for higher year-round irrigation and has introduced significant reforms
      for managing Joint Management Irrigation Systems (JMIS). It assigns the federal Irrigation Agency (IA) to manage the
      main system with Water User Associations (WUAs) handling the distribution. Moreover, the policy makes a new
      provision for establishing an operational linkage with the respective local government for efficient management,
      operation, and maintenance (MOM) of irrigation systems, especially enabling stronger enforcement of irrigation
      service fee (ISF) by linking its collection to the local land tax collection system. Currently, there is significant variation
      in WUA capacity for MOM. Traditionally, FMISs have outperformed agency managed systems in terms of irrigation
      service delivery, fee collection rates, and overall system maintenance. However, with increasing labor migration, many
      FMIS suffer from lower participation in management and rehabilitation, and need the additional support from local
      governments and IAs that the new policy enables.

      10. The Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project (RJKIP) is one of the GoN’s national pride projects in the western
      region in Sudarpaschim province – a province with the highest rate of poverty in Nepal (34.2 percent). The Ministry
      of Energy, Water Resources, and Irrigation (MoEWRI) oversees irrigation provision, and the Ministry of Agriculture and
      Livestock Development (MoALD) undertakes on-farm interventions and agricultural support services. Both ministries
      coordinated to implement the RJKIP project. The Bank supported both Phase 1 (2012-2017) and Phase 2 (2018-2025)
      of RJKIP, modernizing the irrigation infrastructure on 14,000 hectares, enhancing flood and erosion control, improving
      rural roads and bridges for better connectivity and market access, promoting watershed conservation, building capacity
      of WUAs, and providing agricultural support services. The Bank’s support to RJKIP Phase 1 and 2 has benefited over
      157,000 people. RJKIP Phase 3 will scale up the impact, expanding year-round irrigation to another 17,500 hectares
      and reaching an additional 170000 people.

 Relationship to CPF
  11. The project aligns with the CPF FY 19-2312 (Focus Area 3: Improved adoption of sustainable natural resource
  management) extended to FY24 by the Performance and Learning Review13 and outcome areas prioritized by the new


9 Irrigation Master Plan 2019 (updated 2024)

10
     Average annual total renewable water resource is about 220 Km3,
11 Nepal Country and Climate Development Report (CCDR, 2023)
12
     Report No. 83148-NP; July 10, 2018, discussed by the Board on August 7, 2018
13
     Report No. 168048-NP, January 17, 2022, discussed by the Board on February 22, 2022.

                                                                                                                               Page 4
         The World Bank
         NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)


   World Bank Group (WBG) scorecard, namely sustainable food systems and better jobs. It addresses two priority global
   challenges: i) water security and climate change adaptation and (iii) food and nutrition security.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
    12. To improve irrigation services and agricultural productivity in the target areas.


  Key Results (From PCN)

     •    Farmland benefiting from year-round irrigation services – 17,500 ha
     •    People benefiting from increased agricultural production (90,000)14
     •    People benefiting from enhanced climate resilience – 170,000 (CSC indicator)

 D. Concept Description
  13. RJKIP 3 (2025-2031) will expand access to irrigation services, increase farm productivity, enhance climate
  resilience, and boost rural incomes in Kailali district, Sudurpaschim Province. The completion of the water intake and
  the main canal has laid the groundwork for constructing the distribution network westward, along with complementary
  investments in agriculture. The project scope will thus include the extension of the feeder canal and the development
  of lower-order canals so that irrigation water can reach farmer fields equitably with optimal flows, the continuation of
  the Water User Association (WUA) support program, and the implementation of a comprehensive agricultural
  improvement program. It will also incorporate measures for resilience, such as building small storage ponds and
  augmentation of existing small water bodies to capture monsoon precipitation. Phase 3 will be aligned with Nepal’s
  GRID approach to ensure the sustainability and resilience of irrigation schemes and livelihoods.

   The project will have following four components:

   14. Component 1: Irrigation improvement and development (US$100 million): This component aims to build and
   improve the irrigation distribution network in Pathariya area, west of the RJK to distribute part of the existing intake
   volume of 80 m³/s drawn at Chisapani. The main canal bifurcates to supply 40 m³/s to the RJK area and 40 m³/s to
   Lamki and Pathariya. From that point, the GoN has completed the construction of the Lamki feeder canal and is in the
   process of developing distribution networks in the Lamki command area. However, the distribution networks in the
   remaining Patharaiya area remain incomplete and this component aims to undertake this work to allow for equitable
   access throughout the command area of Pathariya (17,500 ha) across four palikas.15 This component will also include
   improvement and construction of rural roads and bridges, and canal operator's houses.

   15. Component 2: Watershed management (US$20 million): This component will finance various watershed
   management activities to prevent soil erosion, conserve watershed areas, and mitigate the impact of floods and
   droughts on agricultural productivity. These will include riverbank protection, landslide and gully control, check dams,


14 Increased agricultural production is defined as increased production resulting from project interventions including but not limited to agriculture

assets, improved technologies and services, finance etc. Interventions are aimed at households. Total beneficiaries are calculated assuming average
household size of 4.5.

15 Palikas are the local governments (urban or rural municipalities). The four beneficiary-Palikas are Ghodaghodi, Bhajani, Bardgoriya and Joshipur.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 5
          The World Bank
          NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)


      and afforestation. The project area has several natural lakes and wetlands that community user groups have been using
      for irrigation, tourism, and fisheries, which need to be improved and rehabilitated. The component will support the
      rehabilitation and augmentation of these existing small--sized multipurpose water storage and the development of
      new water storage ponds to capture monsoon precipitation where feasible. Given the seasonal variability in water
      availability, it is crucial to develop sustainable water storage solutions that align with the principles of watershed
      management and water conservation. Furthermore, effective watershed management is essential for the long-term
      sustainability of irrigation systems and the protection of agricultural command areas.

      16. Component 3: Agriculture support services (US$20 million): With enhanced year-round irrigation, RJKIP 2 has
      improved cropping intensity by 130 percent16 and promoted crop diversification through horticulture and vegetable
      farming especially in the dry seasons. For RJK 3, the planned irrigation expansion is expected to increase cropping
      intensity to 226 percent, supported by targeted investments in agriculture. This component will serve all the existing
      and new command areas covered by the RJK irrigation system including the RJK 1 & 2, Lamki and Pathariya. It will
      finance investments for: i) enhancing productivity, efficiency, and resilience of the agriculture sector; ii) improving the
      capacity of farmers to adapt to modern technologies and farming practices, especially those focused on improved
      water resource management; and iii) promoting value addition of agriculture products. This component will invest in
      agricultural modernization to be achieved through i) promotion of high-value agriculture and diversification; ii) use of
      locally viable climate-smart technologies and improved varieties; iii) adoption of modern technologies for efficient
      production and better water resource management; and iv) demand-based extension and outreach services. Where
      feasible, the project will strengthen linkages with ongoing initiatives and help form producers-buyer alliances (PAs) to
      promote access to finance and markets and promote adoption of digital technologies as applicable during production
      and postproduction stages.

17.      Component 4: Institutional Support and Project Management (US$10 million): This component will finance
capacity building and institutional strengthening of WUAs in the project area, as well as project management support and
capacity building of the Project Implementation Office (PIO). The component will have two sub-components:
    • Subcomponent 4.1 Institutional Support and Capacity Building of WUA (US$3 million): This sub-component will
    include capacity-building programs for WUAs to improve the MOM of the modernized system, equitable water
    distribution, water use efficiency, record and account management, the adoption of modern technologies for
    irrigation operation and performance assessment such as remote-sensing and water accounting and improved and
    inclusive citizen participation. The respective block-level WUA will solely manage irrigation systems below the level
    of management interface infrastructure. A federated WUA covering the whole of Pathariya will be formed and
    strengthened to manage the higher levels of the irrigation system under a joint management model. A MOM plan will
    be developed, and accordingly, the capacity of both the WUAs and Irrigation Agency will be enhanced to
    institutionalize the MOM plan.
 • Subcomponent 4.2 Project Management (US$7 million): including (i) consulting services for project survey,
   engineering design, and construction supervision; (ii) institutional strengthening and sector capacity building on
   Management Information System (MIS), Environment and Social (E&S) monitoring and management, and fiduciary
   management; and (iii) development and preparation of future investment projects in the sector.




16
     Source: Own review of data maintained by ACIU

                                                                                                                            Page 6
      The World Bank
      NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



  18. The environmental risk is substantial because of the nature of activities involved and potential impacts identified
      The project will be implemented in private lands and community forests, but away from protected areas. A
      government-approved EIA for the Pathariya irrigation scheme indicates potential impacts on forest land,
      biodiversity, water resources, privately owned land, assets, farmer livelihoods, and the removal of 3,900 trees from
      14 community forests. The environmental risks include deforestation, habitat fragmentation, biodiversity loss,
      pollution, occupational health and safety (OHS), and community concerns. Specifically, the project’s tree felling,
      construction of irrigation canals and the augmentation of water storage reservoirs may disrupt migratory routes
      and local biodiversity. Additionally, the construction and operation of irrigation systems and water storage facilities
      may lead to issues such as siltation, flooding and overexploitation affecting water availability. Construction
      activities are likely to generate air, noise, and water pollution, affecting the environment and communities. The
      project poses risks to the health and safety of workers and nearby communities during both the construction and
      operation phases. The upgrade and potential rehabilitation/construction of water storage reservoirs are also
      associated with dam safety risks.
  19. The social risks are considered high due to potential impacts from construction activities, including the extension
      of the feeder canal and augmentation of water reservoirs (locations and sizes of ponds yet to be determined). A
      government-approved EIA for component 1 highlights potential impacts on private, agricultural, and forest lands,
      as well as affecting 63 households, electric poles, and other public infrastructure, potentially impacting the Tharus
      community (48% of the population), who are indigenous (IP) to the project area, and other minorities. The project
      will explore options in the final design of the main canal and a negative list in selecting the location for the water
      reservoir to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on communities, especially on IP land and cultural heritage.
      Additional social risks include labor influx, occupational and community health and safety risks, sexual exploitation
      and abuse/sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), and gaps in community engagement. Phase 2 social assessments indicate
      no differentiated adverse impact or exclusion of IP groups however, marginalization exists for farmers with small
      landholdings, particularly those from minorities and households at the tail end of the command area who do not
      receive adequate irrigation water.
      To address these risks, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Labor Management Procedure (LMP) will be
      prepared before appraisal. A social assessment will be integrated into the EIA or added as an addendum. A RAP will


                                                                                                                        Page 7
     The World Bank
     NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)


     be prepared and disclosed before initiating bidding documents for the works contract but implemented before
     works commence. The social assessment will inform the decision to address marginalization, either by updating
     the existing Vulnerable Community Action Plan or preparing a new Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). A SEA/SH action
     plan will be prepared post-appraisal, with the timeframe specified in the project ESCP.



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Lixin Gu
 Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 Maha Ahmed
 Senior Agriculture Specialist

 Rubika Shrestha
 Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance
 The Secretary
 Ministry of Finance
 fso@mof.gov.np

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Energy Water Resources and Irrigation
 The Secretary
 Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
 moewrai555@gmail.com

 Department of Agriculture
 Director General
 Director General
 doa.agri2014@gmail.com

 Department of Water Resources and Irrigation
 Director General
 Director General
 dg_pasection@dwri.gov.np

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


                                                                                                                Page 8
     The World Bank
     NP Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase III(P507433)



The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Lixin Gu, Maha Ahmed, Rubika Shrestha

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Josses Mugabi                           25-Oct-2024

Country Director:                        Preeti Arora                            19-Nov-2024




                                                                                               Page 9
