Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI01104

                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                                                                              ON A
                                                                        PROPOSED GRANT
                                                              IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 14.5 MILLION
                                                                  (US$20.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
                                                                              AND A
                                                                        PROPOSED CREDIT
                                                               IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 7.3 MILLION
                                                                  (US$10.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
                                                                              AND A
                                                  PROPOSED SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATIONS FINANCING FACILITY GRANT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                               IN THE AMOUNT OF US$5.0 MILLION

                                                                                    TO THE

                                                                      INDEPENDENT STATE OF SAMOA

                                                                                     FOR A

                                           PACIFIC REGION PREPAREDNESS, ADAPTATION AND RESILIENCE - SAMOA PROJECT
                                                                          (P507749)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                              FEBRUARY 25, 2026




                                Urban, Disaster Risk Management, Resilience and Land
                                East Asia And Pacific



                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                (Exchange Rate Effective January 31, 2026)

                  Currency Unit =      SAMOAN TALA (SAT)
                     SAT2.68 =                  US$1
                     US$1.38 =                 SDR 1
                     SDR 0.72 =                 US$1

                                FISCAL YEAR
                              JULY 1 – JUNE 30




  Regional Vice President: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo
Regional Practice Director: Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee
        Division Director: Stephen N. Ndegwa
       Practice Manager: Björn Philipp
      Task Team Leaders: Jian Vun, Jessica Rachel Schmidt, Vica Rosario Bogaerts
                              ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACEO         Assistant Chief Executive Officer
AM           Accountability mechanism
ADB          Asian Development Bank
BSRPII       Building Safety and Resilience in the Pacific II
Cat DDO      Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
CEO          Chief executive officer
CERC         Contingent Emergency Response Component
CIM          Community Integrated Management
CRSC         Climate Resilience Steering Committee
CTSSU        Centralized Technical Services Support Unit
Das          Designated Accounts
DRM          Disaster risk management
E&S          Environmental and social
EIRR         economic internal rate of return
ESCP         Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF          Environmental and Social Framework
ESMF         Environmental and Social Management Framework
EP&R         Emergency Preparedness and Response
ESS          Environmental and Social Standard
FM           Financial Management
FGRM         Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
GBON         Global Basic Observing Network
GDP          Gross domestic product
GFDRR        Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GHG          Greenhouse gas
GRS          Grievance Redress Service
IBRD         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
IDA          International Development Association
IAs          Implementing Agency
ICT          Information Communications and Technology
IPF          Investment Project Financing
MHRA         Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment
MNRE         Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
MoF          Ministry of Finance
MWTI         Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure
MWTI-PMD     Ministry of Works, Transport, and Infrastructure Project Management Division
MHEWS        Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems
MTR          Mid-Term Review
NEOC         National Emergency Operations Center
NDC          Nationally Determined Contributions
NPV          net present value
O&M          Operations and Maintenance
ORSNET       Oceania Regional Seismic Network
PDO          Project Development Objective
PHWP         Pacific Humanitarian Warehousing Program
PICs         Pacific Island Countries
POM          Project Operations Manual
PREP-Samoa   Pacific Resilience Program – Samoa Project
RF           Results Framework
SEP          Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SESA         Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
SMP          Sustainable Management Plan
SOFF         Systematic Observations Financing Facility
SOC          Seismic Operations Center
SOP          Standard Operating Procedures
SORT         Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool
                                                      Official Use Only
SPC     The Pacific Community
STEP    Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
ToRs    terms of references
TWG     Technical Working Group
UNDRR   United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
WASH    Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WMO     World Meteorological Organization




                                                  Official Use Only
The World Bank
Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
(P507749)



                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS

 DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
 I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
       A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
       B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................1
 II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 6
       A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................6
       B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................6
       C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................7
       D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................7
       E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................11
       F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................12
 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 14
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................14
       B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................15
       C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................16
 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 16
       A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable)............................................................16
       B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................20
       C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................21
       D. Grievance Redress Services ...........................................................................................................22
 V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 22
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 23




                                                                   Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P507749)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Samoa                    Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project
                                                      Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                      Classification
                         Investment Project
P507749                                               Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                        [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                      [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                           [✓] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                                 [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                       [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                             [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                    [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                  Expected Closing Date
19-Mar-2026                             31-Dec-2031
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen disaster preparedness and increase resilience to climate and disaster risks, and in case of an eligible crisis
or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.

Components
 Component Name                                                                                                Cost (US$)


                                                                                                                            i
                                                     Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P507749)



 Component 1: Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems                                              10,800,000.00
 Component 2: Emergency Preparedness and Response                                                       7,200,000.00
 Component 3: Resilient Infrastructure                                                                 15,000,000.00
 Component 4: Project Management                                                                        1,500,000.00
 Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component                                                     500,000.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                       Independent State of Samoa

 Implementing Agency:           Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, Ministry of
                                Works, Transport and Infrastructure



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            35.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                 35.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    30.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                    30.00

      IDA Credit                                                                                                  10.00

      IDA Grant                                                                                                   20.00



                                                                                                                          ii
                                                   Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P507749)



 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Trust Funds                                                                                                          5.00

        Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                             5.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                                    Guarantee
                             Credit Amount        Grant Amount             SML Amount                            Total Amount
                                                                                                      Amount

National
Performance-Based                      10.00                  20.00                 0.00                 0.00           30.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                                  10.00                  20.00                 0.00                 0.00           30.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                 2026             2027            2028                2029             2030          2031         2032

Annual                0.57            4.50           10.00                7.00             4.00           2.00        1.50
Cumulative            0.57            5.07           15.07               22.07             26.07         28.07       29.57


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                                  Contributing Practice Areas
Urban, Resilience and Land

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate




                                                                                                                             iii
                                                       Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P507749)



SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Low
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Moderate
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Low
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Moderate


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                      Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                     Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                            Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                  Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                   Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                   Relevant


                                                                                                               iv
                                                    Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
     (P507749)



ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Schedule 2, Section I.A.2. The Recipient shall maintain, throughout the Project implementation period, a Climate
Resilience Steering Committee, with a mandate, composition and resources satisfactory to the Association, which shall
be responsible for providing overall policy guidance and strategic direction for the Project, as well as approving the
Annual Work Plan and Budget.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.4. The Recipient shall establish and thereafter maintain, throughout the Project implementation
period, a Technical Working Group, with a mandate, composition and resources satisfactory to the Association, which
shall be responsible for supporting the detailed preparation and implementation of the Project, including providing
technical inputs to the design and implementation of Project activities.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.5.a. The Recipient shall maintain, throughout the Project implementation period, a Project
Management Division (PMD) within the Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI), with a mandate,
composition and resources satisfactory to the Association, which shall be responsible for: (i) carrying out the day-to-day
management and implementation of the Project, and (ii) in collaboration with the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE), and with support from the Central Technical Services Support
Unit (CTSSU) as necessary, preparing and/or consolidating the Annual Work Plans and Budgets, Project Reports for each
calendar semester, and any other reports to be submitted to the Association under the Project, for submission to MOF.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.5.b. The Recipient shall, no later than four (4) months after the Effective Date, appoint, with
terms of reference, qualifications and experience satisfactory to the Association: a procurement officer, financial
management officer, safeguards officer, and monitoring and evaluation officer; and thereafter maintain all such
positions throughout the Project implementation period.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.6. The Recipient shall maintain, throughout the Project implementation period, within MOF, a
CTSSU, with a mandate, composition and resources satisfactory to the Association, which shall be responsible for
providing high-level oversight and guidance, training and support on Project implementation, and (B) coordinating and
collaborating with PMD and MNRE as necessary for Project implementation.
Schedule 2, Section I.B.1. The Recipient shall prepare and adopt, by no later than one (1) month after the Effective Date,
a manual, in form and substance acceptable to the Association, setting forth the arrangements and procedures for
implementation of the Project.


                                                                                                                        v
                                                    Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)



Schedule 2, Section I.D.1. The Recipient shall prepare and furnish to the Association, by no later than June 30 of each
year during Project implementation (or such later date as the Association may agree), for the Association’s review and
no-objection, an Annual Work Plan and Budget.
Schedule 2, Section II.1. The Recipient shall furnish to the Association each Project Report not later than forty-five (45)
days after the end of each calendar semester, covering the calendar semester.
Schedule 2, Section II.2. The Recipient shall carry out, jointly with the Association, not later than three (3) years after
the Effective Date, or such other period as may be agreed with the Association, a mid-term review of the Project (the
“Mid-Term Review”) to assess the status of Project implementation, as measured against the Project indicators
acceptable to the Association, and compliance with the legal covenants included or referred to in this Agreement.
Schedule 2, Section II.2. i. The Recipient shall prepare and furnish to the Association, at least one (1) month before the
date of the Mid-Term Review, a report, in scope and detail satisfactory to the Association.
Article IV, Section 4.01. The Co-financing Deadline for the effectiveness of the Grant Agreement is six (6) months from
the Effective Date.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                           Citation                         Description                    Financing Source
                                                                The Recipient has
Effectiveness                  Schedule 1, Section 5.01.        established the Technical      IBRD/IDA
                                                                Working Group.




                                                                                                                          vi
                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)



 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT


 A. Project Strategic Context
1. Samoa's high exposure and vulnerability to severe natural hazards, compounded by climate change, have caused
significant economic damage and threaten key economic sectors, particularly in vulnerable coastal areas. In the decade
leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, the economy faced multiple economic shocks resulting mainly from tropical
cyclones, which led to more volatile and slower growth, around 2.5 percent per year on average. These disasters have
disrupted livelihoods and threatened employment across key sectors, including tourism, agriculture, and fisheries, which
together account for the majority of Samoa's labor force. These shocks underscored the economy’s vulnerability to
external factors, particularly the devastating impact of natural and climate-related hazards. Such hazards have caused
substantial damage and losses over time, with major disasters occurring at an average rate of one every three years.
Notably, the 2009 tsunami and Cyclone Evan in 2012 caused damages equivalent to 20 percent and 29 percent of GDP,
respectively,1 demonstrating the severe economic impact of disasters. Between 1965 and 2025, Samoa experienced 56
disaster events, resulting in US$543 million in economic losses, i.e., annual losses averaging 5 percent of GDP. Climate
change is expected to worsen the frequency and intensity of natural and climate-related hazards, further endangering
infrastructure and livelihoods, while rising sea levels and increasing temperatures threaten agriculture, fisheries, and
tourism. Over 70 percent of the Samoan population resides in low-lying coastal zones, highly exposed to floods, coastal
inundation, droughts, tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and tsunami.

2. The Project targets disaster risk management (DRM) and urban resilience investment needs in Samoa to reduce risk
and prepare for future disasters. Its multi-pronged approach includes improving national-level multi-hazard early warning
systems (MHEWS) and emergency response capacities, building community preparedness, and investing in resilient
infrastructure in urban areas of the country. The Project is guided by four overarching principles: (i) enhancing end-to-end
MHEWS integrated systems, recognizing that effective MHEWS need to integrate hydrometeorological and geophysical
services through four key areas – disaster risk knowledge, hazard observations and forecasting, dissemination and
communication, and preparedness and response; (ii) investing in resilient public facilities to reduce the exposure and
vulnerability of priority assets to climate and natural-related hazards; (iii) advocating for a people-centered approach,
prioritizing community engagement and participatory design; and (iv) complementing global and regional initiatives,
including the Early Warnings for All initiative, Weather Ready Pacific initiative, Climate Risk Early Warning Systems
(CREWS), Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF), Building Safety and Resilience in the Pacific II (BSRPII), and
the Pacific Humanitarian Warehouse Program (PHWP).

 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
Disaster risk management in Samoa
3. Samoa continues to face considerable challenges as residual risks are exacerbated by climate change and increasing
urbanization. The evolving risk landscape makes early warning and response systems essential to safeguarding lives and
economic assets. Strengthening these systems is not just about immediate safety; it also ensures long-term economic
resilience by avoiding job and productivity losses resulting from disaster impacts. Continued investments in MHEWS and
in strengthening emergency preparedness and response (EP&R) capabilities will better equip Samoa to protect its
communities and economy from the growing impacts of natural and climate-related hazards. With every dollar spent on
these systems, global estimates indicate that countries can save between US$4 and US$10 in disaster response costs,
making them a critical focus for Samoa’s resilience strategy.2 Additionally, integrating risk considerations into urban

1 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), Disaster Risk Reduction in Samoa: Country Update 2022, (Suva: UNDRR, Sub-Regional

Office for the Pacific, 2022).
2 Stephane Hallegate, Jun Rentschler, and Julie Rozenberg, Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure Opportunity, Sustainable Infrastructure

Series (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2019).

                                                                                                                                       Page 1
                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


planning is aligned with proactive DRM, and helps to avoid the placement of people and critical assets in exposed areas.
Public buildings also need design solutions that suit Samoa’s climate and risk profile, including energy and water efficiency
standards that meet the requirements of the National Building Code of Samoa, which were updated in 2017 to align with
international standards. In addition, enhanced compliance with current resilience and adaptation design measures, in
consideration of Samoa’s growing climate and disaster risk, will help to minimize long-term operations and maintenance
costs, as well as over-reliance on main networks.

4. Over the past decade, Samoa’s approach to DRM has evolved, moving from a focus on post-disaster response to a
more balanced approach that includes proactive interventions. This shift has been led by the Ministry of Natural
Resources and Environment (MNRE),3 which is responsible for national disaster management, hazard monitoring, and the
operation of the country’s MHEWS. MNRE has been supported through initiatives such as the World Bank-financed Pacific
Resilience Program – Samoa Project (PREP-Samoa),4 which improved MHEWS, enhanced the resilience of critical school
infrastructure, and contributed to financial protection against disasters. The Government of Samoa has also ensured that
disaster and climate resilience standards are integrated in other sectoral investments to reduce risk proactively, including
those implemented by the Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI), which include transport, urban
development, and coastal protection projects. Additionally, the Ministry of Finance (MoF) is implementing a Disaster Risk
Financing Policy to guide the utilization of post-disaster financing instruments, such as contingent financing from the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), sovereign parametric insurance for tropical cyclones and earthquakes
provided by the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company, and a new Asset Management Policy Framework that aims
to strengthen the financial resilience of assets to hazards. These tools and policy reforms have provided timely financial
resources following disasters and have supported a DRM reform agenda, laying the foundation for a more resilient Samoa.

5. The Government of Samoa is actively implementing a series of regulatory changes to improve climate and disaster
risk management, although operational policies and procedures need to be enhanced. The Government has
demonstrated a strong commitment to enhancing MHEWS as a critical element of proactive DRM. Since 2021, the
Government has enacted the Meteorology, Geoscience and Ozone Services Act 2021, approved a National MHEWS Policy,
and established a Technical Working Group to regulate MHEWS. These reforms support integrated hazard monitoring and
effective downstream dissemination, as well as the implementation of impact-based forecasting for specific hazard
impacts and recommendations. In February 2024, the Government approved the Samoa Disaster Risk Management Policy,
which outlines a coordinated approach to addressing climate, natural, and health-related hazards, with a focus on
community-based preparedness and awareness of risk.5 Meanwhile, the Disaster and Emergency Management Act 2007
is under review to incorporate lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and consider more proactive DRM
approaches. The Pathway for the Development of Samoa 2021–2026,6 Samoa’s national development plan, calls for
building climate and disaster resilience for all Samoans, including through increased investments in Savai’i, Samoa’s largest
island and home to the country’s second largest – but growing – population especially in the township of Sālelologa. The
population in Savai’i grew by 3.7 percent compared to negative 3.8 percent in the Apia urban area. While regulatory
improvements have clarified legal mandates for DRM, more efforts are needed, especially for day-to-day implementation.
For instance, operational policies and procedures would strengthen long-term institutional capacities, especially given
persistent challenges of staff turnover and subsequent loss of institutional knowledge.



3 The key divisions responsible for Samoa’s MHEWS are the Disaster Management Office, Samoa Meteorological Division, Water Resource Division,

and Information Communications and Technology division.
4 PREP – Samoa Project (P154839)
5 The policy reforms are complemented by investments in MHEWS systems, instrumentation, and capacity building, including through the PREP

project. Data management is also being strengthened to support comprehensive risk assessments, including for non-financial assets and
communities, to increase their resilience to current and future climate and disaster risk.
6 Ministry of Finance of Samoa, Pathway for the Development of Samoa (Apia: Ministry of Finance, Economic Policy and Planning Division, 2022),

2022. https://www.mof.gov.ws/publications/economic-policy-planning/pathway-for-the-development-of-samoa.

                                                                                                                                       Page 2
                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


6. Overall, the Government’s DRM program continues to mature, with efforts being made alongside development
partners to strengthen a proactive policy framework and invest further in risk reduction and preparedness; however,
there is urgent need for further improvements in implementation, planning, and financing. The effectiveness of DRM
programs can be assessed through three key pillars: financial resilience, policies and coordination, and investments.
Samoa has made particularly impressive progress on financial resilience and policies. Together with other development
partners (see section E – Role of Partners), the World Bank has maintained a long-term DRM engagement in the country,
supporting these two pillars through the DRM Development Policy Operation with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option (Cat DDO) and the PREP-Samoa project. These efforts have advanced Samoa’s legislative and policy frameworks
for disaster risk financing, MHEWS, infrastructure asset management, and building code improvements to reduce and
mitigate risk. For example, initial investments in MHEWS and resilient school infrastructure were financed under
PREP-Samoa. However, critical gaps remain, especially in the implementation of policy reforms through proactive risk
reduction and preparedness initiatives. In addition, limited financing is available in the Pacific region for initiatives that
build resilience to geophysical (as opposed to climate-related) hazards and, importantly, for integrated (geophysical and
hydrometeorological) hazard monitoring and early warning systems. Also, while investments from the World Bank and
other development partners support climate-resilient transport, energy, digital, and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
sectors, there remains a key gap in urban resilience investment planning and implementation.7 Finally, the post-disaster
financial protection gap also remains large, with limited contingency funds within the Government’s budget and through
external financing from partners.8 Through this Project, the World Bank’s global technical expertise, tailored project
design, and funding mechanism such as the CERC, will help Samoa to address these gaps (see Figure 1).
                                         Figure 1: PREPARE Investments in Disaster Risk Management.




Note: PREPARE will invest in identified gaps in preparedness and risk reduction. The boxes shaded in green indicate the areas to be supported by the
Project. The boxes shaded in orange indicate areas supported by other engagements with the World Bank. The boxes shaded in grey indicate areas
                                                     supported broadly by development partners.

End-to-End Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems
7. The effective use of early warning systems during past disaster events in Samoa has been instrumental in avoiding
loss of life and highlights the potential of such systems; however, significant gaps in reliability and effectiveness remain.

7 For example, the World Bank-financed Digitally Connected and Resilient Samoa Project (P180807); Samoa Aviation and Roads Investment Project

(P176272; and Samoa Climate Resilient Transport Project (P507091).
8 Tropical Cyclones Ofa and Val in 1990 caused an estimated loss of US$300 to 500 million, while losses from the 2009 tsunami were estimated at

US$124 million, and losses from tropical cyclone Evan in 2012 were estimated at over US$210 million. Under its FY24/25 budget estimates, the
Government of Samoa only has SAT5 million (US$1.8 million) available for emergency response operations. The Government has access to ADB’s
US$10 million Contingent Disaster Financing instrument.

                                                                                                                                             Page 3
                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


The Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific 2017–2030 includes a regional commitment to establish
“end-to-end” MHEWS9 across the Pacific. In Samoa, however, persistent issues such as data transmission failures, aging
instrumentation and facilities, poor network coverage across the country, absence of specialized technical expertise, and
the lack of adequate decision support systems have limited the system’s overall efficiencies. These structural issues lead
to early warnings that are less accurate and do not reach users and communities in a timely manner. To address these
gaps, the Government is committed to continue strengthening the foundational elements of the system. This requires
enhancing real-time data collection and forecasting accuracy to improve warning precision; modernizing communication
infrastructure to ensure coverage in remote and underserved areas; and developing automated decision support systems
to streamline responses and reduce human error through enhanced technical capacity across key sectors. It is also critical
for Samoa to further integrate the monitoring of various types of hazards, such as hydrometeorological, geophysical,
climate, and health-related hazards, into a seamless system.

8. Samoa has made efforts toward providing actionable information to guide decision making during disasters, yet
faces challenges in operating, maintaining, and leveraging advanced technologies and systems. The sustainable
maintenance of observation and monitoring networks for both hydrometeorological and geophysical hazards is a known
challenge across the Pacific region. The unavailability of funds for spare parts, insufficient capacity to repair and calibrate
instruments, and obsolescence of equipment all contribute towards lack of sustainability. To address these challenges,
Samoa needs support to participate in several critical global and regional initiatives. First, the streamlining of data sharing
with the Oceania Regional Seismic Network (ORSNET), which aims to integrate seismic monitoring across the region, would
further enhance real-time earthquake and volcanic hazard monitoring and tsunami warning. Second, implementation of
the regional Weather Ready Pacific Decadal Programme of Investment will strengthen the country’s ability to manage
high-impact and extreme weather, water, and ocean events. Finally, support from SOFF, a global initiative to improve
weather data, is needed to address critical data gaps for extreme weather observations through additional land-based
and upper air monitoring stations.10 Additionally, countries like Samoa can integrate community insights and local
traditional knowledge into early warning systems to improve their relevance and effectiveness by combining modern
technology with place-based knowledge of hazards and increasing community trust and acceptance.

Emergency Preparedness and Response (EP&R) Capabilities
9. The compounding effects of Tropical Cyclone Harold and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 highlighted the complexity
of managing multiple emergencies simultaneously. While the National Emergency Operations Center (NEOC, funded by
PREP-Samoa) represents a significant improvement in inter-agency coordination during disaster events, there remains a
critical need for more comprehensive and adaptable EP&R systems that allow for effective interagency response.
Addressing this need requires substantial enhancements in emergency management infrastructure and equipment,
particularly in areas such as incident monitoring (to observe and coordinate responses to the impacts of hazards) and
incident management (including inter-agency emergency response services). For example, Samoa needs a robust digital
information system, which could leverage information from hazard monitoring and forecasting to connect with emergency
response systems and directly reach those at risk more quickly and efficiently. These improvements are not only critical
at the national level but must also extend to the subnational level, where local and rural emergency personnel and
communities require the necessary infrastructure, equipment, and systems to respond effectively to disasters through a
more coordinated approach.


9 According to the World Meteorological Organization, “end-to-end” MHEWS refers to a comprehensive, integrated approach that covers all stages

of the early warning cycle. This includes hazard monitoring and prediction, disseminating warnings to communities, and ensuring communities are
prepared to respond to the warnings.
10 Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF), Samoa Country Hydromet Diagnostics (Canberra, Australia: Bureau of Meteorology, 2023),

https://www.un-soff.org/document/samoa-country-hydromet-diagnostics/

                                                                                                                                        Page 4
                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)


10. There is a strong need to prioritize institutional capacity building and community engagement to ensure Samoa can
effectively utilize investments in emergency management. As a small island nation with competing demands for scarce
government resources and personnel, Samoa faces unique challenges in managing emergency situations efficiently. To
maximize the effectiveness of continued World Bank support and complementary programs financed by other
development partners, such as the PHWP and the BSRPII, it is essential to ensure that the country’s institutions have the
necessary capacity to make full use of the investments in infrastructure and equipment. Boosting that capacity calls for
investing in training programs that develop the skills and competencies of emergency personnel, as government staff
well-versed in emergency management protocols can respond more effectively during crises. Expanding and
strengthening community outreach initiatives such as the Government’s Community Disaster and Climate Risk
Management Programme will also foster greater public awareness and preparedness, allowing citizens to play an active
role in emergency response efforts and further increasing the effectiveness of DRM investments.

Urban Resilience
11. Samoa was the first country in the Pacific to adopt a systems-based approach to urban management, focusing on
holistic urban planning. This approach led to the development of district- and local-level plans that incorporate good
practices in urban planning, including participatory planning. The country’s Community Integrated Management (CIM)
Plans links local priorities to national development strategies and highlight essential infrastructure upgrades and disaster
preparedness. Some urban areas have established additional development controls and regulatory mechanisms. The 2012
Vaitele Sustainable Management Plan (SMP) and the 2018 Urban Design Standards for the Apia Waterfront provide
guidelines for the specified urban areas to: (i) guide land use; (ii) promote safe, functional, resilient, and sustainable urban
spaces; and (iii) ensure that new urban infrastructure enhances safety and livability. The Planning and Urban Management
Act 2004 mandates development policy controls for the entire country, and the Government is committed to developing
SMPs and planning policies for additional priority urban areas.

12. Integrating climate and disaster resilience proactively into the development of secondary cities such as Sālelologa
is critical, given their growing population and exposure to natural and climate-related hazards. In the Pathway for the
Development of Samoa (2021-2026), the Government emphasizes the need for long-term planning to achieve a more
spatially balanced distribution of economic opportunities across the country, while promoting overall national economic
growth. Focusing investments solely in Apia will be insufficient to achieve the Pathway’s goals. Recognizing this, the
Planning and Urban Management Agency (PUMA) under the MWTI intends to develop a township plan and SMP for
Sālelologa on the island of Savai’i due to the town’s strong economic potential as the transportation gateway between
Savai’i and Upolu. The plan would act as a catalyst for development, as there are currently no policies to guide and regulate
future growth in Samoa’s secondary urban areas, especially to manage urban amenities, address climate and disaster risk,
and ensure environmental and social safeguards. This is a critical gap, since the population of Savai’i grew by 3.7 percent
between 2016 and 2021, reaching 45,175 (one-fifth of Samoa’s population), with 34 percent of the island’s population
residing in Sālelologa’s district of Fa’asaleleaga. However, Sālelologa is in a low-lying area, parts of which are within the
tsunami evacuation zone, and the town is exposed to flooding, coastal erosion, and landslides. Its key infrastructure—
including the wharf, ferry terminal, airport, fire stations, market, schools, public library, and electricity substation—are
crucial for the community’s daily life and economic activity, making it essential to integrate climate and disaster resilience
into its future development, including public buildings and spaces. Yet these critical public assets are often not designed
to suit Samoa’s climate and disaster risk profile (e.g., improper design standards and construction practices) and thus
remain vulnerable to hazards. Environmentally sustainable designs adapted to the changing climate are needed and must
include mitigation measures, particularly for climate-related hazards such as floods and strong winds. Universal
accessibility standards are also needed to ensure access to people of all abilities, ages, and genders.

13. However, Samoa is experiencing uneven and often unmanaged urbanization, which poses additional challenges,
particularly as it intersects with increasing climate and disaster risks. Although Apia’s physical footprint continues to

                                                                                                                          Page 5
                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


expand, urbanization is largely occurring outside of urban administrative areas, which has led to urban sprawl and leapfrog
development along the coastal infrastructure corridors, where disaster risk such as related to flood hazards is higher.11
This pattern of peri-urban development can be attributed to the topography, the distribution of primary roadways, the
availability of customary land in the coastal plain, and the subdivision and sale of land. Without strategic planning and
regulation, urbanization increases the concentration of people and assets in hazard-prone areas. Therefore, it is critical to
integrate urban infrastructure with national-level DRM and adaptation planning and policy frameworks to reduce the
exposure and vulnerability of priority assets to natural and climate-related hazards.

14. The project is consistent with the World Bank's strategic engagement in the Pacific. While the Pacific Islands Regional
Partnership Framework (RPF) FY17-FY23 (Report No. 120479), which covers nine Pacific Island Countries (PICs) (Kiribati,
Republic of the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Nauru, Republic of Palau, the Independent
State of Samoa, the Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu) has lapsed and a successor framework is under preparation,
the project remains aligned with the forthcoming PIC9 RPF's target outcome of increased resilience and aligned with the
Small States Strategy lighthouse on climate resilience and disaster preparedness. In particular, the proposed project
contributes to the achievement of Objective 3.1: Strengthened resilience to natural disasters and climate change and
mainstreaming disaster risk and climate change considerations in development planning and investments.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION


 A. Project Development Objective
15. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen disaster preparedness and increase resilience to climate
and disaster risks, and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.

 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
16. Achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following PDO-level indicators:
     a. People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number, disaggregated by sex and age) corporate scorecard
         indicator. Measured by two sub-indicators:
               - People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure; and
               - People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response.
     b. Population with access to an enhanced emergency response system provided by functioning emergency
         management infrastructure (percentage, disaggregated by sex and age).12

17. The Theory of Change (see Figure 2) outlines how activities under the three technical components are expected to
contribute to enhanced disaster and climate resilience through targeted investments and institutional strengthening.
These efforts are designed to address the problem statement: “Samoa is highly exposed and vulnerable to climate-related
and natural hazards, with significant gaps remaining in disaster preparedness, emergency response capacity, and urban
resilience”. Key issues include inadequate hazard monitoring, limited early warning systems, insufficient emergency
response infrastructure, and limited integration of climate resilience into urban planning and public facilities. Without
addressing these gaps, Samoa will continue facing severe economic and social impacts during disasters, undermining
sustainable development and disrupting livelihoods.


11 Official statistics show rural growth surpassing urban growth, with Apia's population declining by 3.8 percent between 2016 and 2021. In this same

period, the population in the northwest Upolu peri-urban area and the urban corridor to Faleolo International Airport increased by 17.2 percent.
Urbanization is instead occurring outside of formal urban administrative areas, indicating “rural” growth.
12 Enhanced emergency response refers to the provision of functional emergency management infrastructure, including operational emergency

operations centers, adequately equipped first responders, and community-level preparedness measures.

                                                                                                                                              Page 6
                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)



 C. Project Beneficiaries
18. The Project is expected to benefit approximately 180,000 people (equivalent to 80 percent Samoa’s total population)
through investments in national-level MHEWS and emergency preparedness capacities. Of this total, 40,000 people are
expected to benefit from risk-informed urban planning and resilient infrastructure improvements. At least 300
government officials, emergency responders, and community members will also benefit from training and capacity
development activities. The Project will adopt universal access considerations to ensure that the voices and needs of
people of all ages, abilities, and genders are addressed in the planning, design, and implementation of Project activities.

                                                       Figure 2: Theory of Change




Key Assumptions: (i) no catastrophic event exceeds the capacity of systems being established; (ii) there is continued government
commitment and institutional mandates remain stable; (iii) logistical and procurement conditions remain functional, (iv) public trust
supports uptake of early warning messages; and (iv) adequate staffing and retention of trained personnel is maintained. These external
factors, while beyond direct Project control, are critical to achieving the intended outcomes.

 D. Project Components
19. The Project is structured under five components. Activities have been determined based on: (i) strategic alignment
with national development planning and DRM strategies; (ii) recommendations from technical assessments and
diagnostics;13 (iii) funding availability; and (iv) complementarity with other DRM programs and initiatives. The project
supports job creation and job protection by financing resilience investments, early warning systems, and preparedness
activities that generate short-term employment and safeguard livelihoods in infrastructure, agriculture and tourism
sectors.


13 Such as the Concept of Operations, Technical Design, Investment Plan, Procurement Plan, and Capacity Building Plan for MHEWS developed under

PREP-Samoa; the Government’s Emergency Radio Network and Emergency Siren Network Analysis and Diagnosis Report; the World Bank’s Technical
Inputs for a Design Brief for a Proposed Samoa Meteorological Facility; Emergency Preparedness and Response Diagnostic; and Urban Resilience
Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment and Investment Options for Sālelologa; and the SOFF Country Hydromet Diagnostic.

                                                                                                                                        Page 7
                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


Component 1: Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems (IDA Grant: US$5.8 million, SOFF Grant: US$5 million)
20. Component 1 will be implemented by MNRE and will invest in global and country-level decision support systems,
instrumentation, and capacity and institutional strengthening for MHEWS, supporting both climate-related and
geophysical hazards. This involves strengthening the “upstream” end of effective MHEWS through investments in
observations and forecasting for natural and climate-related hazards (especially extreme weather, tropical cyclones,
flooding, volcanic activity, earthquakes, and tsunami), including for the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Global
Basic Observing Network (GBON).14 Component 1 investments build on the Concept of Operations, Technical Design,
Investment Plan, and Capacity Building Plan for MHEWS prepared under PREP-Samoa. Using the principles of a
people-centered early warning system, which combines technological solutions with community empowerment under
Component 2 activities, Component 1 aims to promote a more integrated approach to disaster resilience. The SOFF
financing will fund selected activities across all three sub-components of Component 1, including three weather stations
– two land-based automated weather stations and an upper air station (radiosonde) – and associated ancillary
infrastructure, systems improvements, spare parts, training, and technical assistance. The Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) has established a single-donor trust fund (SDTF) to receive the SOFF funding. An
anticipated grant agreement for the proposed SOFF financing is expected to be signed shortly. In the meantime, project
implementation will start with only available IDA resources. In the unlikely event that SOFF funding does not become
available, or is less than expected, the project will be scaled down proportionally through a restructuring or alternative
funding would be required to fill the financing gap.15 The sub-components are:
        • Sub-component 1.1 – Early warning delivery systems will improve the systems that monitor natural and
            climate-related hazards and will support them to disseminate timely, accurate, reliable and impact-based alerts
            and warnings through various channels to inform communities and authorities about impending hazards, in
            accessible formats and through channels that reach all genders, enabling them to take proactive measures to
            mitigate risks. The Project will support: (i) technical assistance and software/hardware improvements for the
            design and development of inclusive impact-based warning systems,16 services and products tailored to the
            needs of diverse demographic groups, especially women and vulnerable communities; (ii) technical assistance
            to enable global and regional data sharing and enhancement of the interoperability of country-level systems
            within regional networks,17 as well as longer-term planning for operations and maintenance; (iii) design and
            development of multi-hazard decision support systems (hardware and software) to provide real-time
            multi-hazard information and analysis (including sex- and age-disaggregated data); and (iv) updated hazard
            modeling and mapping to improve forecasting and warning issuance.
        • Sub-component 1.2 – Monitoring and communication equipment will upgrade equipment to enhance the
            Government’s capability to detect and respond to natural and climate-related hazards effectively, improving
            the accuracy and timeliness of data for forecasting, warning and rapid situation awareness. All equipment
            procured will meet international energy efficiency standards per the manufacturer’s technical specifications.
            The Project will support: (i) ICT hardware and software for communication networks and equipment;
            (ii) monitoring equipment and technology for hydrometeorological and geophysical hazards (with associated
            physical enclosures and operational training), including automated weather stations (surface and upper air),
            river stations, rain gauges, tide gauges, Global Positioning System (GPS) stations, volcano-specific monitoring
            stations, seismic stations, and high performance computers; and (iii) spare parts and supplementary materials
            to maintain consistent operation of equipment after commissioning.

14 GBON is a fundamental element of global weather forecasting systems based on the international exchange of observational data, which underpin

all weather, climate, and water services and products. SOFF is facilitating implementation of GBON in the Least Developed Countries and Small Island
Developing States, including Samoa, to generate and internationally exchange the required GBON station data.
15 SOFF financing is not necessary to achieve the PDO indicators, only one intermediate indicator “GBON land-based and upper air stations’

commissioning period completed, country-specific standard cost for operations and maintenance established, and data sharing verified by WMO
Technical Authority”. Activities funded by IDA can be implemented without awaiting SOFF financing.
16 Impact-based warnings provide information on what hazards will do, not only what hazards will be.
17 Including tropical cyclone forecasting with the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi, Fiji and earthquake monitoring ORSNET.


                                                                                                                                             Page 8
                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)



        •    Sub-component 1.3 – Institutional strengthening and capacity building will ensure that the necessary skills,
             knowledge, and frameworks are in place to monitor hazards and disseminate early warnings effectively,
             improving the technical and institutional capabilities of the Government. The Project will support: (i) technical,
             environmental and social management, and socio-economic assessments (for SOFF); (ii) consultation activities
             with communities (including focus group discussions with women) and key stakeholders, and awareness-
             raising materials (for SOFF); (iii) staff training and development, including in meteorology, seismology,
             hydrology, hazard monitoring and observations, communications, and quality management; (iv) recruitment
             of technical assistance consultants for systems coordination, technician support, and information and
             communications technology; and (v) technical assistance for the development of policies and standard
             operating procedures (SOPs) to modernize and integrate hazard monitoring and early warning
             communications.

Component 2: Emergency Preparedness and Response (IDA Grant: US$7.2 million)
21. Component 2 will be implemented by MNRE and enhance national- and community-level response capacities to
better prepare for, and respond to, future disasters. This will be achieved through supporting the “downstream” end of
effective MHEWS by investing in five key pillars of EP&R: legal and institutional framework, information management,
facilities, equipment, and personnel. National hazard monitoring centers that are critical for emergency response will be
designed and constructed to national climate-resilient building design standards, including for water and energy
efficiencies, and relevant climate adaptation measures such as climate-resilient building materials and environmentally
sustainable design practices. This includes the proposed meteorological and seismic facility, a specialized center equipped
with instruments and technology for observing, recording, and analyzing weather, seismic, climate and atmospheric
conditions. Emergency management capacities and community outreach programs will be supported to ensure that early
warning information through improved MHEWS is accessible, understandable, and actionable across all sectors and
communities. Activities are expected to have benefits at the regional, national, and community levels. The sub-
components are:
         • Sub-component 2.1 – Emergency management infrastructure will support national response capacities by
             investing in critical government facilities that would enable effective whole-of-government emergency
             responses for disasters and are designed to meet current resilience, safety, and accessibility standards,
             including considerations for privacy, security, and hygiene. The Project will support detailed engineering
             design, environmental and social assessments, construction supervision, civil works activities, and related
             internal furnishings and equipment for: (i) a new meteorological facility in Apia and a satellite office adjacent
             to the Faleolo International Airport; (ii) a Seismic Operations Center (SOC) in Apia;18 and (iii) multifunctional
             fire, ambulance and emergency response services facilities.19
         • Sub-component 2.2 – Emergency management capacity will improve Samoa’s EP&R systems to maintain
             readiness and operational efficiency during emergencies. The Project will support: (i) emergency response
             equipment and prepositioned emergency relief supplies (non-food items), including for facilities financed
             under Sub-component 2.1; (ii) business continuity planning and emergency response training and drills for
             government line ministries, first responders, and utilities providers; and (iii) SOPs, including for emergency
             response, emergency operation centers, and regional coordination on emergency response.20
         • Sub-component 2.3 – Dissemination, education, and outreach will ensure that first responders and
             communities are well-informed and equipped to respond to emergencies. The Project will support: (i) the pilot

18 The detailed engineering designs, environmental and social management instruments, and bid documents have been prepared under the Pacific

Resilience Program – Samoa Project (P154839).
19 These assets will be handed over to the Samoa Fire and Emergency Services Agency (SFESA) upon completion and include multifunctional spaces

for inter-agency emergency response.
20 This effort complements the Pacific Humanitarian Warehousing Program, which is a Pacific-led, multi-partner program that is strengthening

disaster preparedness in the region by enhancing sovereign capacity to procure, store, and manage essential supplies (non-food items) for future
disasters.

                                                                                                                                         Page 9
                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


             of cell broadcasting technology to disseminate emergency alerts;21 (ii) design and development of a digital
             disaster and incident management information system for all hazards and risk data; (iii) emergency sirens
             including their integration with electrical and radio networks, spare parts and training, and related operations
             and maintenance equipment; and (iv) implementation of community outreach and awareness-raising
             programs, including modules targeting diverse population groups (women, youth, and people with disabilities).

Component 3: Resilient Infrastructure (IDA Grant: US$5 million; IDA Credit: US$10 million)
22. Component 3 will be implemented by MWTI and will invest in national and local activities to reduce the exposure
and vulnerability of select urban areas to climate and natural-related hazards. The focus of this component is to reduce
risk proactively through township planning and urban policy frameworks that are informed by climate and disaster risks,
and through prioritized physical investments in new and upgraded green public buildings and spaces that incorporate
disaster and climate resilience standards. This approach builds on global experience and lessons learned from World Bank
financed- projects in the Republic of the Marshall Islands and Vanuatu, which combine physical infrastructure with
institutional strengthening for urban planning. Activities under this component will focus on secondary urban areas.
Longterm planning in other urban areas is critical to a cost-effective and viable- approach to infrastructure development.
In Savai’i, there are opportunities to encourage inclusive growth and shared prosperity to provide more opportunities for
economic development, social inclusion, basic services, and urban livability. Risk reduction investments in waterfront and
streetscape upgrading have been prioritized in the first phase of implementation to improve urban amenities immediately;
additional resilient public facilities (buildings or spaces) will be confirmed once the township plan and investment
prioritization are completed by Year 2 of implementation but will include retrofitting the Sālelologa market as a resilient
multifunctional government building.22 For all such public facilities, construction materials will adhere to global
environmental sustainability and climate mitigation and adaptation standards, as set out in the National Building Code
(e.g., materials with low-embedded greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, such as low-carbon concrete and sustainably
sourced timber); and buildings will include green features such as automated lighting, and water- and energy-efficient
appliances, cyclone fastening, rainwater harvesting, and marine-grade, flood resistant materials suitable for coastal areas.
This component will also establish urban planning committees in selected urban areas to support decision-making
responsibilities, and promote representation of women with a minimum target of 50 percent women. The sub-
components are:
        • Sub-component 3.1 – Planning and institutional strengthening will provide technical studies for asset
             vulnerability and investment prioritization, establish development control policies for future developments,
             and support the implementation of climate-informed building codes.23 The Project will support: (i) technical
             assistance for development of a Sālelologa township plan, SMP, and Strategic Environmental and Social
             Assessment (SESA); (ii) technical assistance and equipment24 for development of building code implementation
             policies, procedures and awareness raising (including in Savai’i); (iii) technical assistance for updating and
             development of national and subnational planning legislation,25 development control policies, land use
             planning policies and data management guided by climate and disaster risk, and a formalized street addressing
             system (which will enhance emergency services); and (iv) technical studies, feasibility studies, and vulnerability
             assessments to support the development of urban areas.26

21 Cell broadcasting is critical for early warnings because it enables rapid, widespread dissemination of emergency alerts to all mobile devices in a

specific area, ensuring timely and effective communication during crises.
22 The Project Operations Manual (POM) lays out the criteria for the subproject investments including screening criteria – contribution to project

objectives, readiness, non-redundancy (with other initiatives), ownership and maintenance considerations, equity (with vulnerable and poor people);
and prioritization criteria – geographic targeting, replicability, and co-benefits.
23 The Project is only financing the studies referenced and not any downstream activities.
24 For example, technologies and devices needed to document and monitor construction sites, such as measuring devices and tablets.
25 While the World Bank may finance such technical assistance, it cannot support any activities involving participation in parliamentary committee

discussions, lobbying, or other engagements that may be considered political in nature.
26 Additional urban areas could include Asau in Savai’i and Mulifanua in Upolu. A prioritization of urban areas will be undertaken during

implementation.

                                                                                                                                             Page 10
                                                                     Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)



        •    Sub-component 3.2 – Resilient public facilities investments will construct and retrofit high-priority public
             facilities to demonstrate compliance with disaster risk reduction, climate adaptation, accessibility, and
             sustainability standards. The Project will support the detailed engineering design, environmental and social
             assessments, civil works activities, and construction supervision for: (i) pilot waterfront upgrading in Sālelologa,
             combined with small-scale coastal protection27 and community spaces; (ii) urban streetscape upgrading, access
             roads to basic services, stormwater drainage, and small-scale coastal protection in urban areas of Samoa;
             (iii) retrofitting and construction of critical government buildings, such as resilient multifunctional government
             buildings (with emergency management functions) in Savai’i; and (iv) multifunctional public spaces, including
             parks, green spaces, and floodplain management spaces. The investments under this component have been
             informed by a Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment (MHRA) and Investment Options technical assistance study,
             carried out by the World Bank from 2024 to 2025.28

Component 4: Project Management (IDA Grant: US$1.5 million)
23. Component 4 will be implemented by MWTI and will support project management and implementation support for
Components 1 to 3. Responsibilities include environmental and social management, procurement and contract
management, financial management, communication, monitoring and evaluation, and training. Key activities include the
preparation of annual work plans and budgets, regular project and financial reporting, auditing, development of a
monitoring, evaluation, and learning system, and day-to-day project and contract management activities. The Project will
support: (i) the recruitment of consultants to support the implementation of all Project activities, such as a Procurement
Officer, Financial Management Officer, Safeguards Officer, and Monitoring and Evaluation Officer; (ii) technical assistance
to support evaluation of the Project at the mid-term point and completion, as well as auditing; and (iii) capacity building
and training on project management and implementation.

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (IDA Grant: US$0.5 million)
24. Component 5 will be implemented by MoF and will support emergency response activities under a pre-allocated
CERC. Despite the ex-ante resilience-building activities planned under this Project, the increasing vulnerability of Samoa
to natural and climate-related hazards means that access to contingent financing is a key requirement under MoF’s
Disaster Risk Financing Policy. The CERC provides a mechanism with pre-allocated funding: (i) for quick disbursements to
meet the immediate liquidity needs of the Recipient following an eligible disaster event to finance critical imports; or (ii) to
finance emergency response, recovery and reconstruction works and associated services. Despite the ex-ante resilience-
building activities planned under this Project, the increasing vulnerability of Samoa to natural and climate-related hazards
means that access to contingent financing is a key requirement under the Ministry of Finance’s Disaster Risk Financing
Policy. Accordingly, the proposed project includes a Contingent Emergency Response Component with pre-allocated
funding of US$500,000 equivalent for use following an eligible disaster event The CERC Annex in the Project Operations
Manual (POM) provides the overall financing framework and types of activities to be financed under the CERC. All eligible
activities included in the CERC Annex will consider climate risks, on both mitigation and adaptation to demonstrate
alignment with the Paris Agreement. This ensures alignment for the specific activities that are to be financed and included
in the Emergency Action Plan, based on the information available at the time of activation of the CERC.

 E. Role of Partners
25. Several development partners are supporting DRM and urban development in Samoa, but efforts would benefit
from a more holistic and integrated approach to investments in preparedness and risk reduction. Table 1 presents
activities funded by other development partners that are complementary to this project, including the layering of disaster
risk financing options, emergency management infrastructure, and climate-related early warning systems. Despite the


27 For example, land-based coastal revetments, tidal steps, nature-based solutions, small seawalls, etc.
28 This included field visits, stakeholder consultations, and design workshops to consider waterfront and streetscape upgrading, and development of

a multifunctional government facility.

                                                                                                                                           Page 11
                                                                     Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P507749)


significant support, major gaps remain particularly in multi-hazard early warning systems (as opposed to climate-related
ones, for which there is more funding available to the Pacific region), national hazard monitoring facilities, and integrated
urban planning and infrastructure investments that reduce climate and disaster risks proactively. The Government’s aid
coordination and management systems, including under the MoF and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT),
ensures the coordination and complementarity of these activities. The World Bank will continue cooperating with other
development partners in this sector, including through this Project.
                                       Table 1: Involvement of Partners in DRM and Urban Sectors
  Partner                    Nature of Involvement
  Asian Development          The Government has access to a US$10 million Contingent Disaster Financing facility. The ADB is also
  Bank                       supporting investments in Apia port upgrading and climate-resilient road infrastructure.
  Australia and New          A weather radar is planned under the Weather Ready Pacific program, implemented by the Pacific
  Zealand                    Regional Environment Programme (SPREP). Other investments informed by the Weather Ready Pacific
                             Decadal Programme of Investment are being scoped. The Pacific Islands Emergency Management
                             Alliance funds The Pacific Community (SPC) to deliver regional and national training and technical
                             assistance for the National Disaster Management Office and Samoa Fire and Emergency Services
                             Authority. The Australia-Pacific Partnership for Aviation Program is investing in weather monitoring
                             stations at Faleolo and Fagali’i.
  Australia                  A humanitarian warehouse adjacent to the NEOC in Tuana’imato is planned under the Pacific
                             Humanitarian Warehousing Program, implemented by SPC. Australia is also supporting bilateral
                             programs on accredited training for emergency responders and meteorologists.
  European Union             An Emergency Operations Center in Savai’i near Maota Airport is planned under the BSRPII Program,
                             implemented by SPC. The European Union is providing technical and financial support to the Samoa
                             Drought Early Warning and Management Policy through the European Union Delegation in Fiji, and
                             supporting automated weather stations and climate monitoring service enhancements through the
                             Climate Services and related Application (ClimSA) Programme.
  Japan                      Japan supports training for Meteorological Facility staff and capacity building related to the potential for
                             public-private partnerships for climate change operations and improving access to external climate
                             funding sources. The upgrading and rehabilitation of Automated Weather Stations is being considered.
  New Zealand                New Zealand supports waterfront developments in Apia, including an ongoing reconstruction of the
                             Savalalo Market for food and handicrafts. It provides technical and financial support to DRM policy
                             reforms including the Samoa DRM Policy 2024 and planned revisions to the Disaster and Emergency Act
                             2007; and offers climate financing budget support to MNRE including for coastal protection.


 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
26. Over the past decade, the World Bank has gradually increased its urban resilience investments in Pacific Island
Countries to support a forward-looking approach that incorporates and emphasizes preparedness and risk reduction.
Analysis and knowledge gained from past and ongoing initiatives on DRM and urban resilience in the Pacific have
highlighted the importance of financing targeted investments in Pacific cities and towns to offer sustainable opportunities
for managing disaster and climate risk effectively.29 This includes aligning and combining long-term strategic planning for
DRM with targeted “soft” (non-engineered) and “hard” (engineered) interventions,30 and engaging local communities
continuously through the project lifecycle to foster awareness, commitment, and ownership and to ensure that the
interventions integrate cultural values and sensitivities.31 Experience from other countries has demonstrated that in order
for cities to play a more effective role in the country or wider regional development, projects should identify strategic

29 See World Bank report on Livable Pacific Cities and Towns: Urbanization Strategies for Resilience, Sustainability, and Inclusion (forthcoming)
30 Pacific Resilience Project (PREP) and Kiribati Adaptation Project Phase II
31 Kiribati Adaptation Project Phase II and Republic of the Marshall Islands Urban Resilience Project


                                                                                                                                              Page 12
                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)


urban areas and implement priority investments, as opposed to taking a piecemeal, ad-hoc approach. For example, the
Maldives has pursued a regional development strategy to provide economic opportunities, improve basic service delivery,
and enhance quality of life in secondary urban centres.

27. The sustainability of early warning services depends on a comprehensive approach to investing in system
integration, institutional strengthening and sustainability, and operations and maintenance (O&M). Investments reflect
a realistic assessment of MNRE’s existing institutional and staffing capacity, as well as the availability of recurrent budgets,
to ensure appropriate O&M costs for sustained systems operations. Procurement packages will be designed to include
spare parts, sustainability plans, and training to help minimize O&M burden on MNRE beyond the project closing date.
Previous experiences from World Bank-financed projects elsewhere have shown that trained systems integrators play a
critical role in supporting project implementation by developing detailed system designs, providing procurement and
implementation support, and providing technical guidance for the overall project. A systems coordinator consultant will
be recruited under Component 1 to help integrate GBON investments under SOFF with national-level hazard monitoring
systems. Formal and accredited technical training will be provided to officers in MHEWS service providers, and policies
and procedures will be developed, to help strengthen institutional and staff capacity for long-term sustainability of
Samoa’s MHEWS.

28. Investments in community preparedness and emergency response capacity significantly contribute to protecting
assets and saving lives. For instance, in Tonga, the World Bank's investments have supported the modernization of
observation infrastructure, data management systems, and forecast and warning systems. Following the Hunga Tonga-
Hunga Ha’apai volcanic eruption and tsunami in 2022, timely action-oriented early warnings were issued and emergency
operation centers were activated to coordinate a national-level state of emergency. These investments helped to mitigate
a significant loss of life as people were well informed on the potential impacts and were able to evacuate swiftly. Similarly,
in the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), the World Bank-financed Pacific Resilience Program II – RMI Project has
supported the installation of radios across the entire country to improve atoll-level emergency communications. These
strategic investments in emergency response systems have not only strengthened infrastructure and institutional capacity
but also ensured timely and effective response and recovery during disaster events, thereby minimizing human losses and
safeguarding economic stability. Communities are key to successful project outcomes as they are the first responders and
worst affected in disaster events. Building community capacity (including that of women and girls) in emergency
preparedness and response has seen great success in Odisha, India where almost 1 million people benefitted from
improved early warnings and emergency shelters across the coast during the Category 5 Tropical Cyclone Phailin.
Improved early warning systems allowed for dissemination of alerts four days before Phailin struck land. This translated
into the effective evacuation of approximately 400,000 people. There were 21 fatalities, and an additional 23 due to severe
flash flooding in the aftermath of the cyclone. This can be compared to Cyclone 05B, which hit the same area in 1999; with
only two days’ early warning, timely evacuation was not feasible in that case, and the cyclone resulted in 10,000 fatalities.

29. The PREP-Samoa Project invested significantly in addressing the country’s DRM needs over the past decade,
highlighting lessons learned and further investment opportunities. In post-disaster situations, the pre-allocated CERC
under PREP-Samoa was effective in deploying relatively rapid funds for disaster response without the need to reallocate
resources. This helped to avoid unnecessary delays related to budget reallocations and activity planning in a country highly
exposed and vulnerable to natural and climate-related hazards. The project also played a significant role in the
strengthening of the country’s MHEWS, establishment of the Disaster Risk Financing Policy (the second in the Pacific
region), and construction of a demonstration climate-resilient school. Yet, significant opportunities remain to advance
systems, instrumentation and capacities for end-to-end and people-oriented MHEWS, which are complex systems that
require long-term investment and capacity support, as well as close coordination across institutions and different parts of
the system. Further investments are needed, together with complementary MHEWS investments financed by other
development partners (see Table 1), to address key constraints such as fast-evolving technologies, staffing capacities, and
high maintenance costs. In addition, greater concentrations of people and assets are now in urban areas, highlighting the
                                                                                                                        Page 13
                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


need to target investments to reduce the Government’s contingent liability during future disasters. Interventions must go
beyond the traditional sub-sectoral and ad-hoc urban projects (in public facilities, transport, water supply, sanitation,
drainage, etc.) to target integrated urban planning and infrastructure/asset investments that reduce risk proactively.


 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION


 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
30. Project Governance. The Project will be governed by the Climate Resilience Steering Committee (CRSC), chaired by
the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of MoF, and including the CEOs of MNRE, MWTI, MFAT, and the Samoa Fire and
Emergency Services Authority. The key mandate of the CRSC is to coordinate, provide advice, and guide climate and
disaster resilience investments of the Government. The responsibilities of the CRSC for this Project will include approval
of the Annual Work Plan and Budget and any other strategic decisions. The Aid Coordination and Management Division
(ACMD) of MoF serves as the Secretariat for this committee. A Technical Working Group (TWG) will be established prior
to Project Effectiveness to support the detailed preparation and implementation of the Project, consisting of Assistant
CEOs (ACEOs) implementing the Project and other key stakeholders from line ministries that are required to provide
technical inputs to the design and implementation of Project activities.

31. Implementing Arrangements. MoF is the Executing Agency, with MNRE, MWTI and MoF designated as the
Implementing Agencies (IAs). MNRE will be responsible for implementing Components 1 and 2, MWTI will be responsible
for implementing Components 3 and 4, and MoF will be responsible for implementing Component 5 (if the CERC is
activated).32 The Project Management Division of MWTI (MWTI-PMD), led by its ACEO and in coordination with the ACEOs
of the TWG, will carry out the day-to-day project management and implementation functions, including project
engineering oversight, procurement, environmental and social management, contract management, and monitoring and
evaluation, with funding from Component 4. Most of the day-to-day financial management functions will be carried out
by the MWTI-PMD as laid out in the POM, while MoF will be responsible for selected tasks including processing payments,
submitting Withdrawal Applications and Interim unaudited Financial Reports (IFRs) to the World Bank, and conducting
annual audits. Contracts will be signed by the respective IA with assigned technical focal points at the ACEO level (who are
also part of the TWG) providing oversight and technical approvals. IAs will be supported by technical specialists (consulting
firms and individual consultants) carrying out project activities (other than project management) under Components 1, 2,
and 3. The Centralized Technical Services Support Unit (CTSSU) under MoF will advise MWTI-PMD and IAs on procurement,
financial management, environmental and social management, and monitoring and evaluation as needed. Human
resource capacity constraints in the line ministries will be mitigated by the longer six-year project implementation
timeframe, an investment plan that was agreed at Appraisal, advance procurement of selected activities, and additional
staffing resources in the MWTI-PMD dedicated to the Project. Refer to Figure 3 for further detail.

32. Implementation Readiness. MoF, MNRE, and MWTI have experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects
in the DRM and transport sectors. MWTI-PMD staff are implementing the Samoa Aviation and Roads Improvement Project
(P176272) and Samoa Climate Resilient Transport Project (P165782), both financed by the World Bank, and three
infrastructure projects financed by the ADB. MNRE has experience implementing PREP-Samoa and the Enhancing the
Climate Resilience of Coastal Resources and Communities Project (P126596). MWTI has broad experience with
infrastructure development, including in the land, aviation, maritime, and building sectors. Technical expertise in civil
engineering and urban planning through consulting services will complement staff capacity in MWTI. Advance
procurement33 commenced during project preparation for the following activities: under Component 1, (i) seismic stations,

32 This institutional arrangement is similar to that of the Samoa Aviation and Roads Investment Project (P176272).
33 Including the preparation of technical specifications for goods, preparation of terms of references (ToRs) for consulting services, and initiation of

the bidding process.

                                                                                                                                               Page 14
                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)


(ii) hydrometric stations and flood modeling, (iii) automated weather stations, (iv) weather forecasting software repairs;
under Component 2, emergency sirens, under Component 3, (i) Sālelologa township plan, SMP, and SESA, (ii) Urban
Planning and Design Specialist; and under Component 4, (i) Engineering Advisor, (ii) project management officers.

                                         Figure 3: Implementation arrangements




33. Project Operations Manual (POM). The POM is a key project document that outlines the operational framework for
implementing the Project. It serves as a practical guide for all stakeholders to ensure effective, transparent and compliant
project execution in line with the policies of the Government of Samoa and the World Bank. The POM will be finalized and
adopted no later than one month after the Effective Date.

34. Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism (FGRM). The Project will establish a FGRM managed by the MWTI-PMD
to allow project stakeholders to seek satisfactory resolution to grievances they may have in relation to the Project and
allow for constructive feedback to enhance the quality, inclusion and effectiveness of project activities. The FGRM will
help to ensure that the rights and interests of affected people, beneficiaries, and direct and contracted workers are
protected, and concerns are addressed adequately. The grievance process is based upon the premise that it imposes no
cost to those raising the grievances (i.e., Complainants); that concerns arising from project implementation are adequately
addressed in a timely manner; and that participation in the grievance process does not preclude pursuit of legal remedies
under national law. The Results Framework includes an indicator to measure beneficiary feedback on the timely resolution
of complaints.

 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
35. Results Framework (RF). The RF forms the basis to track the progress of activities to meet the PDO. Within the first
six months of project commencement, a monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) plan will be established to guide
project implementation. The MEL plan will be maintained by MWTI-PMD, which will be responsible for collecting the
required data from the IAs, setting up the MEL system, and reporting the results through periodic progress reports (at
least quarterly for internal government reporting and at least every six months to the World Bank). Technical support and
training on the MEL system will be provided from funding under Component 4. Information and data collected by
MWTI-PMD on distribution of inputs, disbursement of funds, and achievement of results indicators will feed into the MEL
system to help monitor and evaluate the project’s outcomes and impacts, and ensure that the lessons learned are
incorporated into project implementation.

36. Project Reporting and Missions. The POM includes a template for the project reports, setting out key information to
be included in each report and the modality for finalization after any clearances required prior to submission to the World

                                                                                                                     Page 15
                                                         Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


Bank. The reports will be submitted to the World Bank not later than 45 days after the end of each calendar semester,
covering the calendar semester, and should cover at a minimum the following: (i) physical and financial progress against
agreed implementation and disbursement indicators; (ii) issues and problems areas, including comments on actions to
address identified problems; (iii) work programs and cost estimates for the upcoming 12 months, including revised
estimates for the former period; and (iv) data on grievances and resolutions to allow for timely corrective actions. The
World Bank will conduct regular implementation support missions approximately every six months, complemented by
technical missions to resolve specific project implementation challenges. A mid-term review (MTR) mission to evaluate
project implementation will take place at the mid-point of project implementation, not later than three (3) years after the
Effective Date, and will include a review of utilization of the CERC and whether project restructuring is needed.

 C. Disbursement Arrangements
37. IDA and SOFF financing will flow to two separate Designated Accounts (DAs) managed by MoF. In addition, if CERC
is triggered, a new DA will be opened for CERC related expenditures. MoF has been managing DAs for all World
Bank -financed projects and has gained significant financial management experience working with the World Bank.
Disbursement methods applicable are advances, direct payments, reimbursements and special commitments for eligible
expenditures incurred under the project. MoF will submit withdrawal applications and the required supporting
documentation. The financing will flow from either the DA or the World Bank to contractors (for construction of buildings
and facilities), goods suppliers (for early warnings equipment, emergency response equipment, ICT goods), consultant
firms (for technical assistance, construction supervision, and auditing), operational service providers (travel, training,
workshops) and technical and project management consultant staff. The detailed disbursement arrangements are
included in the Disbursements and Financial Information Letters.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY


 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable)
38. The Project’s technical aspects and costs were assessed and are adequate. The Project has been designed to align
closely with Samoa's strategic priorities and the World Bank’s Triple Dividend of Resilience Framework.34 The Project offers
threefold benefits: (i) minimizing disaster losses by strengthening MHEWS and emergency management infrastructure
and promoting urban resilience; (ii) boosting economic resilience by safeguarding key economic drivers and jobs during
and after disaster events; and (iii) generating co-benefits that foster improved long-term social cohesion, environmental
protection, and economic stability. The Project’s strategic focus on resilience and sustainable development ensures a
balance between costs and benefits, ultimately supporting Samoa’s national goals under the Pathway for the
Development of Samoa 2021-2026. By targeting critical gaps in disaster preparedness and response, the Project is
expected to offer a favorable cost-benefit ratio, providing long-term economic stability and enhanced quality of life for
Samoa’s population.

39. The technical design of Component 1 (Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems) provides an opportunity to
continue strengthening the end-to-end capacity of MHEWS in Samoa based on international good practices. The
component combines investments in systems strengthening (to enhance hazard monitoring capabilities), institutional and
capacity strengthening for service providers (to ensure efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability), and investments in
infrastructure (to deliver tangible benefits and enhance timeliness and accuracy of early warnings) for the provision of
MHEWS. The design of Component 1 conforms with international good practices established under World Bank-financed



34 Thomas Tanner, Swenja Surminski, Emily Wilkinson, Robert Reid, Jun Rentschler, and Sumati Rajput, The triple dividend of resilience: realizing
development goals       through   the    multiple    benefits of      disaster risk     management. (Washington,        D.C.:     World     Bank
Group), http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/993161515193991394

                                                                                                                                         Page 16
                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


projects.35 The Project will implement key recommendations for national-level MHEWS developed under the PREP-Samoa
Project and GBON systems from the SOFF Country Hydromet Diagnostics.36 Costs of project activities were estimated
based on similar activities financed in the Pacific region and unit costs of early warning instrumentation determined
through market research. The technical assistance activities were selected based on the Capacity Building Plan developed
under the PREP-Samoa Project, SOFF Country Hydromet Diagnostics, the ORSNET Technical Report developed under the
PREP-Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) Project (P155542), and World Bank technical assistance programs under
implementation since 2020. Finally, to counter the persistent O&M issues in Samoa, the Project includes resources to
procure and maintain a store of spare parts, while supporting the Government of Samoa to recruit personnel to maintain
the new equipment. New equipment and instrumentation will be compatible with existing systems and procured, where
known and appropriate (per the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations), from stable suppliers.

40. The technical design of Component 2 (Emergency Preparedness and Response) builds on the country and regional
context, international good practices, and thorough consultations with government counterparts and broader
stakeholders. The EP&R Diagnostic and Investment Plan (2025) followed the World Bank’s “Ready to Respond” diagnostic
tool and assessed the capacity of Samoa’s EP&R system through five pillars: (i) legal and institutional frameworks;
(ii) information management; (iii) facilities; (iv) equipment; and (v) personnel. The Project will finance key gaps identified
in the investment plan, including in national-level emergency management infrastructure designed to withstand natural
and climate hazards, and emergency response equipment and capacities to improve emergency response operations. In
addition, community programs at the village level provide opportunities to enhance disaster preparedness, especially
given the limited human resources within the national government. Costs of project activities were estimated based on
unit rates and contracts awarded under the PREP-Samoa Project, other similar activities financed in the Pacific region, and
budgets of ongoing government programs in EP&R. The technical assistance activities were informed by thorough
stakeholder consultations carried out during project preparation to develop the EP&R Diagnostic and Investment Plan.

41. The technical design of Component 3 (Resilient Infrastructure) has been informed by the Government’s long-term
vision to develop Sālelologa as the primary urban center for Savai’i and World Bank technical assistance to identify
potential investment options informed by climate and disaster risks. Since at least 2010, the Government has made
incremental investments to transform Sālelologa into an administrative and socioeconomic hub that offers improved
access to public facilities and services for the people of Savai’i Island. Investments in digital connectivity and digital
government infrastructure, including under the World Bank-financed Digitally Connected and Resilient Samoa (P180807),
will help to connect underserved areas of Samoa—including in Savai’i—through digital government services. Investments
in township planning and resilient public facilities under this Project will help to strengthen the role of Sālelologa as a hub
for economic growth and social inclusion. The MHRA and Investment Options study, carried out by the World Bank in
partnership with a technical consortium of global experts, has helped to begin community consultations and scope the
township plan requirements and potential high-priority “no-regret” physical investments in waterfront upgrading,
streetscape improvements, coastal protection, and multifunctional government facilities. Costs of project activities were
estimated based on global expertise inputs under the MHRA and Investment Options study. The technical assistance
activities were informed by MWTI’s corporate plan priorities in urban management and building regulation.

42. Paris Alignment (PA). The Project is consistent with Samoa’s climate and disaster resilience strategies, including its
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), long-term development strategies, community-level adaptation plans,
national climate change policies, and other relevant strategies. On mitigation, the Third NDC 2025 commits to focusing

35 Including the Pacific Resilience Program in Samoa, Tonga, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands; the Indonesia Disaster Resilience Initiatives

Project, the India National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project-II, the Nepal Building Resilience to Climate Related Hazards, the Pakistan Hydromet and
DRM Services Project, the Tajikistan Strengthening Critical Infrastructure Against Natural Hazards, and the Southeast Asia Disaster Risk Management
Program in Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
36 SOFF, Samoa Country Hydromet Diagnostics.


                                                                                                                                            Page 17
                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


on opportunities to reduce emissions in the energy (including electricity), waste and other land use sectors. This project
does not hinder the achievement of these efforts. On adaptation, Samoa has developed CIM Plans that identify prioritized
adaptation actions for Samoa’s 368 villages to enhance their climate resilience at the community level. The Climate Change
Policy (2020-2030) identifies measures to develop resilient infrastructure to withstand climate impacts and strengthen
community preparedness and response capacities. In addition, Samoa’s National Disaster Risk Management Policy
20242034 defines the country’s DRM framework and integration of natural hazards with climate-related hazards, and
Samoa 2040, the Government’s long-term development roadmap, links climate resilience and disaster risk objectives to
long-term sustainable development goals. The Project directly supports these adaptation efforts. Furthermore, the Project
is also consistent with the country’s key long-term development strategy, the Pathway for the Development of Samoa
(2021-2026), which emphasizes environmental conservation, sustainability, and DRM.

43. The Project is aligned with the objectives of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. On mitigation,
proposed activities such as capacity building and investments related to parks and open space, flood management and
protection, coastal protection, and urban drainage are universally aligned. Activities supporting the development of
warning services, products, and systems that enhance Samoa’s ability to prepare for and respond to emergencies are likely
to be low risk, given the temporary and timebound nature of these activities. Mitigation risks related to the construction
of emergency management infrastructure and public or government buildings are reduced to low as they will be designed
to meet national building codes and incorporate energy efficiency (e.g., effective use of solar energy) and water efficiency
measures (including rainwater recycling and water-saving fittings). The Project will provide advisory support to ensure
that energy and water resource utilization in emergency management and urban infrastructure is optimized for both new
construction and the retrofitting of existing structures. By adopting measures maximizing energy and water efficiency with
low embedded GHG emissions, the Project aims to substantially mitigate the impact of GHG emissions. Mitigation risks
related to urban planning activities, which include the development of land use and spatial plans that can influence urban
growth patterns with moderate or significant impacts on GHG emissions, are considered to be reduced to low. Technical
assistance under the project will promote compact and low-carbon development (e.g., urban green spaces and green
buildings) and mixed land use that will support less carbon-intensive urban forms and advance climate mitigation efforts.
Mitigation risks related to the mobile crane truck is reduced to low as the truck will be diesel fueled with a limited, short
lifetime, and does not present a barrier to transition to other lower-carbon alternatives as they become feasible in Samoa.

44. On adaptation, Samoa is at high risk from climate-related hazards such as cyclones, floods, and sea-level rise. Over
the past 20 years, more than 85 percent of disasters in Samoa have been related to climate-related hazards, and this
proportion is expected to worsen due to projected climate impacts.37 With a primary focus to enhance MHEWS and
disaster preparedness under Components 2 and 3, the project will integrate relevant national-level climate resilience
standards into emergency management and urban infrastructure, requiring all constructions and renovations to apply
climate resilient building design techniques, adhere to climate resilience standards, and incorporate climate projections
and risk assessments to account for potential increases in the frequency or intensity of climate. The inland location of the
buildings has been selected to avoid the risk of inundation. Under Component 3, site-specific climate resilience measures
related to nature-based solutions (e.g., rain gardens and bioswales) and resilient urban design (e.g., to reduce urban heat
island effect) for heat and flood management will also be implemented to further reduce adaptation risks. In addition,
enhancing the monitoring of hydrometeorological hazards and related dissemination of early warnings under Components
1 and 2 will help communities better prepare for climate-related events, including tropical cyclones and floods. These
activities contribute to building climate resilience and will help reduce risks from climate hazards to a low level.

45. Economic Analysis. An economic analysis was carried out and confirms that the Project is economically viable. The
analysis follows the World Bank Investment Project Financing (IPF) Economic Analysis Guidance Note and incorporates

37 Six of the seven major disasters recorded in the EM-DAT international disaster database have been due to climate-related hazards.


                                                                                                                                       Page 18
                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


the Triple Dividend of Resilience framework to estimate both direct and long-term co-benefits of resilience investments.
The methodology compares the net present value (NPV) and economic internal rate of return (EIRR) under scenarios with
and without the Project. Benefits and costs are estimated over a 20-year period in constant 2023 US dollars. The analysis
covers all project components except for the CERC, which cannot be assessed ex-ante due to the uncertainty of its
activation. The main Project benefits include: (i) avoided direct economic losses from natural hazards through enhanced
early warning and risk reduction systems; (ii) reduced mortality and injuries due to improved emergency preparedness
and response; and (iii) long-term social and environmental co-benefits, including avoided ecosystem degradation and time
savings for vulnerable populations. The economic costs comprise capital investments and O&M expenditures over the life
of the project. O&M costs are based on benchmark ratios for each infrastructure type and were deflated to 2023 values
using Samoa’s consumer price index. Under the conservative scenario, total annual benefits are estimated at US$7.78
million, while under the optimistic scenario they rise to US$10.12 million. The EIRR ranges from 18.83 percent
(conservative) to 26.27 percent (optimistic), exceeding the 10 percent threshold commonly used for economic viability in
climate resilience investments. The NPV of the Project ranges from US$25.26 million to US$93.99 million across discount
rates of 2.00 percent, 3.88 percent, and 7.58 percent. The corresponding benefit-cost ratios range from 1.08 to 1.71. These
results demonstrate the Project’s strong economic rationale under a range of assumptions, including disaster risk
reduction effectiveness, environmental asset preservation, and improved access to emergency services. A sensitivity
analysis was conducted to test the robustness of the results under varying assumptions, including changes in early warning
effectiveness (linked to lead time), the value of time saved by beneficiaries, and the percentage reduction in hazard-
related losses. The Project remained economically viable across all tested scenarios.

46. Gender. Gender gaps. Traditional gender roles in Samoa often limit women's participation in urban planning
decision-making processes, particularly within village councils (fonos) dominated by the matai system. Fonos oversee local
governance and are supported by other village-level committees, including the women’s village committee. Only titled
people are eligible to sit on fonos, the majority of whom are men. Although there is limited gender disaggregated data
available,38 some women are currently reportedly sitting on fonos, and District Committees comprise approximately 38
percent women.39 Because of women’s underrepresentation, urban planning initiatives and strategies often overlook
their needs, weakening community resilience and inclusive development. Project actions. In line with the Samoa National
Policy on Gender Equality and Rights of Women and Girls (2021–2031)40 and the World Bank Group Gender Strategy
(2024–2030), the Project aims to close identified gender gaps in women’s voice and agency in decision-making roles
related to urban planning. The Project has identified ways to increase the amount and quality of female participation in
relevant consultations and promote their representation in project-related urban planning decision-making committees
(which will be sustained beyond the project), including to address physical safety and equal access to urban services for
women and girls in Samoa. These efforts will include outreach targeted at women and girls to increase their knowledge
on risk-informed urban planning, as well as the development of gender-inclusive protocols to ensure that the location and
timing of urban planning decision-making activities are responsive to the needs of both women and men. The ToR for
decision-making committees will set a target of at least 50 percent female representation (including the Chair or Co-Chair
being female), clearly define all committee roles, and identify which roles are considered executive positions (noting all
members have decision-making and leadership roles, while executive positions are for administrative purposes).


38 Government of Samoa, Second Voluntary National Review on the Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (Apia: Government of

Samoa, 2020), https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/26429Samoa_Samos2ndVNR2020reduced.pdf
39 Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development of Samoa, Annual Report Financial Year 2023–2024 (Apia: Ministry of Women, Community

and Social Development, 2025), https://mwcsd.gov.ws/annual-reports/.
40 Priority Area 6: Infrastructure Outcome “increase gender sensitivity and social inclusion in all infrastructure development and governance including

transport, energy, WASH, communication”. 6.4 – Urban to increase data collection and analysis of urbanization and disadvantage in urban areas. See
Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development of Samoa, National Policy on Gender Equality and Rights of Women and Girls (2021–2031)
(Apia: Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development, 2021), https://mwcsd.gov.ws/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/National-Policy-on-
Gender-Equality-and-Rights-of-Women-and-Girls-2021-2031.pdf

                                                                                                                                              Page 19
                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)


Indicators. The Project will track female representation in formal decision-making committees established, and the extent
to which their needs have been addressed through project activities as part of the urban planning activities.

47. Citizen engagement. Project beneficiaries will inform the project through: (i) consultations and participatory planning
activities during project implementation (e.g., inclusion of communities and representatives from diverse groups in the
planning and design of early warning systems and urban planning); (ii) transparent feedback and grievance redress
mechanisms that will be disseminated among project beneficiaries and the public through social media, websites, and
communication materials (e.g., consultation handouts); (iii) communication campaigns; (iv) knowledge exchange and
capacity building opportunities; and (v) development of risk management processes and engagement required under the
World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), including the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). The feedback
provided through the above citizen engagement mechanisms will be used by the IAs to continuously enhance the project
activities. The feedback will also be summarized in the six-monthly project reports, which will include the necessary
corrective actions determined in response to the feedback received to inform the remaining implementation period.
Traditional knowledge will be used to inform the design of activities as relevant. The RF includes two indicators to assess
citizen engagement related to beneficiaries: whether project activities meet their needs, and timely resolution of
complaints. Sex- and age-disaggregated data will be used in aggregate for operational and statistical purposes only.

 B. Fiduciary
48. Procurement. Procurement for the Project will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank Procurement
Regulations for IPF Borrowers for Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services, Sixth Edition, September 2025,
as well as the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement and the Project’s Procurement Plan (PP). Overall
procurement risk is assessed as “Moderate” as the implementing agencies are familiar with the World Bank procurement
procedures and have prior experience using the World Bank procurement document and the Systematic Tracking of
Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system. The IAs (MoF, MNRE, and MWTI) will use the STEP system including the contract
management module, to improve contract implementation; use of the system will equip MNRE and MWTI to better track
contracts through key deliverables, key performance indicators (KPIs), and payments. The Project’s critical civil works
activities are low value, with an estimated cost of less than US$5 million for each activity, and local contractors have
sufficient capacity for construction. The detailed procurement arrangement and market approach are identified in the
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and initial Procurement Plan. There are some risk factors that will
negatively impact the project implementation, such as limited capacity of the IAs, the government’s lengthy review and
approval process for procurement activities, supply chain disruption and inflation due to the global impact of ongoing
tariff disputes. To mitigate the risks and strengthen the procurement capacity, the following measures have been
established and agreed to be implemented: (i) a Procurement Officer will be added to the MWTI-PMD; (ii) a Procurement
Specialist in the CTSSU will provide practical hands-on advice to the stakeholders; (iii) a Project Engineer will be hired to
draft ToRs, assist in procurement, and manage contracts; and (iv) engineering firms will help prepare bidding documents
and provide procurement assistance (technical evaluation of bids, support on contract negotiation, and contract
management). In addition, the World Bank will support the MWTI-PMD in reviewing bidding documents for major works
and addressing procurement bottlenecks, and will monitor procurement aspects during implementation support missions.

49. Financial Management (FM). FM arrangements for the project are acceptable as required by the World Bank’s Policy
on Investment Project Financing, with an overall FM risk rated as "Moderate". The FM risk for MNRE and MWTI is rated
"Moderate" (covering 99% of project activities). The FM risk for MoF is rated as “Low” (covering 1% of the project activities
under the CERC). While project complexity is increased with three IAs across multiple sectors adding challenges including
consolidation of financial reports for the total Project, these are mitigated by MWTI-PMD being responsible the day-to-
day project financial management functions, and consolidation of total project reporting. The residual FM risk is
“Moderate” as: all three IAs are government ministries bound by the Public Finance Management Act 2001, utilize the
government's Financial Management Information System (FMIS), operate under International Public Sector Accounting
                                                                                                                      Page 20
                                                          Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
        (P507749)


Standards (IPSAS) cash basis accounting, and have previous experience in implementing World Bank financed projects,
including MWTI consolidating financial reporting for other multi agency/sector projects, with no significant issues
impacting timely and accurate financial reporting including annual audited financial statements. The Project budget
appears sufficient to fund the planned activities, and all proposed expenditures appear eligible for financing under IDA
and SOFF, and only include the standard goods, works, services, training and operating costs. As part of its commitment
to enhancing transparency and accountability in project financing, the World Bank is offering borrowers and clients access
to FundsChain, an innovative blockchain-based platform that optimizes real-time tracking of disbursements and
complements existing financial management systems in support of digitization, transparency, and efficiency. The platform
can be customized to align with existing financial management systems and the project’s operational context.

 C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

50. Environmental and social (E&S). The E&S risks of the project are rated as “Substantial” due to downstream E&S
implications such as greenspaces, nature conservation, and livelihood impacts when implementing the Sālelologa
masterplan. Further, beneficiaries and key stakeholders can be unintentionally excluded during the master planning. The
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) includes a preliminary assessment of E&S risks and outline a
process for screening, assessing, and managing these risks during project implementation. An E&S exclusion list and E&S
screening and site selection tool has been developed. All Technical Assistance activities will manage risks under
paragraphs 14-18 of ESS1. Risks associated with the procurement, installation, and operation of monitoring equipment
will be mitigated through procurement specifications and standard operating procedures as needed. Other adverse E&S
risks are predictable and can be effectively managed through project design and standard E&S mitigation measures
(including E&S considerations in site selection) to avoid serious adverse effects to human health and safety. The project
has prepared several E&S instruments namely an ESMF, SEP; ToRs for a SESA of the Sālelologa Master Plan; and an
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).41 MNRE and MWTI have prior experience managing E&S risks under
World Bank-financed projects. An E&S focal point was appointed for project preparation, and the GoS has committed
through the ESCP to recruiting or appointing a dedicated Senior Safeguards Officer and maintaining the CTSSU with
qualified staff to support management of E&S risks and project impacts during implementation. The Project will partially
utilize Samoa's country E&S framework, such as the environmental permitting process, augmented with gap filling
measures to ensure compliance with the relevant ESSs.

51. The ESMF includes a gap analysis of Samoa’s E&S framework relevant to project activities and risks against the
World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). The ESMF includes procedures for screening, assessing and
managing E&S impacts to address the national environmental permit process, land access processes, regulatory
arrangements for managing labor and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks, and statutory public consultation
requirements. The ESCP describes the material measures and actions and timing to ensure compliance with the World
Bank's Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs). The ESCP includes: maintaining adequate E&S resources; the
implementation of the E&S screening process and land access process as part of the ESMF; preparation of site-specific
environmental and social assessments; the incorporation of E&S considerations in Project-financed technical assistance;
labor and working condition requirements; and measures for preventing and responding to sexual exploitation and abuse
(SEA)/sexual harassment (SH).

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate




41 The Government of Samoa disclosed the ESMF, SEP and ESCP on June 30, 2025, and the World Bank disclosed the same version of the SEP and

ESCP on the same date.

                                                                                                                                  Page 21
                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                         PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)



 Legal Operational Policies                                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                     No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                               No



52. Legal Operational Policies. None of the investments financed by this Project will use or risk polluting international
waterways or are in disputed areas.

 D. Grievance Redress Services
53. Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project supported
by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance Redress
Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related
concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent
Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could
occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which
provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints
may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management
and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the
Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 V. KEY RISKS

54. The overall risk of the proposed project to achieving the PDO is assessed to be “Moderate”, as shown in the
Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT) in the Data Sheet. Risks have been assessed on a residual basis (except
for Environmental and Social) based on mitigation measures identified. The one Risk Category rated “Substantial” is
described below.
                                           Table 2: Summary of Key Risks
 1. Environmental and Social (Substantial)
 Risk: Environmental risk is rated as “Substantial” mainly due to the potential downstream environmental risks and implications
 such as greenspaces, natural environment, nature conservation and biodiversity, flooding, water quality, land use, and climate
 change associated with the Sālelologa township plan. Key environmental risks and impacts of the emergency management
 infrastructure may be direct, indirect, and cumulative and relate to dust, noise, erosion and sedimentation, resource
 consumption, waste generation, worker safety, and hazardous waste disposal (e.g., contaminated oil and e-waste). Social risk is
 rated as “Substantial” due to the potential for: (i) land and livelihood impacts associated with proposed investments in
 emergency management infrastructure, township planning in Sālelologa (and associated downstream impacts of planning
 decisions), and investments in resilient public facilities; (ii) community health and safety risks associated with construction/labor
 influx (e.g., antisocial behavior, transmissible disease, and SEA/SH); and (iii) labor and working condition risks.
 Mitigation Measures: Potential environmental impacts are site-specific, predictable, and manageable through standardized
 environmental and social risk management or subproject E&S instruments under the World Bank and Samoa's E&S frameworks.
 Social risks are expected to be predictable and readily managed through standard social mitigation measures and rigorous E&S
 and stakeholder engagement processes.




                                                                                                                                   Page 22
                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)



ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                    Closing Period
   To strengthen disaster preparedness and increase resilience to climate and disaster risks, and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.
   People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           40,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           20,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           20,000
   People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           180,000
     ➢People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           90,000
     ➢People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           90,000
   Population with access to an enhanced emergency response system provided by functioning emergency management infrastructure (Percentage)
   Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
   0                                                                                           90




                                                                                         Official Use Only                                                                              Page 23
       The World Bank
       Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
       (P507749)



Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                                Closing Period
   Component 1: Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems
   GBON land-based and upper air stations’ commissioning period completed, country-specific standard cost for operations and maintenance established, and data sharing verified
   by WMO Technical Authority (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       3
   Monitoring and communication equipment functional and complying with SOPs (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       50
   Early warning systems, services, and/or products operationalized (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       6
   Multi-hazard early warning policies, regulations and/or SOPs adopted (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       4
   Personnel trained and proficient in multi-hazard early warning systems (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       300
   Component 2: Emergency Preparedness and Response
   Emergency management infrastructure constructed and is functional and accessible (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       5
   Line ministries and state-owned enterprises with business continuity plans updated and adopted (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       10
   Standard operating procedures and frameworks for emergency preparedness and response developed and approved (Number)
   Oct/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
   0                                                                                       4




                                                                                     Official Use Only                                                                            Page 24
    The World Bank
    Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
    (P507749)


People covered by an enhanced emergency alert system (Percentage)
Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
0                                                                                           90
Component 3: Resilient Infrastructure
New or updated urban plans, policies and regulations integrating climate and disaster resilience (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
0                                                                                           3
Designs completed for public facilities and/or spaces that meet the project’s resilience standards (Percentage)
Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
0                                                                                           4
Resilient public facilities and/or spaces constructed or rehabilitated (Number)
Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
0                                                                                           4
Female representation in decision-making committees on urban planning (percentage) (Percentage)
Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
38                                                                                          50
Component 4: Project Management
Female beneficiaries in project areas who report that project activities regarding reduced climate and disaster risks in urban areas reflect their needs (percentage) (Percentage)
Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
0                                                                                           70
Issues and complaints raised in the project’s feedback and grievance redress mechanism addressed within 30 calendar days (Percentage)
Oct/2025                                                                                    Dec/2031
0                                                                                           75
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component




                                                                                      Official Use Only                                                                              Page 25
         The World Bank
         Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P507749)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number, disaggregated by sex and age)
                         This indicator measures the number of individuals who have improved their resilience to climate-related risks as a result
                         of project interventions. There are two sub-indicators:

                                •    People benefiting from climate-resilient infrastructure. The first sub-indicator includes the number of people
                                     that benefits from the resilient infrastructure improvements in Savai’i (Component 3).
                                •    People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response. The second sub-
Description
                                     indicator assesses the number of individuals who have improved their resilience to climate-related risks as a
                                     result of the adoption of urban plans, policies, and regulations that incorporate climate and disaster risk
                                     consideration (Component 3), and the number of people that has access to an enhanced MHEWS that has been
                                     improved directly by project activities (Component 1).

                           The results will be disaggregated by sex and age to assess equitable benefits.
Frequency                  Bi-annually
                           (i) Reports from MWTI assessing whether practical completion of climate-resilient infrastructure has been completed
                           and number of people benefiting from the infrastructure. (ii) Reports from the MNRE, including the Samoa Meteorology
Data source                Division, Water Resource Division, and Disaster Management Office, on population covered by enhancements to
                           MHEWS products and systems, as well as statistical information on community outreach initiatives, and reports from the
                           MWTI, urban planning documents, completion reports of public facilities, and demographic data from national statistics.
                           (i) Data collection includes government calculations of people served by completed climate-resilient infrastructure as
                           certified by engineering supervision reports for related civil works activities. (ii) Data collection includes government
Methodology for Data       calculations of population coverage for MHEWS systems and products, and calculation of participants from community
Collection                 outreach initiatives, and analyzing reports from the MWTI regarding adopted urban plans and policies, as well as project
                           completion reports of resilient public facilities. Additionally, demographic data will be used to establish the population
                           size benefiting from these initiatives.
Responsibility for Data
                           MNRE and MWTI, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
Collection



 Population with access to an enhanced emergency response system provided by functioning emergency management infrastructure
(percentage, disaggregated by sex and age)
                          This indicator measures the percentage of the population that have access national-level emergency management
Description               infrastructure for meteorological and seismic operations centers that are fully functioning with internal fitouts completed
                          and provide sufficient spatial and operational requirements for inter-agency emergency response (Component 2)
Frequency                 Bi-annually
                          Reports from MNRe assessing whether practical completion of national-level meteorological and seismic operations
Data source
                          facilities have been completed and number of people benefiting from the facilities.
                          Data collection includes government calculations of people benefiting from the completed facilities as certified by
Methodology for Data      engineering supervision reports for civil works activities. Data will also involve analysis of operations logs and interviews
Collection                with relevant personnel to confirm the facilities are fully functioning. Documentation from inter-agency meetings will also
                          be reviewed to determine their operational status.
Responsibility for Data
                          MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
Collection




                                                                        Official Use Only                                                     Page 26
         The World Bank
         Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
         (P507749)




Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components

Component 1


 GBON land-based and upper air stations’ commissioning period completed, country-specific standard cost for operations and maintenance
established, and data sharing verified by WMO Technical Authority (number)
                          This indicator tracks the number of GBON land-based and upper air stations that have completed their commissioning
Description               period. It also measures the establishment of country-specific standard costs for operations and maintenance and the
                          verification of data sharing by the WMO Technical Authority.
Frequency                 Bi-annually
                          Installation and integration reports from GBON stations, financial records detailing operation and maintenance costs, and
Data source
                          verification of data sharing from the WMO Technical Authority.
                          Data collection includes reviewing installation and integration reports that confirm stations are fully operational within
Methodology for Data
                          the GBON network. Data sharing is verified with records from the WMO Technical Authority to ensure compliance and
Collection
                          connectivity.
Responsibility for Data
                           MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
Collection

 Monitoring and communication equipment functional and complying with SOPs (number)
                        This indicator tracks the number of monitoring and communication equipment that are operational and compliant with
Description             established Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) related to hazard monitoring. It ensures that equipment is reliable
                        and effective for hazard monitoring and communication during emergencies.
Frequency                Bi-annually
Data source              Maintenance logs from equipment operators, inspection reports, and compliance checklists related to SOP adherence.
                         Data collection involves reviewing maintenance logs and conducting physical inspections of monitoring and
Methodology for Data
                        communication equipment to verify functionality. Compliance with SOPs is assessed using checklists during these
Collection
                        inspections.
Responsibility for Data
                         MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
Collection

 Early warning systems, services, and/or products operationalized (number)
                          This indicator measures the number of early warning systems, services, and products that have been successfully
Description
                          operationalized, specifically focusing on the upstream components related to hazard monitoring.
Frequency                  Bi-annually
                          Implementation reports from MNRE, operational logs of early warning systems, user feedback surveys, and
Data source
                          service/product deployment records.
                          Data collection includes reviewing implementation and operational reports to confirm the functionality of early warning
Methodology for Data
                          systems, conducting surveys to gather feedback on effectiveness and user satisfaction, and analyzing deployment records
Collection
                          for the number of systems and products made operational.
Responsibility for Data
                           MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
Collection

 Multi-hazard early warning policies, regulations and/or SOPs adopted (number)
                          This indicator measures the number of multi-hazard early warning policies, regulations, and/or SOPs related to early
Description
                          warning that have been formally adopted to enhance disaster preparedness and response across various hazards.
Frequency                 Bi-annually
Data source               Official policy documents, legislative records, and minutes from relevant governance meetings.
                          Data is collected by reviewing official documents to identify newly adopted multi-hazard early warning policies and
Methodology for Data
                          regulations. Legislative records are analyzed for any changes or new SOPs, and governance meeting minutes are
Collection
                          reviewed for adoption confirmation.



                                                                      Official Use Only                                                    Page 27
          The World Bank
          Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
          (P507749)


 Responsibility for Data   MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection

  Personnel trained and proficient in multi-hazard early warning systems (number, gender disaggregated)
                           This indicator tracks the total number of personnel trained who have demonstrated proficiency in operating multi-
 Description
                           hazard early warning systems (MHEWS), with data disaggregated by gender.
 Frequency                 Bi-annually
 Data source               Training attendance records and departmental documentation.
 Methodology for Data      Data is collected by reviewing training attendance records and departmental documentation confirming demonstrated
 Collection                proficiency.
 Responsibility for Data
                           MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection


Component 2


 Emergency management infrastructure constructed and is functional and accessible (number)
                         This indicator measures the number of emergency management infrastructure facilities that have been constructed, are
 Description
                         operational, and are easily accessible to the community for effective disaster response and recovery.
 Frequency               Bi-annually
 Data source             Construction completion reports and operational assessment records, along with accessibility evaluation reports.
 Methodology for Data    Data collection involves reviewing construction completion reports to confirm the number of completed facilities and
 Collection              conducting assessments to verify their functionality and accessibility for the community.
 Responsibility for Data
                          MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection

  Line ministries and state-owned enterprises with business continuity plans updated and adopted (number)
                            This indicator measures the number of line ministries and state-owned enterprises that have updated and adopted
 Description
                            business continuity plans to ensure operational resilience during emergencies.
 Frequency                  Bi-annually
 Data source                Business continuity plan documentation and adoption records from line ministries and state-owned enterprises.
 Methodology for Data       Data collection will involve reviewing official documents and records of business continuity plans to confirm updates and
 Collection                 adoption by relevant entities.
 Responsibility for Data
                            MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection

 Standard operating procedures and frameworks for emergency preparedness and response developed and approved (number)
                          This indicator measures the number of frameworks and standard operating procedures (SOPs) related to emergency
 Description
                          preparedness and response that have been developed, approved, and are in use.
 Frequency                Bi-annually
 Data source              Records of approved SOPs and frameworks from MNRE and other relevant entities.
 Methodology for Data     Data collection will include reviewing approval records and assessing the implementation status of the developed SOPs
 Collection               and frameworks.
 Responsibility for Data
                          MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection


 People covered by an enhanced emergency alert system (percentage)
                           This indicator measures the percentage of the population that is covered by the enhanced emergency alert system
 Description
                           capable of disseminating timely alerts during emergencies.
 Frequency                 Bi-annually
 Data source               Population statistics and coverage assessments of the emergency alert system.



                                                                       Official Use Only                                                     Page 28
          The World Bank
          Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
          (P507749)


 Methodology for Data       Data collection will involve analyzing population data and evaluating the operational reach and effectiveness of the
 Collection                 emergency alert system to determine coverage levels.
 Responsibility for Data
                            MNRE, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection


Component 3


 New or updated urban plans, policies and regulations integrating climate and disaster resilience (number)
                         This indicator measures the number of urban plans, policies, and regulations that have been developed or updated to
 Description
                         incorporate climate and disaster resilience considerations.
 Frequency               Bi-annually
 Data source             Official documentation of urban plans, policies, and regulations from relevant authorities.
 Methodology for Data    Data collection will involve reviewing project documentation and governmental records to verify the adoption of new or
 Collection              updated plans and policies.
 Responsibility for Data
                         MWTI, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection

 Designs completed for public facilities and/or spaces that meet the project’s resilience standards (number)
                          This indicator measures the number of detailed designs for public facilities and/or spaces that have been completed to
 Description
                          the specified resilience standards outlined in the project.
 Frequency                Bi-annually
 Data source              Detailed design documentation
 Methodology for Data
                          Data collection will include reviewing design specifications to confirm adherence to resilience standards.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                          MWTI, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection

 Resilient public facilities and/or spaces constructed or rehabilitated (number)
                              This indicator measures the number of public facilities and/or spaces that have been constructed or rehabilitated
 Description
                              according to resilience standards as part of the project.
 Frequency                    Bi-annually
 Data source                  Construction completion reports and operational status assessments of public facilities and spaces.
 Methodology for Data         Data collection will involve reviewing construction reports and conducting site inspections to verify the completion and
 Collection                   resilience of facilities/spaces.
 Responsibility for Data
                              MWTI, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection

 Female representation in decision-making committees on urban planning (percentage)
                          This indicator measures the percentage of women represented in formal urban planning decision-making committees
                          established under the Project. It captures both overall female membership and the presence of women in leadership
                          positions (Chair or Co-Chair), in line with the Project’s requirement that each committee include at least one female
 Description
                          Chair or Co-Chair. The urban planning decision-making committees established under the project will be sustained
                          beyond the project closing date as per Part IV of the Planning and Urban Management Act 2004, or any subsequent
                          revision of this act.
 Frequency                 Bi-annually
 Data source              Records from meetings, committee membership lists, and consultation reports.
 Methodology for Data     Data collection will involve reviewing attendance records and membership data to assess female’s representation in
 Collection               relevant committees, including that at least the Chair or Co-Chair is female to ensure influence at this level.
 Responsibility for Data
                           MWTI, coordinated by MWTI-PMD
 Collection



                                                                         Official Use Only                                                     Page 29
          The World Bank
          Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa Project                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
          (P507749)




Component 4


 Female beneficiaries in project areas who report that project activities regarding reduced climate and disaster risks in urban areas reflect their
 needs (percentage)
                           This indicator measures the percentage of female beneficiaries in project areas who perceive that the project activities
 Description
                           address their specific needs related to reducing climate and disaster risks.
 Frequency                  Bi-annnually
 Data source               Surveys and interviews with female beneficiaries in project areas.
 Methodology for Data      Data collection will involve conducting surveys or focus group discussions with female beneficiaries to gather qualitative
 Collection                and quantitative feedback regarding the alignment of project activities with their needs.
 Responsibility for Data
                            MWTI-PMD
 Collection

  Issues and complaints raised in the project’s feedback and grievance redress mechanism addressed within 30 calendar days (percentage)
                            This indicator measures the percentage of issues and complaints registered through the project’s feedback and grievance
 Description
                            redress mechanism that are resolved within a specified timeframe of 30 calendar days.
 Frequency                  Bi-annnually
 Data source                Records from the feedback and grievance redress mechanism, including logs of complaints, resolutions, and timelines.
 Methodology for Data       Data collection will involve reviewing complaint records to calculate the percentage of complaints addressed within the
 Collection                 30-day period and assessing resolution quality.
 Responsibility for Data
                             MWTI-PMD
 Collection




                                                                        Official Use Only                                                    Page 30
