Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Morocco Disaster and Climate Resilience Program(P507147)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Nov-2024 | Report No: PIDPC00141




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Morocco Disaster and Climate Resilience Program(P507147)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID              Operation Name
                               MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH                                    Morocco Disaster and
Morocco                                                       P507147
                               AFRICA                                                   Climate Resilience Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               17-Feb-2025                    30-May-2025               Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Ministry of Economy and
                               Ministry of Interior
Finance

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to increase resilience to climate and disaster risks in the Program Area.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                      330.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         200.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                     199.50
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                             0.50
  Total Financing                                                                                              200.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             200.00



                                                                                                                  Page 1
         The World Bank
         Morocco Disaster and Climate Resilience Program(P507147)


       World Bank Lending                                                                                                                                  200.00

  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1. Morocco, one of the countries most impacted by disaster and climate-related shocks in the Middle East and North
Africa (MENA) region, is already witnessing an increase in frequency and impact of hydrometeorological events due to
climate change. Every year, losses induced by weather-related and geological hazards are estimated at over 0.6 percent
of GDP. Due to its geographical position, variability in rainfall and topography, Morocco is particularly prone to floods,
causing Annual Average Losses (AAL) of US$ 450 million.1 In addition, it is estimated that an investment of about US$ 78
billion would be needed for resilient and net-zero greenhouse gas emissions in Morocco by 2050. Already, 65 percent of
the population and 90 percent of industries are exposed to increased coastal flooding and sea-level rise. Tangier Bay is
projected to lose all its port infrastructure and 63 percent of its industrial zone if sea levels rise by 86 centimeters, while
Casablanca is projected to lose annually US$ 1.2 billion if sea levels rise by 40 centimeters.2 Moreover, Morocco's fast
urbanization leads to greater exposure to disaster and climate risks; the urban population has swelled from 29 percent in
1960 to over 60 percent in 2024, and is expected to reach 75 percent by 2050. Cities in Morocco account for an estimated
75 percent of the country’s GDP and 70 percent of investment at the national level.3 Because of the dense aggregation of
people and assets, urban areas face a high level of exposure to natural hazards.
 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program
2. Over the last 20 years, the Government of Morocco (GoM) has significantly strengthened the institutional
framework for climate and disaster risk management (DRM). Most importantly, this included a gradual shift from ex-
post emergency response toward a more integrated DRM approach with a strong focus on ex-ante disaster risk reduction
and preparedness. This is illustrated by the: i) overhaul in 2017 of the Fonds de Lutte contre les Catastrophes Naturelles,
FLCN) from an ex-post disaster response fund into a disaster risk reduction fund that incentivizes financing of disaster risk
reduction projects; ii) creation in 2020 of a dedicated DRM Directorate (DGRN); iii) adoption of the country’s first National
Strategy for Natural Disaster Risk Management (Stratégie Nationale de Gestion des Risques de Catastrophe naturelle,
SNGRCN, 2021-2031), and its Action Plan; iv) designation of DRM focal points in 92 provinces, prefectures and pachaliks,
and v) roll-out of a pilot flood early warning system (EWS) in four provinces, bringing together key hydro-meteorological
service providers, DGRN and Civil Protection.
3. While the GoM has made significant investments in risk reduction and resilience investments, significant scale-up
is necessary at both sectoral and subnational levels while ensuring effective intersectoral coordination. The FLCN’s co-
financing mechanism has supported to date more than 270 disaster risk reduction projects worth US$ 376 million, most

1 Morocco natural hazards Probabilistic Risk Analysis (MnhPRA), quoted in World Bank, 2013. Building Morocco’s Resilience: Inputs for an Integrated Risk

Management Strategy. Washington, DC.
2 World Bank (2022), Morocco Country Climate Development Report (CCDR).
3 World Bank, 2018. Leveraging urbanization to promote a new growth model while reducing territorial disparities in Morocco.




                                                                                                                                                              Page 2
         The World Bank
         Morocco Disaster and Climate Resilience Program(P507147)


of which are implemented at the subnational level. However, most of these investments are relatively limited in scale and
overall investment volumes are insufficient to generate transformational impact. Additionally, there is an overreliance on
structural investments at the expense of more cost-effective non-structural solutions including nature-based solutions
(NBS), early warning, risk-sensitive urban planning, and awareness raising.
4. At the sectoral level, key critical infrastructures and essential services are insufficiently protected against climate
and disaster risks. While many sectoral measures are being implemented to ensure the resilience of infrastructure, efforts
to protect critical infrastructure are hindered by the absence of an integrated national approach and clarity in governance
arrangements, limited knowledge of the infrastructure’s vulnerability and exposure to shocks, and lack of prioritization.
5. At the subnational level, the integration of climate and disaster risk factors into urban and territorial development
remains limited. While the identification and mapping of disaster risks at local level have been only recently initiated
through the development of multi-hazard maps (Carte d’aptitude à l’urbanisation), these maps have not been formally
incorporated into planning tools. Additionally, risk preparedness and reduction investments by cities and regions remain
limited due to insufficient and unpredictable financial, technical and human resources at the local level. While several
Climate Action Plans have been prepared at regional levels, and Urban Resilience Strategies for pilot cities, including Fez
and Mohammedia, they remain limited in scale and implementation.
6. Morocco still lacks a nationwide flood EWS, hindering effective disaster preparedness. Through strong inter-agency
coordination, important achievements were made in the detection, monitoring, analyzing and forecasting aspects of the
EWS value chain through a pilot flood EWS, operational since 2023 in four provinces. However, the pilot remains
geographically limited, only focuses on one hazard, and does not include dissemination to end-users.
7. The absence of a unified, high-quality climate and disaster risk data system across government ministries and levels
hampers effective risk analysis and informed decision-making. While Morocco has made significant efforts to develop
information about climate disaster risks through local-level and sectoral disaster risk mapping and assessments,4 there is
no integrated, government-wide Risk Information and Management System to facilitate information exchange across
departments and levels of government. This lack of integration hampers the efficient management of geo-referenced
exposure, hazard, and risk data for effective and risk-informed decision-making.
 Relationship to CAS/CPF
8. The proposed Program is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2019-2025 for Morocco.5
Specifically, it directly supports Objective 9, Strengthen Resilience to Climate shocks/change and mitigation, under Pillar
3, Supporting the Climate Transition, whereby the proposed operation will continue to support the implementation of
Morocco’s national DRM program to strengthen resilience to climate shocks and disaster risks, and improve disaster
preparedness. Given the multisectoral nature of DRM, the program would also indirectly touch upon other CPF objectives.
The program will indirectly support Objective 3, improve performance of key infrastructure delivery services of cities and
agglomerations, through its focus on increasing the resilience of critical infrastructure and urban areas, and strengthening
DRM capacities at regional and municipal levels in terms of DRM and management of critical infrastructure. The program
will also indirectly support Objective 11, improve the efficiency of public spending, as it aims to improve access and use of
information for enhanced decision making in the areas of disaster risk reduction and preparedness.
   Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

4 These include, multi-hazard maps, tsunami risk information by the Royal Center for Teledetection (CRTS), seismic risk information by the National Institute for

Geophysics (ING), multi-hazard risk modeling by the Fonds de Solidarité contre les Evénements Catastrophiques (FSEC) building on MnhPRA, a risk atlas by the
Department of Environment, all of which have contributed to enhancing risk understanding at various levels
5 The PLR updates the CPF by realigning some pillars to the GoM’s response to the crisis and plans for an inclusive and resilient recovery, including ones emerging

from the New Development Model. The description in the paragraph reflects the realignment of the PLR.


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3
         The World Bank
         Morocco Disaster and Climate Resilience Program(P507147)


9. The WB has been a key partner to the GoM on DRM since 2010, providing support through a mix of financing
instruments and technical assistance including the ongoing Morocco Integrated DRM and Resilience Program (US$ 300
million), a closed Cat DDO (US$ 275 million) and an IPF small grant (US$ 5 million),6 as well as a series of technical assistance
funded through the Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and the Swiss State Secretariat for
Economic Affairs (SECO).
10. Thanks to its global expertise on DRM and climate resilience, the WB can offer the following technical value added:
i) the WB’s convening power and aggregator role to help coordinate sectoral investments and policies on risk reduction
and climate change adaptation to achieve impact at scale, enabled through cross-sectoral coordination, ii) extensive global
experience, knowledge exchange and best practices in developing DRM programs, combining elements of institutional
reform with resilience investments, and iii) cutting edge analytics and technical innovations, including on potential use of
NBS, risk modelling, and use of artificial intelligence.
11. The Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument is best suited to support the GoM’s vision for a more disaster and
climate resilient Morocco. In selecting the PforR, the following factors were taken into consideration: i) the instrument
ensures that the WB’s assistance provides incentives for concrete achievements by directly linking disbursements to
intended results; ii) it can support ongoing institutional reforms while scaling up targeted and prioritized disaster and
climate resilience investments; iii) it would leverage resources of the government’s comprehensive and ambitious
resilience-related programs and plans7; iv) it will strengthen existing Government systems and allow the WB support to
focus on improving their efficiency and effectiveness, including on fiduciary and environmental and social issues; and v)
the PforR instrument has been previously used in the sector and has proven to be successful to deliver results.
 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

  Program Development Objective(s)
 The PDO is to increase resilience against climate and disaster risks in the Program Area.
 PDO Level Results Indicators
12. The following PDO level results indicator are envisaged at this stage of Program preparation:
    a. Number of people with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Corporate Results indicator)
    b. Number of people benefiting from climate and disaster risk reduction investments supported under the Program
    c. Number of people with expanded access to improved hydrometeorological services and flood early warning
       system
    d. Establishment of an integrated risk data system for climate and disaster risks (yes/no)

 D. Program Description
 PforR Program Boundary
13. The proposed operation will support key areas of the SNGRNC that have the potential to achieve transformational
impact for disaster and climate resilience. The strategy aims at reducing vulnerability and strengthening the resilience of
populations and territories against natural disasters to ensure sustainable development. The proposed Result Areas (RAs)
have been identified based on the following prioritization criteria: i) strong client ownership; ii) readiness for
operationalization through past or ongoing Bank TA; iii) a balanced mix of policy and regulatory support, direct


6 Morocco Integrated Disaster Risk Management Program-for-Results (P144539) and Additional Financing (P176349); Morocco Disaster Risk Management

Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P168580); and Strengthening Morocco’s Resilience to Climate Physical Risks (P175523).
7 Including the implementation of the New Development Model and the SNGRCN.




                                                                                                                                                         Page 4
       The World Bank
       Morocco Disaster and Climate Resilience Program(P507147)


investments and capacity building; iv) high value for money by focusing on DRM solutions that have high benefit-cost
ratios; and v) a focus on promoting both vertical and horizontal coordination.
14. Through the proposed RAs, the operation will support a significant scale-up of DRM at both sectoral and subnational
levels while ensuring effective interinstitutional coordination. While the first generation of Bank support helped build
strong DRM foundations in Morocco, especially at the central level, this second-generation engagement will focus on
advancing reforms and investments in risk reduction and disaster preparedness, allowing for more transformative impact.
At the sectoral level, RAs 1, 2 and 3 will incentivize select line ministries to invest in disaster and climate resilience. At the
subnational level, RA 4 will support urban resilience approaches in priority cities. RA 5 is cross-cutting and aims to
strengthen more effective risk data collection and sharing.
15. RA 1, Critical Infrastructure Resilience, supports the GoM in better protecting priority critical infrastructure and
reducing disruptions of essential services in key sectors. The RA will support the adoption and implementation of a
National Directive for the Resilience of Critical Infrastructure. Prepared with the support of comprehensive Bank TA, the
Directive outlines a vision and key principles for enhancing critical infrastructure resilience, by establishing a national
definition of critical infrastructure and introducing governance mechanisms alongside priority measures to ensure
protection of key critical assets and continuity of essential services.

16. RA 2, Flood Risk Management, aims at strengthening flood risk management in Morocco, by facilitating the
prioritization and implementation of cost-effective solutions, striking the right balance between hard and soft
measures. The RA will strengthen the implementation of a more integrated and strategic flood risk approach, embodied
in Decree no. 2.23.80 on flood risk management. This will include a strong focus on improving flood risk knowledge to
prioritize high-impact investments and the significant scale-up of cost-effective and innovative investment solutions,
including green-gray infrastructure and NBS, which do not only reduce risks but have other benefits such as protecting
and/or restoring biodiversity, enhancing climate regulation and ecosystem services, as well as supporting livelihoods.

17. RA 3, Early Warning Systems, aims at achieving full coverage of Morocco’s population for flood alerts as well as
preparing the ground for a national, end to end, multi-hazard EWS. Building on the successful pilot EWS, which has
addressed coordination challenges in detection, monitoring, analysis, and forecasting of flood risks in four pilot provinces,
RA 3 will scale up these efforts to gradually reach additional provinces, as well as strengthen monitoring, detection and
forecasting capabilities of fluvial floods. Additionally, it will incorporate one or two further hazards, such as storms or
landslides, to the existing system..

18. RA 4, Resilient Cities, aims to strengthen the mainstreaming of DRM and climate change adaptation at the
subnational level, through urban resilience planning and investments. Over the last few years, Bank TA has supported
the development of two pilot urban resilience strategies in the cities of Fez and Mohammedia (2022) as well as a Climate
Action Plan (CAP) for the city of Fez (2024). The RA will support the implementation of these strategies and plans, while
incentivizing other priority cities to replicate similar approaches.

19. RA 5, Risk Data Systems, will focus on strengthening the overall disaster and climate risk data information and
governance system in Morocco. This RA aims to enhance the government’s institutional and technical risk data
management capacity and coordination. It aims to aggregate existing risk information in a coordinated manner, support
multi-hazard risk information and provide a decision support system to all relevant sectors to undertake risk-informed
sectoral planning and investments.

 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening


                                                                                                                             Page 5
       The World Bank
       Morocco Disaster and Climate Resilience Program(P507147)


20. The Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) will evaluate potential environmental and social (E&S)
risks related to Program activities and assess the capacity of the implementing partners to manage these risks. Eligibility
screening will be conducted to ensure significant E&S risks are excluded. Public consultations will follow the disclosure of
a draft ESSA, incorporating stakeholder feedback. The final ESSA will be completed and disclosed before negotiations.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Philipp Stefan Petermann
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Atishay Abbhi
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Safaa Bahije
   Water Resources Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Economy and Finance
  Mr. Mohamed El Gholabzouri
  Coordonnateur des relations avec le Groupe de la Banque mondiale
  m.elgholabzouri@tresor.finances.gov.ma

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Interior
  Mr. Abdallah Nassif
  Gouvernor
  anassif@interieur.gov.ma

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                                                                        Page 6
