Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 11/22/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04578




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 27, 2024                                                                              Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507433                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         RJKIP-3                      2025

                     Operation Name            NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Nepal                     Nepal                                     SOUTH ASIA                    Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Energy Water Resources        03-Apr-2025                   30-May-2025
                                               and Irrigation , Department of
                                               Agriculture, Department of Water
                                               Resources and Irrigation




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     06-Nov-2024               150,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     12. To improve irrigation services and agricultural productivity in the target areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Agriculture is central to Nepal’s economy and integral to poverty reduction. It contributed to over 60 percent of
                     employment and over 21 percent of GDP in 2019. Despite its importance, the sector has seen low investment, resulting
                     in low productivity, higher food insecurity, and a widening trade imbalance. The lack of year-round irrigation and
                     climate-smart agricultural services are significant factors hindering productivity growth. Currently, less than half of net
                     irrigable land (about 1.1 million ha) is irrigated—and only 40 percent of which has access to year-round irrigation.
                     Consequently, Nepal’s agriculture productivity remains vulnerable to seasonal and annual climate variabilities and


                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                     shocks. The direct economic cost of climate vulnerability in the agriculture sector in 2020 was 1.5-2 percent of GDP and
                     the human costs may be even higher – 4.6 million Nepali’s were food insecure as of 2016. To address these challenges,
                     the Government of Nepal (GoN) has developed plans to provide year-round irrigation services throughout the country.
                     The Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project (RJKIP) is one of the GoN’s national pride projects, strategically investing in
                     the far western provinces where the need is the highest. RJKIP has benefited from phased World Bank support since
                     2012. The Bank supported both Phase 1 (2012-2017) and Phase 2 (2018-2025) of RJKIP, which modernized irrigation
                     infrastructure on 14,000 hectares, enhanced flood and erosion control, improved rural roads and bridges for better
                     connectivity and market access, and promoted watershed conservation, capacity building of water user associations,
                     and agricultural support services. These efforts have benefited over 157,000 people. Building on Phases 1 and 2, Phase 3
                     of RJKIP (2025-2030) aims to further improve the irrigation services, increase farm productivity, enhance climate
                     resilience, and boost rural incomes by scaling up the irrigation command area of an additional 23,000 hectares,
                     incorporating climate resilience measures such as multipurpose storage, groundwater development and deepening
                     agricultural support services and value chain development. Phase 3 will be aligned with Nepal’s GRID approach to
                     ensure the sustainability and resilience of irrigation schemes and livelihoods, supported by appropriate watershed
                     management. The Project Development Objective (PDO) continues to focus on enhancing irrigation services, agricultural
                     productivity, and climate resilience. It addresses three of the World Bank’s priority global challenges: i) Water security
                     and access; ii) Climate change adaptation and mitigation; and (iii) Food and Nutrition Security. The project consists of
                     four key components aimed at enhancing irrigation, watershed management, and agricultural support services in the
                     region. Component 1: Irrigation Improvement and Development (US$100 million) seeks to expand and improve the
                     irrigation distribution network from the existing intake at Chisapani to areas beyond the current RJK and Lamki
                     command areas, extending to Pathariya. The main canal will supply 40 m³/s to both the RJK area and the extended




Public Disclosure
                     areas. This component includes the construction of a 13km extension of the feeder canal and lower-order channels. It
                     aims to modernize the distribution networks, ensuring equitable access to irrigation throughout the Pathariya command
                     area (17,500 ha). Additionally, it will enhance the cropping intensity to 226 percent from the current 150 percent.
                     Component 2: Watershed Management (US$20 million) will finance activities to prevent soil erosion, conserve
                     watershed areas, and mitigate the impact of floods and droughts on agricultural productivity. It includes riverbank
                     protection, landslide and gully control, check dams, and afforestation. The component will also support the
                     rehabilitation and augmentation of existing small-sized multipurpose water storage and the development of new water
                     storage ponds to capture monsoon precipitation. This is crucial for sustainable water storage and the long-term
                     sustainability of irrigation systems. Component 3: Agriculture Support Services (US$20 million) aims to enhance
                     cropping intensity and promote crop diversification, particularly horticulture and vegetable farming. It will serve all
                     existing and new command areas covered by the RJK irrigation system. The component will finance investments to
                     enhance productivity, efficiency, and resilience in the agriculture sector, improve farmers' capacity to adapt to modern
                     technologies and promote value addition of agricultural products. It will promote high-value agriculture and
                     diversification, use climate-smart technologies, and offer demand-based extension services. It will also foster producer-
                     buyer alliances and promote digital technologies in the production and postproduction stages. In addition, it will
                     promote soil health and fertility and establish demonstration sites for improved irrigation techniques and the use of
                     bio/natural fertilizers. Component 4 focuses on Institutional Support and Project Management. RJKIP3 has the potential
                     to generate tangible and significant impacts as it is complemented by WB-funded Phases I and II of the RJK irrigation
                     scheme using already constructed intake, main, and feeder canals, which has laid the ground for extending the RJK
                     system towards the west to the Lamki and Pathariya areas. Furthermore, to maximize the advantages of natural assets
                     in rural landscapes and ensure the resilience of irrigation schemes and communities in the face of disaster and climate
                     hazards, the project will consider multipurpose water storage, and watershed management measures for protecting and


                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                     developing water bodies within the designated project area. For watershed management, the project will consider
                     restoring, protecting, and conserving the watershed area, including such as river training, erosion control, construction
                     of multipurpose water storage, and forestry and wetland conservation. These activities will prevent soil erosion,
                     mitigate the impact of floods and droughts on agricultural productivity, and manage water resources and biodiversity. In
                     addition, agriculture support services that provide improved technology, farm equipment and machinery, market
                     extension, and value chain will improve agriculture production and increase rural livelihood. Collectively, all these
                     efforts contribute to enhancing a resilient rural livelihood.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be implemented in Kailali District featuring flat terrain with elevations from 100 to 200 me and an
                     average gradient of 1 in 700 towards the south. The project area lies in the tropical region and is one of the most fertile
                     land with a maximum temperature of 43°C during summer and minimum of 5°C during winter season having an average
                     rainfall of 1641 mm from Jun to Sep. Although predominately agricultural, tropical forest with Sal (Shorea robusta) and
                     Khayer-Sissoo (Acacia-Dalbergia) are the dominant plant species of the project area. The area is bounded by the main
                     canal (from Karnali river), Mohana and Patharaiya River, and Kandra Khola with plenty of ponds and lakes used for
                     fisheries and traditional irrigation by the local people. This region is in the low seismicity area. Air and water qualities
                     are less polluted due to the absence of industries. The EIA for Component 1 indicates certain impact on 24.92 ha of
                     forest land from 14 community forest. The nearest protected areas are Bardia National Park, located 25 km away to the
                     east and the Dudhwa Nature Park of India situated 7.4 km to the south.
                     The project area has a diverse population. The Indigenous Tharu community is the largest group at 48%. Agriculture and



Public Disclosure
                     farm wages are the main livelihoods, supplemented by off-farm income from seasonal migration. The prevalent land
                     tenancy systems are Battaya (sharecropping), Thekka (leased for cash or kind), and Bandhaki. Landholding are mostly
                     small, with 80.03% of households owning between 0.1-2.0 ha, 5.11% between 2-10 ha, 0.05% above 10 ha, 11.91%
                     less than 0.1 ha and 2.9% without land. Some landless populations have been occupying government lands for years.
                     This is crucial for Resettlement Action Plan to ensure their enumeration and entitlement if impacted. The Phase 2 social
                     assessment report, shows significant gaps between men and women on land ownership with variations across
                     caste/ethnic backgrounds, household heads, and poverty levels.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     As in the previous phases, this project will continue the collaboration between the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources,
                     and Irrigation (MoEWRI), and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development (MoALD). The current
                     implementation arrangements from Phase 2 will be maintained, with a Project Implementation Office (PIO) under the
                     Department of Water Resources and Irrigation (DWRI) and the Agriculture Component Implementation Unit (ACIU)
                     under the Department of Agriculture (DoA). The PIO includes a Social, Environmental and Institutional Development
                     Unit (SEIDU). The staffing comprises a Senior and Junior Sociologists, along with individual consultants such as a
                     Biodiversity expert, an environmental expert, and an independent consultant for third-party monitoring, some of whom
                     support project implementation on an intermittent basis.

                     The project initially faced challenges due to inadequate Environmental and Social (E&S) staffing and a lack of
                     experienced specialists. Frequent changes in E&S officers at the PIO and delays in appointing replacements, along with
                     poor contract management, affected E&S performance at the contractor level. Both the supervision consultant and
                     contractor experienced frequent resignations of E&S staff. The Bank has since worked with the PIO to improve E&S

                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                     performance. Both units are well-staffed and have gained significant project management experience from RJKIP 1 and
                     2. Additional training will be provided by the bank to improve ESF skills of staff. It is recommended that the project
                     include a small sub-component to support E&S capacity, institutionalization, and system strengthening. The use of
                     digital tools for GRM documentation and reporting is advised. E&S consultants that will be supporting PIO and ACIU
                     should be experienced and engaged on a full-time basis.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                 High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The environmental risk is classified as substantial based on the potential impacts identified, scale and the nature of
                     the activities involved. Key risks associated with developing irrigation schemes and water storage facilities include
                     deforestation, habitat fragmentation and biodiversity loss, pollution, and OHS. Specifically, the project clear felling of
                     3900 trees and the construction of irrigation canals and reservoirs near wildlife habitats may disrupt migratory routes
                     and local biodiversity. Additionally, the construction and operation of irrigation systems and water storages may lead
                     to issues such as siltation and flooding. The water storage facilities also present risks associated with dam safety.
                     During the construction phase, significant civil works will be involved, including the construction and rehabilitation of
                     canals, distribution networks, and water storage facilities. Key environmental risks and impacts during this phase
                     include air and noise pollution, water contamination, soil erosion, waste generation, and biodiversity disruption. The
                     project will also require substantial resource materials, adding to the environmental impact. The project poses risks to



Public Disclosure
                     the health and safety of workers and nearby communities during both construction and operation phases. During the
                     operation phase, the project will continue to pose environmental risks, although these are generally more
                     manageable. Key risks and impacts include water resource depletion, water quality issues, flooding, dam safety
                     biodiversity disruption, and community health and safety concerns. The operation of irrigation systems may lead to
                     overexploitation affecting water availability. Canals can disrupt wildlife migration and serve as death traps for animals
                     seeking water. The operation of these facilities poses ongoing risks to the health and safety of workers and nearby
                     communities.
                                                                                                                                            High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risks are considered high due to potential impacts from constructing extension of the main canal and water
                     reservoirs (locations and sizes still unknown). A government-approved EIA for component 1 highlights potential
                     impacts on private, agricultural, and forest lands, as well as 163 houses affecting 63 households, electric poles, and
                     other public infrastructure. A RAP will detail the categories of affected persons and the extent of their losses. Given
                     that the project area is predominantly inhabited by Tharus (48% of the population), some IPs may be impacted to
                     necessitate FPIC which will be confirmed during preparation. The project will explore options in the final design of the
                     main canal and a negative list in selecting the location for the water reservoir to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on
                     communities, IP land and cultural heritage. Additional social risks include labor influx, occupational and community
                     health and safety risks, SEA/SH, and gaps in community engagement. Phase II social assessments showed no
                     differentiated adverse impact or exclusion of IP groups in the governance structure of the irrigation systems. Rather,
                     they represent over 71% of Water User Association (WUA) functionaries. Marginalization however exists for farmers
                     with small landholdings, Occupational Castes (Dalits), female-headed households, and households at the tail end of


                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                     the command area who do not receive adequate irrigation water. To address these risks, a SEP and LMP will be
                     prepared before appraisal. A social assessment will be integrated into the EIA or added as an addendum. A RAP will
                     be prepared and disclosed before initiating bidding documents but implemented before works commence. The social
                     assessment will inform the decision to address marginalization, either by updating the existing Vulnerable Community
                     Action Plan or preparing a new IPP. A SEA/SH action plan will be prepared post-appraisal, with the timeframe
                     specified in the project ESCP.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant due to project’s potential impacts on the environment and human health and safety from the
                      physical works. To address project ES risks, the project will prepare prior to appraisal a) a gap analysis annex to the
                      national approved ESIA for Pathariya irrigation scheme; b) ES scoping document for remaining components. This
                      document will focus on key risks that need to be addressed early in project design according to the mitigation
                      hierarchy, including the siting of investments, dam safety features, water flows and biodiversity management
                      approach. A preliminary cumulative assessment will be included to ensure a comprehensive understanding of the
                      impacts. The finalization of environmental documents for water storages, IPMP and the biodiversity management
                      plan will be deferred to the implementation phase. This phased approach allows for a more detailed and context-
                      specific assessment and the development of appropriate mitigation measures as the project design progresses.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      Key stakeholders of the project include various GoN line agencies (District Forest Office - DFO, District Agriculture
                      Development Office - DADO, Bardia National Park), local government representatives in the affected municipalities,
                      Water Users Associations (WUAs), Badghars, local leaders, the Local Environment Monitoring Committee (LEMC),
                      Community Forest Users Groups (CFUGs), private service providers such as agro-vets, and Non-Governmental
                      Organizations (NGOs). Coordination among these stakeholders is crucial for informing project design and
                      implementation. Special consultation approaches are necessary to ensure that vulnerable and marginalized groups
                      participate in and benefit from the project. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will prepared, and disclosed by
                      appraisal. Additionally, the project's grievance redress mechanism will be enhanced to handle SEA/SH related
                      complaints. The GRM will be augmented with a digital tracking and reporting system, including appropriate arrange

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The project will engage direct workers, contracted workers, and primary suppliers for consultancy and construction
                      activities. Currently, community workers are not anticipated. A comprehensive assessment of the project's impact on
                      these worker categories will be documented in a Labor Management Procedure (LMP). This LMP, developed during
                      project appraisal, will outline the application of the Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) to these worker
                      categories. It will include provisions on employment terms and conditions, non-discrimination and equal opportunity,
                      workers' organizations, a dedicated workers grievance mechanism that will be sensitive to SEA/SH complaints uptake



                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                      and response, and occupational health and safety (OHS) in compliance with ESS2 requirements. Contractors will
                      develop specific site OHS plans.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                 Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant due to high resource needs and potential pollution. The project involves construction activities
                      requiring substantial resource materials, which can lead to habitat disruption, increased emissions, and waste
                      generation. Less than 10% of the Karnali river's mean annual discharge (1369 m³/s ) is used for irrigation, with 80
                      m³/s diverted for overall irrigation and design is based on that. The water Balance flow and measures for preventing
                      over-exploitation and potential impact on habitats and downstream users and habitat will be presented and further
                      analyzed during project preparation. Additionally, construction and operation phases are likely to generate air, noise,
                      and water pollution. For component 3, IPMP will be prepared early during project implementation due to the use of
                      pesticides.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                 Relevant

                      The project will involve activities such as the use of heavy machinery, excavation, and material transportation, which
                      pose various safety hazards to nearby communities. These risks include accidents, injuries, increased traffic-related
                      incidents. In the operation phase, the project introduces the risk of drowning in irrigation canals and water storage
                      facilities, particularly for children and vulnerable community members. The project documents will address these
                      risks. The project will upgrade existing water storages, increasing capacity by up to 3mil m3 and dam heights to
                      around 5m, and construct new off-river storages with a capacity of approximately 250,000 m3. During the project




Public Disclosure
                      preparation phase, risks associated with dam safety will be assessed for both existing and planned water storages.
                      Due diligence will be identified and conducted, and mitigation measures will be integrated into the technical design.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                     Relevant

                      This standard is applicable. The existing Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for component 1 reveals that private
                      lands, assets, livelihoods, and trees may be impacted during the construction and rehabilitation of canals, distribution
                      networks, and field channels. These impacts could also affect non-titled individuals and sharecropping farmers, who
                      might be excluded from compensation under the government framework. The land acquisition and resettlement
                      impacts from the water reservoir will be assessed during the preparation phase, as the specific locations for these
                      sub-investments are not yet determined at this concept stage. To address this risk, a Resettlement Action Plan will be
                      prepared, approved, and disclosed in accordance with this Standard before bidding for sub-projects that require
                      displacement, and it will be implemented before the commencement of works.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                      Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant due to the risks of habitat fragmentation and deforestation as these can disrupt ecosystems and
                      affect species migration as identified in national EIA. The project will require 24.92 ha forest land, and the clear felling
                      of 3900 trees in a linear pattern. Construction activities may increase sedimentation and pollution in water bodies,
                      potentially harming aquatic habitats. Irrigation canals could pose a risk of trapping wildlife. Bariya National Park is
                      located 25 km away and will not be impacted. The project relies on the existing Karnali River canal, and no additional
                      water will be extracted. Gap assessment and scoping documents will also analyze biodiversity risks associated with


                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                      expansion of agricultural areas, access to and new / upgraded storages. BMP will outline detailed strategies to
                      mitigate these risks throughout the project design and operation. Compensatory tree planting will be designed and
                      implemented to minimize impacts.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is relevant as the project is situated in Nepal's Terai region, predominantly inhabited by the Indigenous
                      Tharu community and other ethnic minorities. The determination of impacts on Indigenous Peoples (IPs), such as
                      land, relocation, or cultural heritage, requiring FPIC will be determined during preparation. The project will consider
                      technically feasible options in the final designs of the canal and establish an exclusion list for the water reservoir to
                      prevent adverse impacts on indigenous people. The project's social assessment will inform whether to update the
                      existing Indigenous and Vulnerable Community Development Plan (IVCDP) or to develop an Indigenous Peoples Plan
                      (IPP).

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      This standard is applicable. Communities in the project areas are typically known for their spiritual connection to their
                      surroundings, including forests and rivers, which are considered the abodes of gods, goddesses, or spirits, and are
                      associated with good harvests, health, and prosperity. Guidance on consultation to identify locally important cultural
                      heritage resources and procedures for handling chance finds will be provided in the ESIA update. Depending on the
                      specific nature and scale of the risks and impacts of the sub-project, mitigation measures or plans will be prepared as




Public Disclosure
                      part of the site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs).

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             TBD
                       This will be explored further during preparation


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No




                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                       Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     ESIA for Component 1: Based on the national EIA for Pathariya irrigation scheme, a gap assessment will be prepared
                     include aspects of the ESF and social assessment.

                     ES Scoping Study: A scoping document will be prepared for the remaining components, focusing on key risks to be
                     addressed early in project design according to the mitigation hierarchy. This includes siting of investments, preliminary
                     assessment of potential E&S risks, cumulative impacts, and water flow calculations, biodiversity management and
                     approach development, dam safety analysis and sue diligence. ES scoping study will also include TORs for specific
                     assessments to be carried out during implementation.

                     ESCP: Environmental and Social Commitment Plan.

                     SEP: Stakeholder Engagement Plan.

                     LMP: Labor Management Procedures.

                     Early in Project Implementation: Finalization of environmental documents for water storage and the biodiversity
                     management plan will be prepared to impact the detailed design. IPM will also be prepared as well as dam safety
                     documents. Additionally, a Resettlement Action Plan Indigenous, Vulnerable Community Development Plan (IVCDP)/IPP



Public Disclosure
                     a SEA/SH action plan will be prepared.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Lixin Gu                               Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  lgu@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Maha Ahmed                             Job Title:      Senior Agriculture Specialist

                      Email:                  mahmed@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Rubika Shrestha                        Job Title:      Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  rshrestha8@worldbank.org




                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Np Modernization Of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project - Phase 3 (P507433)




                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Lixin Gu, Maha Ahmed, Rubika Shrestha

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Natasa Vetma

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Gloria Malia Mahama




Public Disclosure




                    Nov 27, 2024                                                                                  Page 10 of 10
