Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDIC00241




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                              Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience
 Zambia                         P507962
                                                              Programmatic DPF
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
 EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                         Macroeconomics, Trade         Development Policy
                                08-Dec-2025
 AFRICA                                                       and Investment                Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 Republic of Zambia             Ministry of Finance and
                                National Planning

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The program development objective is to: (i) enhance fiscal management and resilience, (ii) promote private-sector
 investment and resilience in enabling sectors, and (iii) strengthen disaster risk management and climate resilience.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                                 25.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                25.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                          25.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
Team is authorized to skip the Concept Review



                                                                                                                        Page 1



                                                                                                             Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
    1. Zambia faces significant impacts from climate change and fiscal constraints, emphasizing the need for
    enhanced disaster risk management (DRM) and resilience to support an inclusive recovery and maintain fiscal
    sustainability. In 2023/24, Zambia’s economy experienced a historic drought and ongoing frequent power
    outages. The drought, the driest in 40 years, affected 9.8 million people, with 6.6 million facing severe food
    insecurity. Only 31 percent of the 2.2 million hectares of planted maize were harvested. Although agriculture—
    the main source of employment in Zambia and heavily dependent on rainfed farming—suffered during the
    drought, its limited contribution to GDP meant it did not significantly slow overall economic growth. The economy
    grew by 4 percent in 2024, driven by a strong recovery in the mining sector and substantial growth in services.
    However, poverty increased from 57 percent in 2010 to 60 percent in 2022 (based on the national poverty line),
    and likely rose further due to the drought. Additionally, public spending pressures from the drought response
    turned 2023’s primary surplus into a deficit in 2024. Meanwhile, Zambia remains at high risk of debt distress. This
    situation underscores the need to strengthen DRM to build resilience against shocks that can increase poverty and
    to protect the hard-won progress toward sustainable public finances.
    2. Zambia’s markets and physical infrastructure in enabling sectors are deficient and not climate-resilient,
    discouraging private sector participation and exacerbating vulnerabilities to shocks. Zambia relies on
    hydropower for electricity generation, and under the recent drought, it faced a power generation deficit surpassing
    1,000MW, with load-shedding exceeding 20 hours per day in 2024 and more than 12 hours today. Drying water
    sources, decreasing groundwater availability, and power outages are severely impacting the supply and access to
    safe water for firms and households in affected areas. Huge infrastructure gaps discourage private sector
    development and constrain economic growth. At the same time, public capital expenditure is expected to remain
    low in the medium term, hovering around 3-4 percent of GDP due to fiscal constraints. Private investment showed
    a strong correlation with economic growth in the past decade,1 and it will be essential to narrow infrastructure
    gaps that also enhance climate resilience.


 Relationship to CPF
    3. The proposed operation supports the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Zambia for FY25-29, WB’s
    Corporate Priorities, and complements recent projects and analytics. The DPF series contributes to achieving
    Zambia’s CPF objective 1 (business environment for private investment), objective 2 (connectivity and increase
    energy access), objective 4 (targeting and effectiveness of social protection), objective 5 (natural resources
    management and climate-smart agriculture), and objective 6 (climate risk management systems and financing).
    The operation aligns with the institution's corporate priorities, including gender, climate, and enabling private
    capital. Moreover, it complements with recent WB projects and analytics. In June 2024, the World Bank approved
    US$207.6 million to address the impacts of the ongoing drought through the Second Additional Financing for
    Scaling-up Shock Responsive Social Protection Project (P181711). Knowledge from implementing the last DPF
    operation has been included, while conducting close consultations with stakeholders and development partners




1 Zambia Selected Issues Paper (IMF, 2023).



                                                                                                                       Page 2



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

The program development objective is to: (i) enhance fiscal management and resilience, (ii) promote private-sector
investment and resilience in enabling sectors, and (iii) strengthen disaster risk management and climate resilience

  Key Results
   4. On completion of the DPF series, the reform outcomes will lay the foundations for increased resilience to
   economic and climate shocks, while supporting private sector-led growth and providing financing for its
   immediate and potential liquidity needs in the aftermath of disasters. It will enhance the government’s ability to
   respond to the impacts of climate change and economic shocks, and further improve its fiscal resilience. It
   strengthens Zambia’s DRM systems and boosts household and private-sector resilience to climate shocks, filling
   critical gaps in the current institutional framework. In addition to the World Bank’s ongoing efforts to support
   Zambia in emerging from the recent catastrophic drought, this DPF series provides readily available grants in case
   of a future emergency. It also aligns with the international commitment to help the country restore
   macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability under the G20 Common Framework.

 D. Concept Description
   5. The proposed Development Policy Financing (DPF) is the second of two operations in a programmatic series
   that supports critical reforms to increase resilience to shocks while seeking to reduce poverty on a more livable
   planet. The Program Development Objective (PDO) will be achieved through reforms aimed at: (i) enhancing fiscal
   management and resilience, (ii) promoting private-sector investment and resilience in enabling sectors, and (iii)
   strengthening disaster risk management and climate resilience. Reforms aimed at strengthening mineral revenue
   management and building fiscal buffers, enhancing credit risk assessments when contracting sovereign loans and
   guarantees, and mobilizing carbon revenues will increase fiscal resilience and keep public debt on a sustainable
   path. Increasing private sector participation in growth-enabling sectors will enhance household and firms'
   resilience to natural disasters, supporting job creation and economic transformation. Finally, strengthening the
   country's disaster risk management framework and social protection system will reduce Zambia's climate
   vulnerabilities and protect the livelihoods of all Zambians. This DPF series also provides readily available grants in
   case of a future emergency through its Cat-DDO component. The proposed second operation aligns with Zambia’s
   Eighth National Development Plan for 2022–2026 (8NDP), as well as IDA21’s Policy Commitments in Governance
   and Institutions and Jobs and Economic Transformation.
   6. The operation prioritizes the World Bank’s value-added and is part of its ongoing partnership with the GRZ,
   assisting the country in responding to various shocks since 2020. The World Bank’s cumulative net positive flows
   have amounted to US$1.5 billion between 2022 and 2024, and from July 2023 onward, all new World Bank funding
   to Zambia has been issued as grants to provide additional support amid debt distress and multiple external shocks.
   This operation mainly aims to improve climate resilience and enhance energy and water connectivity, in line with
   the World Bank Group’s new Country Partnership Framework for Zambia and regional priorities in Eastern and
   Southern Africa. It selectively advances fiscal resilience and management reforms, complementing parallel budget
   support interventions from the African Development Bank and the European Union, as well as public financial
   management (PFM) reforms under the IMF program.




                                                                                                                         Page 3



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Poverty and Social Impacts
   7. This operation aims to reduce vulnerability to poverty, which is high and exacerbated by weather and
   health-related shocks. Zambia's exposure to such shocks negatively impacts food security, access to services,
   human capital, and assets. In 2022, 25 percent of the poor and 11.4 percent of the non-poor were affected by
   drought, while 11 percent and 5 percent, respectively, were affected by floods. PAs #1, #2, #3, #6, and #7 aim
   to enhance the government's shock response capabilities, crucial for protecting the poor and marginalized. The
   response to the 2024 drought highlighted both the limitations and potential of the social protection system.
   Structural vulnerabilities are largely due to poor access to services. Improving infrastructure and access through
   private sector involvement (PAs #4, #5, and #8) and enhanced resilience (PAs #6, #7, and #8) will help close
   these gaps sustainably, though benefits will materialize in the medium term. Additional analysis would be
   required to assess the potential impacts of water tariff changes (PA#8).

Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
  8. Most prior actions do not present significant environmental risks, thanks to national legislation that
  mandates environmental assessments for infrastructure projects. However, PA5 may lead to increased electronic
  waste from small-scale renewable energy sources like solar equipment. To mitigate this, electronic waste
  regulations and hazardous waste regulations ensure proper management and disposal, preventing environmental
  pollution. An individual assessment of the environmental effects of each prior action will be provided at the ROC
  stage.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Albert Pijuan Sala
 Senior Economist

 Ignacio M. Urrutia Duarte
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Jorge Fernando Tudela Pye
 Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Zambia

Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


 Ministry of Finance and National Planning
 Mulele Maketo Mulele
 Permanent Secretary, Economic Management
 Mulele.Maketo@mofnp.gov.zm
 Akapelwa Imwiko
 Acting Director Economic Management
 Akapelwa.Imwiko@mofnp.gov.zm

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                  Albert Pijuan Sala, Ignacio M. Urrutia Duarte, Jorge Fernando Tudela Pye

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                     Nathan M. Belete                        01-Sep-2025




                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                       Official Use Only
