Public Disclosure Authorized


                                                                        FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                       Report No: PADHI01165




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                            INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION


                                                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                                                                               ON A
                                                                          PROPOSED CREDIT



                                                                IN THE AMOUNT OF EUR 87.3 MILLION
                                                                   (US$100.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                  TO THE

                                                                       REPUBLIC OF CÔTE D'IVOIRE

                                                                                  FOR A


                                           COMMUNITY AND LOCAL DEVELOPMENT IN WESTERN CÔTE D'IVOIRE PROJECT

                                                                             APRIL 28, 2026




Public Disclosure Authorized   Social Policy Global Practice
                               Western and Central Africa Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
                               official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                 (Exchange Rate Effective March 31, 2026)

                   Currency Unit = EURO (EUR)

                         US$1.00 = EUR 0.873

                                FISCAL YEAR
                          January 1 - December 31




  Regional Vice President: Ousmane Diagana
Regional Practice Director: Trina S. Haque
         Division Director: Marie-Chantal Uwanyiligira
        Practice Manager: Nicolas Perrin
      Task Team Leaders: Julia Lendorfer, Maya Boulos
                            ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADC          Agents du Développement Communautaire (Community Facilitators)
ANStat       Institut National de la Statistique (National Institute of Statistics)
             Associations Villageoises d'Épargne et de Crédit
AVEC
             (Village Savings and Credit Associations)
AWPB         Annual Work Plan and Budget
CCDR         Country Climate and Development Report
CDD          Community-Driven Development
CDV          Comités de Développement Villageois (Village Development Committees)
CLD          Community and Local Development
             Projet de Cohésion Sociale des Régions Nord du Golfe de Guinée
COSO North
             (Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project)
COSO West    Community and Local Development Project in Western Côte d’Ivoire
             Comité Régional d'Approbation des Sous-Projets
CRAS
             (Regional Approval and Monitoring Commission for Subprojects)
CTs          Collectivités Territoriales (Local Governments)
DFIL         Disbursement and Financial Information Letter
EIRR         Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESMF         Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESS          Environmental and Social Standards
FIP          Forest Investment Program
FM           Financial Management
GRM          Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS          Grievance Redress Service
IA           Implementing Agency
IFR          Interim Financial Report
IGA          Income-generating Activity
IGF          Inspection Générale des Finances (General Finance Inspection)
IMS          Information Management System
IPF          Investment Project Financing
LED          Local Economic Development
M&E          Monitoring and Evaluation
MBJ          More and Better Paid Jobs
             Ministre de l’Economie, des Finances et du Budget
MEFB
             (Ministry of Economy, Finance and Budget)
             Ministre de l’Hydraulique et de l’Assainissement et de la Salubrité
MINHAS
             (Ministry of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene)
MoI          Ministère de l'Intérieur et de la Sécurité (Ministry of Interior)
NDC          Nationally Determined Contribution
NPV          Net Present Value
NSC          National Steering Committee
O&M          Operations and Maintenance
             Projet d’Appui à la Sécurisation de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement
PASEA
             (Water Security and Sanitation Support Program)
             Projet pour la Connectivité Rurale
PCR
             (Inclusive Connectivity and Rural Infrastructure Project)
PDO          Project Development Objective
PIM       Project Implementation Manual
PIU       Project Implementation Unit
PND       Plan National du Developpement
PPSD      Project Procurement Strategy for Development
          Programme de Renforcement de la Sécurisation Foncière Rurale Côte d'Ivoire
PRESFOR
          (Rural Land Tenure Management Strengthening Program)
PSGouv    Program Social du Gouvernement (Government's Social Program)
PSSN      Productive Social Safety Net Program
RC        Regional Council
SEA/SH    Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
SP        Sous-préfectures (Sub-prefecture)
STEP      Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
VP        Vice President
WBG       World Bank Group
             The World Bank
             Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
DATASHEET ............................................................................................................................ i
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 6
      A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................. 6
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 7
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION.................................................................................................... 8
      A. Project Development Objective (PDO) ............................................................................................. 8
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................. 9
      C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 10
      D. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 11
      E. Role of Partners ............................................................................................................................... 15
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ..................................................................... 16
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ......................................................................................... 16
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................................................... 16
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ................................................... 18
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .......................................................................................................... 18
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 18
      A. Technical and Economic Analysis.................................................................................................... 18
      B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 20
      C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies .................................................................... 21
      D. Grievance Redress Services ............................................................................................................ 24
V. KEY RISKS...................................................................................................................... 24
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ......................................................................................... 26
ANNEX 2: Targeting Protocol ............................................................................................... 34
ANNEX 3: Fiduciary Management and Disbursement ........................................................... 39
ANNEX 4: Detailed Economic Analysis .................................................................................. 44
ANNEX 5: Mapping of Select World Bank and Partner Projects ............................................. 50




                                                                                           i
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Cote d'Ivoire            Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P507888                                              Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                   [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                        [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                              [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                    [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                          [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
19-May-2026                            30-Sep-2030
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services and economic opportunities in Western Côte d’Ivoire.


Components
 Component Name                                                                                              Cost (US$)
 Resilient and Inclusive Local Development at the Community Level                                         51,000,000.00
 Socio-economic Development at the Regional Level                                                         21,000,000.00
                                                          i
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



 Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening                                18,000,000.00
 Project Management                                                                  10,000,000.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower/Recipient:             Republic of Cote d'Ivoire

 Implementing Agency:            Prime Minister's Office



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                         No

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                   No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                     100.00

  Total Financing                                                                          100.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                             100.00

  Financing Gap                                                                              0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                             100.00

      IDA Credit                                                                           100.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)




                                                             ii
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                                                                           Guarantee
                           Credit Amount      Grant Amount           SML Amount                            Total Amount
                                                                                             Amount

National
Performance-Based                   100.00               0.00                 0.00                0.00            100.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                               100.00               0.00                 0.00                0.00            100.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal Year              2026                2027                  2028                2029                2030
Annual                      0.00               15.00                  35.00               35.00               15.00
Cumulative                  0.00               15.00                  50.00               85.00              100.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                            Contributing Practice Areas
                                                                Climate Change; Poverty and Equity; Gender; Fragile,
Social Policy
                                                                Conflict & Violence

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                                  Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                    ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                               ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                              ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                      ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability                ⚫ Moderate

                                                          iii
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



 6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
 7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
 8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
 9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Moderate


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
 POLICY COMPLIANCE


 Policy
 Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
 [ ] Yes      [✓] No

 Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
 [ ] Yes [✓] No



 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


 Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
                                   E & S Standards                                                Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                     Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                            Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                  Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                   Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                   Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement       Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                     Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                     Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                             Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                      Not Currently Relevant
 NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
 environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
 Summary (ESRS).

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
                                                           iv
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
SCHEDULE 2, Section I.A.1. (a) No later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall establish and
maintain, at all times during the implementation of the Project, a steering committee with a mandate, composition and
resources satisfactory to the Association (“National Steering Committee”).
SCHEDULE 2, Section I.A.2. (a) No later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall (i) establish
and maintain within the Prime Minister’s office, at all times during the implementation of the Project, a Project
implementation unit, with composition, terms of reference and resources satisfactory to the Association (“Project
Implementation Unit” or “PIU”); and (ii) appoint a coordinator and recruit, inter alia: a deputy coordinator, a financial
management specialist, a procurement specialist, a CDD specialist, a social safeguards specialist and an environmental
safeguards specialist; and; (iii) no later than six (6) months after the Effective Date, recruit a monitoring and evaluation
specialist, a local economic development specialist, a water specialist and a civil engineer, all with qualifications,
experience and terms of reference acceptable to the Association.
ESCP, Prepare an SEA/SH Action Plan 6 months after the Project Effective Date.
ESCP, Establish the grievance mechanism no later than 6 months after Project Effective Date and thereafter maintain
and operate the mechanism throughout Project implementation.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                           Citation                         Description                    Financing Source




                                                            v
             The World Bank
             Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



    I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A. Project Strategic Context
1.       Côte d'Ivoire is one of the fastest-growing economies in Sub-Saharan Africa, with significant gains in poverty
reduction driven by sustained economic dynamism. From 2018 to 2021, the incidence of national poverty dropped from
39 percent to 37 percent, reflecting the government's strong commitment to improving living standards. Yet, to fully
unlock the country’s development potential, it is essential that growth is inclusive and reaches the country's more remote
areas. The north and west, where rural poverty stands at 54 percent, represent some of the country's most promising
frontiers for transformative, people-centered investment. The Montagnes District, comprising the three regions of Tonkpi,
Guémon, and Cavally, with a population of 3 million, stands out as the area where targeted investment can have the
greatest impact on poverty reduction and inclusive growth. Ensuring that this region and others like it are not left behind
is both a development imperative and a strategic opportunity to consolidate Côte d'Ivoire's significant achievements, in
line with the ambitious objectives set out in the country’s National Development Plan (NDP).1
2.       Over the past years, the government has demonstrated strong and proactive leadership with ambitious,
sustained investment in the regions with the most pressing needs. Through the three successive phases of its flagship
Government’s Social Program (Programme Social du Gouvernement, PSGouv), the government has electrified over 1,800
localities, nearly tripling national electricity coverage from 33 percent in 2011 to 97 percent in 2025 and committed US$6.7
billion across education, water, youth employment, and social protection, with a dedicated axis for fragility prevention in
border areas.2 The Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project (Projet de Cohésion Sociale des Régions Nord
du Golfe de Guinée, COSO North) (P175043) pioneered a successful Community and Local Development (CLD) approach in
lagging northern border areas, demonstrating that village-level planning with regional technical support can durably
strengthen social cohesion and service delivery. Grounded in the results achieved through COSO North and the analytical
foundation of the Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA, 2024), the government and the World Bank have also advanced
significantly in the preparation of a Prevention Compact that translates shared inclusive development priorities into
concrete actions across three areas: unlocking jobs and economic opportunities for youth, securing land and natural
resources, and reducing regional divides.
3.      Despite these efforts, the Montagnes District has some of the lowest access to basic services in the country,
with significant gaps both within the district and compared to national averages. A 2025 household survey to inform
project preparation finds that the top service gaps identified by residents are health (23 percent), transport (22 percent),
and water/sanitation (21 percent).3 In rural areas, nearly 20 percent of residents must travel over 10 km for medical
consultation, compared with 7 percent in urban areas. These long distances, coupled with weak connectivity and frequent
financial barriers, worsen health service inequalities across the district. Electricity coverage is also low, with 52 percent
lacking access (64 percent in rural areas), much higher than the national average of 23 percent.
4.        Access to safe and reliable water remains one of the most persistent development challenges in the Montagnes
District. A mere 9.5 percent of households have access to running water, versus 40.7 percent nationally, and rural
Montagnes fares worst at just 0.6 percent versus 24.7 percent in urban areas.4 Where water points exist, persistent issues
with village management, gaps in operator capacity, and inconsistent tariffs lead to prolonged outages and abandonment
of systems. Aging infrastructure, seasonal aquifer depletion, and water quality concerns further undermine service
reliability, pushing households back to unsafe sources.
5.      The Community and Local Development Project in Western Côte d’Ivoire (COSO West) consolidates these
challenges and leverages government efforts, replicating and improving the COSO model to extend its impact to the
country's most dynamic and opportunity-rich western region in full alignment with PSGouv 3 and the ambitions of the

1 The World Bank Group. 2023. Côte d’Ivoire Country Partnership Framework (CPF), FY23–FY27.
2
 https://psgouv.ci/v2/welcome/photo_selectionner/prsentations-des-rsultats-du-psgouv-2-par-le-conseiller-spcial-du-premier-ministre-coordonnateur-gnral-du-
psgouv283
3   IPA Household Survey, 2025
4   IPA Household Survey, 2025
                                                                              6
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



NDP. The project is designed to deliver results at scale by embedding innovation, evidence, and coordination at the heart
of its approach. COSO West draws on the Project Targeting Index (PTI), an innovative geospatial methodology that
triangulates poverty incidence, access to services, and resilience indicators at the Sub-prefecture (Sous-préfecture, SP)
level, cross-validated against national multidimensional poverty data, to identify where preventive investments can yield
the highest returns. Rather than operating in isolation, COSO West functions as a catalyst and connector within a broader,
coordinated portfolio of government and World Bank investments, directly complementing key operations such as Rural
Land Tenure Management Strengthening Program (Programme de Renforcement de la Sécurisation Foncière Rurale Côte
d'Ivoire, PRESFOR, P179338), Productive Social Safety Net Program (PSSN, P175594), Basic Education System
Strengthening Program (Programme de Renforcement du Système Éducatif de Base, PRSEB , P177800), and preparing the
ground for operations in water and sanitation (Water Security and Sanitation Support Program, Projet d’Appui à la
Sécurisation de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement, PASEA, P177118) and transport (Inclusive Connectivity and Rural
Infrastructure Project, Projet pour la Connectivité Rurale, PCR P178362). The project will also coordinate closely with
International Finance Corporation (IFC) on Local Economic Development (LED), including a value chain study aligned with
the AgriConnect initiative. This portfolio approach, sequencing community-level investments to maximize synergies and
laying the institutional foundation for larger multisectoral operations, positions COSO West as a national platform for
replication, with the potential to extend socio-economic opportunities and build resilience for vulnerable populations,
including youth, women, and historically marginalized communities, well beyond the Montagnes District.
6.       The Montagnes District is highly vulnerable to climate-induced disasters such as floods, droughts and extreme
heat. Current projections suggest that the average annual temperature in Montagnes will rise by 1.5 to 2.5 °C by 2050,5
with precipitation patterns becoming increasingly erratic.6 The region’s dependence on agriculture and forestry, coupled
with population growth and migration, has intensified water scarcity and pressures on natural resources, which are
already affected by climate change. Over 50 percent of the district’s land area is covered by natural forest,7 but the
expansion of cocoa and coffee production has led to significant deforestation and degradation, in a vicious cycle that also
harms production. Climate change is already remapping the cocoa-growing zones: Without adaptation measures, half of
these zones will no longer be viable by 2050.8 In this context, climate stressors can exacerbate inter-communal conflict by
limiting access to natural resources and livelihoods, underscoring the importance of the project’s activities, which address
both the underlying drivers of vulnerability while helping communities better cope with the impacts of climate-related
hazards.
7.      The project is consistent with Côte d'Ivoire’s latest Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC 3.0, 2025)9 and
the World Bank’s Country Climate and Development Report for Côte d'Ivoire (CCDR, 2023).10 The NDC explicitly
recognizes that climate change exacerbates fragility in rural areas and calls for inclusive governance, participatory local
adaptation planning and conflict-sensitive approaches to land and water management. The CCDR highlights the climate
vulnerability of key sectors such as cocoa and the potential increase in conflict and migration if land degradation worsens.
The project contributes to addressing these vulnerabilities by financing community-level climate-resilient investments and
building the capacity of local stakeholders for climate adaptation.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

Local Governance and Local Development Planning
8.      Côte d’Ivoire has a broad policy and legal framework for local planning, but implementation remains
incomplete. Law 2003 208 defines 16 competencies to be delegated to Local Governments (Collectivités Territoriales, CT)
in health, communal roads, water supply and sanitation, and land use. Law 2014 451 on territorial administration specifies

5 World Bank. n.d. ThinkHazard! - Montagnes, Côte d'Ivoire. Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). Retrieved April 6, 2026,

from https://www.thinkhazard.org/en/report/48-cote-divoire/montagnes.
6 World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Cote d'Ivoire.
7 Global Forest Watch. Cote d'Ivoire, Montagnes. https://www.globalforestwatch.org/dashboards/country/CIV/8/.
8 World Bank. 2023. Country Climate and Development Report: Cote d'Ivoire.
9 Côte d'Ivoire, NDCs, 2025. https://unfccc.int/documents/497390.
10 World Bank. 2023. Country Climate and Development Report: Cote d'Ivoire.

                                                                         7
             The World Bank
             Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



that CTs are the main agents of local governance, mandated to lead local development while ensuring community
participation. This mandate for coordinating local governance falls under the General Directorate for Decentralization and
Local Development (Direction Générale de la Décentralisation et du Développement Local, DGDDL) of the Ministry of
Interior (Ministère de l'Intérieur et de la Sécurité, MoI), in liaison with the Ministry of Planning (Ministère du Plan et du
Développement, MPD). The territorial governance architecture comprises both decentralized entities (Regional Council
[RC] and Commune) and deconcentrated state administration (regions, departments/prefectures, sous prefectures, and
villages). It should be noted that local oversight of the CTs is exercised by the regional and departmental prefects.11
9.      In practice, the 2022 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)12 highlights three binding constraints to effective
devolution: (a) contradictory and overlapping mandates; (b) insufficient, unpredictable intergovernmental transfers and
weak own‑source revenues, especially in lagging and rural areas; and (c) shortages of qualified staff and limited local
capacity to recruit, retain, and train senior officials. These constraints leave the statutory missions underfunded and
unclear, hampering service delivery and territorial development. As a result, core planning functions remain centralized
at the regional level where local competences are with RCs and municipal councils. National diagnostics emphasize that
northern and western territories, and secondary cities such as Man, lag in service access and face greater fragility,
requiring targeted institutional support. Only 9.5 percent of households have access to running water (compared to 40.7
percent nationally), 52 percent lack electricity, and 83 percent of the district's road network requires rehabilitation.13
While the legal framework mandates community engagement in local development, implementation is near non-existent,
particularly in the west and north, where service gaps and poverty are higher.14
10.     In rural areas, Village Development Committees (Comités de Développement Villageois, CDV) can be an
important entry point of community engagement. In past the World Bank and government operations, these committees
have been established to act as liaisons with CTs and RCs on local development planning at the village level (lessons learned
Section II.F). Their role has typically consisted of mobilizing the community, ensuring citizen engagement at village
assemblies, and channeling village priorities into Local Development Plans (LDPs) and Annual Investment Plans (AIPs).
They have the possibility to be recognized as community institutions under the National Associations Law (Law 60-315)
and their elected committees typically include a president, secretary, treasurer, and auditors.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A. Project Development Objective (PDO)

11.   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services and
economic opportunities in Western Côte d’Ivoire.
12.      ‘Inclusive’ refers to services (including water, education, health and rural roads) and economic opportunities
prioritized by women, youth, and vulnerable groups, empowered to actively participate in community decisions. ‘Resilient’
refers to services and economic opportunities that strengthen the ability of communities in the District of Montagnes to
withstand, cope with, and recover from external risk factors such as climate change, economic shocks, and conflict.15 ‘Basic
services’ refers to physical access to improved infrastructure in core sectors such as health, education and water (such as
health centers, schools, water pumps and markets). In line with the community-centered approach, the specific
infrastructures are not pre-defined but will be selected from an open menu of eligible options with a negative list as
specified in the Operations Manual.




11 Coulibaly, Souleymane, (Editor) Coulibaly; and Madio Fall, (Editor) Fall. 2016. Diversified Urbanization : The Case of Côte d’Ivoire. Washington, DC:

World Bank Group.
12 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099442202222331992/pdf/IDU05007935f0306c0427909a40028d540f5ccd8.pdf

13   ANStat/EHCVM 2021/22; Ministry of Hydraulics, 2025; AGEROUTE, 2025; IPA Household Survey, 2025
14 World Bank. 2022. Côte d’Ivoire. Systematic Country Diagnostic Update: Countdown to 2030.
15 In line with the definition of resilience provided in the Framework for Understanding and Measuring Resilience.

                                                                           8
            The World Bank
            Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
13.        The following core PDO indicators will measure progress (disaggregated by age and gender):
       •     Beneficiaries of economic inclusion programs16 (Corporate Scorecard Indicator - CRI) Number)
       •     People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Corporate Scorecard Indicator - CRI) Number)


                 Problem Statement: Limited access to services and economic opportunities, combined with socio-
                 economic and institutional fragility, prevents inclusive and resilient development in Western Côte
                                                               d’Ivoire


                                                           Figure 1. Theory of Change




14.    Figure 1 outlines the Theory of Change (TOC) underlying the project approach. The project is structured around
three main components/Intermediate outcomes. In the green track, community mobilization and prioritization of local


16 This indicator also contributes to the More and Better Jobs Scorecard indicator

                                                                          9
             The World Bank
             Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



investments and Income-generating Activities (IGAs) translate into locally led decision-making that informs investments
and economic opportunities. In the yellow track, water, connectivity, and value chain analytics inform both local and
regional investments leading to integrated regional socio-economic development and cascading economic gains. In the
blue track, social cohesion activities, capacity building and knowledge generation strengthen community relationships as
well as the institutional framework for CLD. These in turn contribute to the PDO of improved access to inclusive and
resilient socio-economic services in the Montagnes District. Table 1 provides a detailed breakdown of activities by
components. The project’s Results Framework (RF) and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan are included in Annex 1.
15.      The project will contribute to several corporate priorities of the World Bank Group (WBG) including
AgriConnect, job creation, and SP500. AgriConnect is a WBG initiative focused on transforming farming and agribusiness
as engines for jobs, economic growth, and food security. The project will contribute to this agenda by supporting women's
and youth economic groups and value chains in the agricultural sector, pursuing scalable solutions for aggregation models
to organize smallholders into collectives, and investing in physical infrastructure such as roads, storage, and logistics, as
well as skills and advisory services. In the Montagnes District, livelihoods are overwhelmingly agricultural and structured
along gendered lines: men are primarily engaged in cocoa and coffee cash-crop production, while women rely on low-
yielding food crops — principally rice and maize — and petty trade. The project directly targets these value chain
bottlenecks by investing in rural market modernization, storage and aggregation facilities, and processing infrastructure
across the Tonkpi, Guémon, and Cavally regions, with the aim of reducing post-harvest losses and improving farmgate
prices for smallholders. On job creation and SP500, the project directly targets women and youth—two groups facing the
most acute barriers to economic inclusion in the district—through economic grants, market links, and tailored group
capacity building. In a context where youth unemployment and underemployment stand at over 40 percent nationally,
the project's community-level support for youth economic groups offers a structured pathway to productive employment,
complementing broader skills and advisory services. By reaching women and youth at scale through these interventions,
the project represents a core contribution to the SP500 commitment to provide social protection and employment
opportunities to 500 million individuals, including 250 million women, by 2030.17


                                                            Table 1. Summary of Project Activities
                                         Project Components                                                                        US$, millions
 C1. Resilient and Inclusive Local Development at the Community Level                                                                   51
           C1.1. Enhanced access to basic services through resilient, inclusive infrastructure                                          40
           C1.2. Increased livelihood opportunities for women and youth                                                                 11
 C2. Socio-economic Development at the Regional Level                                                                                   21
 C3. Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening                                                                               18
           C3.1: Improving Relations and Mutual Trust Between Communities                                                                5
           C3.2: Analytical Work and Institutionalization of CLD in Côte d'Ivoire                                                        1
           C3.3: Capacity building for local stakeholders                                                                               12
 C4. Project Management                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                   TOTAL               100
C. Project Beneficiaries

16.      The project is expected to cover around 620 localities including campements18 in the 35 poorest SPs in the three
regions of the Montagnes District benefitting directly a total population of 2 million. The 35 SP were identified out of a
total of 73 based on a ranking of the number of rural poor using the multidimensional poverty map of the National Institute
of Statistics (Institut National de la Statistique, ANStat) (see annex 2 for targeting protocol). This targeting methodology

17 The project's interventions — mandatory women's representation in community governance, targeted IGA grants for women and youth, and value chain support in

cocoa, coffee, rice, and maize — directly operationalize these CPF FY23–FY27 priorities at the local level in the Montagnes District.
18 In this context, a campement is an informal or semi-formal settlement—often smaller than an officially listed locality—where communities reside

outside or on the periphery of recognized towns or villages. Campements may be attached to nearby localities or isolated, can host sizable
populations, and sometimes have basic community infrastructure (such as schools), but they are not always captured in official administrative lists.
                                                                                   10
            The World Bank
            Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



maximizes impact by aligning resources to areas with the greatest need, ensures coverage across all three regions, and
includes more than 80 percent of the district’s rural poor. The project will operate in all identified localities and
campements within the 35 selected SPs, ensuring inclusive coverage across both officially listed localities and additional
settlements identified through local consultations and satellite imagery. A few exclusions apply: (a) areas already covered
by the Forest Investment Program (P162789, FIP) and FIP-2; (b) campements in protected areas;19 and (c) urban centers
not adapted to a rural CLD approach.
                       Table 2. Project Intervention Areas: Regional Distribution of the Population and of Localities
                                               (35 SPs with the highest number of rural poor)
                                                                      Cavally          Guémon            Tonkpi               Total
                Total Population in 35 SPs                            385,143          669,405           949,577            2,004,125
                Number of official localities in 35 SPs                 48               111               462                 621
                   Share of rural poor population (percent)                     14           27                     58               100
                    Share of population by region (percent)                     19           33                     47               100
                      Share of localities by region (percent)                    8           18                     74               100


D. Project Components
Component 1. Resilient and inclusive Local Development at the Community Level (US$51 million equivalent)
17.    Through the CLD approach, Component 1 will finance resilient and inclusive community infrastructure and IGA.
Together, these investments will help communities close critical gaps in basic services; develop local economic
opportunities; and strengthen their capacity to plan, implement and maintain priority investments over time.
Subcomponent 1.1. Enhanced access to basic services through resilient, inclusive infrastructure (US$40 million equivalent)
18.     This subcomponent finances construction, rehabilitation, upgrading, and equipping of climate-resilient small-
scale community infrastructure that addresses communities’ most pressing needs. The CLD approach described below
improves the model adopted from COSO North to further strengthen the role of communities in prioritizing, planning,
implementing, and monitoring local investments.
          (a)     Identification. Investments are identified through a participatory diagnostic in which communities,
                  mobilized by the CDV and with technical support from Community Facilitators (Agents du Développement
                  Communautaire, ADC), identify service gaps and priority needs of different community groups, including
                  women, youth, and other marginalized groups where relevant.20 The CDV then leads a consensus-based
                  consolidation process in which the community votes on its top three priority investments from an open menu
                  of eligible options with a negative list as specified in the Operations Manual.21 At least one of the top three
                  priorities must represent the choice of the aforementioned groups.
          (b)     Selection. The top three priorities of each locality are submitted to the Regional Approval and Monitoring
                  Commission for Subprojects (Commission Régional d'Approbation de Sous-Projets, CRAS), established by the
                  project.22 Community investments are assessed based on prior review by the regional Project
                  Implementation Unit (PIU) and on eligibility criteria for alignment with regional planning and technical
                  compliance. The CRAS reviews each community's investment in order of priority and retains the first eligible
                  investment that receives technical clearance from the competent sector ministry. To strengthen

19 Individuals living in these areas will not be excluded. They will participate in the local development planning of their closest targeted locality, but

no infrastructure will be rehabilitated or constructed within protected areas nor will IGAs that rely on natural resources in protected areas be
financed.
20 Local climate risks and vulnerabilities will also be a key aspect of the diagnostics process.
21 Structured consultations disaggregated by gender, separate safe spaces for women's deliberations, and gender-sensitive facilitation training for

ADCs will be ensured.
22 See section on institutional arrangements for details on CRAS composition.

                                                                           11
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                transparency, community engagement, and inclusion, the project will ensure that CDV members are invited
                to observe CRAS sessions.
          (c)   Implementation. The CDV will participate in the selection of local firms for the construction or rehabilitation
                of community investments. Local labor and expertise will be prioritized with a focus on creating job
                opportunities. Investments include a range of activities from physical works, equipment, and mainstreaming
                climate-proofing standards.23
          (d)   Participatory M&E. Throughout implementation and until the completion of investments, the CDV will
                participate in the M&E of the construction and operationalization of infrastructure. A maintenance sub-
                committee under the CDV will be set up and capacitated for each infrastructure.
19.     Allocations, cycles, and flow of funds. Each locality will receive one community investment over the project life,
with investments delivered across two financing rounds. The average estimated cost per investment is US$63,000, based
on unit cost reviews from COSO North. This corresponds to an average envelope of approximately US$1.14 million per SP,
with adjustments by population size. Overall, the subcomponent is expected to finance around 620 investments. While
funds flow to the RC in line with the country’s decentralization framework, the national PIU remains responsible for
procurement, overseeing a participatory process which includes RC and CDVs.
Subcomponent 1.2. Increased livelihood opportunities for women and youth (US$11 million equivalent)
20.       This subcomponent aims to advance the economic empowerment of women and youth through IGA at the
community level. During the identification phase, the participatory diagnostic will map existing and potential economic
groups. Wherever feasible, Village Savings and Credit Associations (Associations Villageoises d'Épargne et de Crédit, AVEC)
previously established under the PSSN will serve as strategic entry points, as many have been supported for multiple years
and are positioned to graduate to productive activities. Where no economic groups exist, the project will facilitate the
establishment of new ones. In the selection phase, interested community members will receive assistance to (a) organize
into groups and (b) develop business proposals that define the IGA's nature, scope, and objectives, including a budget
specifying their investment contribution24 and projected returns. A transparent selection process led by a committee
comprising the ADCs, regional PIU, and technical partner agencies will evaluate proposals based on three criteria: (a)
eligibility limited to women and youth groups; (b) half of grants allocated to proposals that support relevant value chain
development;25 (c) half of grants allocated to proposals reflecting groups' economic interests and needs, prioritizing
inclusion criteria (diverse membership, vulnerability considerations); and (d) a commitment to continue or start
contributing to an AVEC savings scheme. Each group may request up to US$15,000 in total support. IGA groups with an
existing bank account will receive direct transfers, while others will be supported via technical partner agencies. Support
packages will address diverse needs and may include agricultural and trade assets, materials, transportation costs, and
training.26 IGA groups will receive technical assistance from implementing partners (government agencies and
nongovernmental organizations [NGOs]) to consolidate viable initiatives, improve market access, and strengthen group
management. A tailored and targeted approach to ensure women’s participation is detailed under section IV.C. Gender
and Youth.




23 Investments may include physical works and equipment for schools, literacy centers, health posts, childcare and other facilities to support

women’s economic participation. These investments will be built with climate and disaster proofing design (such as reinforcing roofing for buildings
and improving natural ventilation to reduce heat exposure) to reduce the impact of climate change-induced flooding, heatwaves and waterborne
diseases on the most vulnerable (children and women), ensure service continuity during extreme climate events, thereby strengthening local
adaptive capacity.
24 Between 5 and 10 percent of the total budget.
25 Based on the results of a value chain study to be available before the project effectiveness (Component 2).
26 As most livelihood opportunities are expected to be in agriculture sector, support packages will include training and capacity building on climate-

smart agriculture, provision of climate-resilient seeds, support to grow drought-resistant cash crops with extended value chains, integrated soil
management, soil and water conservation, and afforestation.
                                                                         12
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



Component 2: Socio-economic Development at the Regional Level (US$21 million equivalent)
21.       This component will support the rehabilitation and development of resilient local economic infrastructure at
the regional level by improving access to water, markets, and connectivity between production areas and economic
hubs, addressing socio-economic needs that require inter-village solutions or top-down planning.27 It will focus on
strengthening LED by improving market access and connectivity between production areas and economic hubs, promoting
job creation, and expanding the provision of safe drinking water in target localities. Collectively, these investments are
expected to unlock local economic potential by reducing transaction costs, creating new opportunities, and improving the
reliability of essential services. By linking production zones to markets and service centers, the component will catalyze
growth for agriculture and other sectors. The resulting expansion in market activity is expected to translate into
meaningful job creation—particularly for youth and women.
22.      Access to clean drinking water. Each locality will be assessed for basic rural water access (water points and public
institutions). Findings will guide tailored intervention packages (averaging about US$25,000 per locality, adjusted to needs
and population) that prioritize rehabilitation and improvement of existing schemes: repairing pumps and associated
structures, replacing outdated components and capacitating pump repair technicians and Village Water Point
Management Committees (with 50 percent women members). Where consistent with eligibility and environmental
safeguards, systems may be upgraded or built using solar-powered options, and local merchants will be incentivized to
supply spare parts. Activities will align with the Ministry of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (Ministre de l’Hydraulique et
de l’Assainissement et de la Salubrité, MINHAS) and PASEA standards. These investments will primarily rely on
groundwater resources in the targeted regions, which are not transboundary in nature. Investments that use or risk
polluting international waterways will be excluded in line with the criteria to be reflected in the Project Implementation
Manual (PIM).28
23.      Investments in local value chains. Informed by a value chains study prepared in line with the AgriConnect
initiative, this component will fund value chain and economic infrastructure projects in the Montagnes District, allocating
about US$1 million per region to address priority bottlenecks. Investments may include improving rural markets, storage
and processing facilities, and key access roads to support strategic and climate-resilient value chains.29 In response to
climate change-driven shocks and disruption that intensify food insecurity, these upgrades aim to connect production
areas with markets, lower post-harvest losses and costs, boost private sector activity, and strengthen food security. Value
chain upgrades are designed with an explicit jobs lens focusing on youth employment and strengthening resilience to
climate shocks.30 Short-term employment will be generated through labor-intensive rehabilitation of markets, storage,
processing facilities, and small access roads. Moreover, improved connectivity, storage capacity, and processing will
reduce losses and increase output, enabling small-scale economic groups to scale and formalize, creating sustained
employment while enabling income diversification and reducing climate sensitivity of rural livelihoods. IGA under
Subcomponent 1.2 will be linked to these supported value chains and, in line with the social policy strategy and
commitment to the jobs agenda, will embed relevant skills-building and training, and labor‑market matching so
beneficiaries can expand production, connect to new markets, and sustain income gains. The intended impact on jobs and
incomes for this activity is described in the Economic Analysis in annex 4.
24.     Connectivity. The component will finance preliminary analytical work on local roads and connectivity in all regions
of the Montagnes District, with an estimated budget of around US$300,000. The assessment will identify critical missing

27 There are three areas of investments under this component, and their respective financing is estimated to be US$15 million for water, US$4.5

million for value chains, and US$0.5 million for connectivity.
28 Water subprojects will be built with climate resilience features identified by the assessment to reduce flood risks and the impact of water scarcity

exacerbated by droughts. Examples of measures include raising pump platforms above flood levels, improving drainage channels around water
points and replacing worn pumps with high-efficiency parts to reduce water losses. Areas with high rates of waterborne disease intensified by
climate impacts will be targeted.
29 Examples include raising warehouses above projected flood levels and modernizing facilities with climate-proofed sheds to limit food supply

interruptions after extreme weather events.
30 Such upgrades will support the transition away from climate-sensitive agricultural value chains that have become less economically viable due to

climate impacts.
                                                                         13
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



links, prioritize rehabilitation segments, and define technical standards for climate-resilient, all-season rural roads
connecting production zones with markets and service centers.31 Findings will guide small access road investments and
inform larger government and partner operations in line with the National and Rural Roads Management and
Maintenance strategies and in coordination with PCR and Road Management Agency (Agence de Gestion des Routes,
AGEROUTE) to ensure technical alignment and avoid duplication.


Component 3: Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening (US$18 million equivalent)
25.       Component 3 will support the institutionalization of the CLD approach and strengthen cooperation between
communities and institutions. The component will finance analytical work, policy dialogue, targeted social cohesion
interventions and capacity building for local actors and government institutions that oversee local development planning.
The component will generate evidence on what works, translate it into operational tools and policy recommendations,
and reinforce local capacities to plan, implement and monitor inclusive investments. The component will also finance an
impact evaluation to assess the impact of equitable access to services on last-mile service delivery. To maximize the
utilization of digital tools developed within the COSO North project, ongoing efforts will be made to update and refine
these resources, with particular emphasis on the knowledge management platform and the investment register.
Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Relations and Mutual Trust Between Communities (US$5 million equivalent)
26.     Communities at increased risk of fragility, conflict or violence (FCV) will be identified in the participatory
diagnostic described under Component 1. Community grievances, inequities in the use of shared resources, or unfair
treatment in existing dispute resolution mechanisms at the locality level will be diagnosed to inform social cohesion
interventions and identify community investments that can mitigate drivers of conflict, including those exacerbated by
climate shocks.32 Implementing partners will map existing conflict resolution mechanisms, assess capacity gaps, and
strengthen them where required. Disputes related to land tenure will be referred to PRESFOR.
27.     In addition, this subcomponent will strengthen equitable, transparent access to shared public services in
contexts of intergroup tension. To improve equitable access to services, particularly water, which are frequently
conditioned by group dynamics, the project will pilot low-cost behavioral interventions co-created with communities
(public rules-of-use, equitable rotation schedules, and locally endorsed fair-use charters) alongside support for local
mediation.33 These behavioral interventions will be evaluated to test their effectiveness, informing national policy
dialogue and potential scale-up across sectors and districts and to other shared services beyond water.
Subcomponent 3.2: Analytical Work and Institutionalization of CLD in Côte d'Ivoire (US$1 million equivalent)
28.      This subcomponent will finance analytical work, policy dialogue, and initial institutionalization measures to
support a coordinated and sustainable CLD approach in Côte d’Ivoire. The analysis will review the policy, legal and
institutional frameworks, the distribution (or duplication) of roles across central and local institutions, the suitability of
existing regulations for CLD, and available human and financial resources. It will examine financial flows and fiduciary
systems and identify options for more predictable, decentralized flows within the current context. Concretely, a review of
local planning practices will be conducted to align the COSO West participatory approach with national procedures. The
analytical and operational work will be discussed at national and regional workshops and will inform practical tools:
updated CLD guidelines, standard operating procedures and model legal instruments. The work may also provide the



31 The assessment will also assess the climate vulnerabilities of existing connectivity infrastructure and identify specific climate resilience measures

to be incorporated into rural road upgrade or rehabilitation. Measures may include improving drainage structures and soil stabilization of unpaved
and low-volume roads.
32 The diagnosis and interventions will focus on addressing interconnected climate and fragility risks and facilitating participatory, inclusive

processes such as participatory climate risk assessment to reduce communities’ underlying vulnerabilities to climate-exacerbated conflicts over
resources.
33 Behavioral change campaigns that encourage water-saving and efficient water use particularly during droughts will also be included.

                                                                           14
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



foundation for longer-term engagement or linked operations by proposing phased expansion scenarios and spelling out
institutional and financing reforms required for scale-up.
Subcomponent 3.3: Capacity building for local stakeholders (US$12 million equivalent)
29.      This subcomponent will finance human resources and capacity building of local stakeholders to drive and
participate in all stages of the investment cycles. 130 ADCs will be deployed to support localities with local development
planning. Local stakeholders (RC, SP, and CDV) will benefit from training on inclusive and participatory local development,
environmental and social norms, local climate adaptation and mitigation, social inclusion, and citizen engagement.34
Training will be delivered by the PIU. This subcomponent will also finance the running costs of the RC for project-related
activities, the CRAS, and the CDVs.
Component 4: Project Management (US$10 million equivalent)
30.     This component will support project management and coordination at the regional, national, and subnational
levels by covering the operating costs of planning, implementation, and technical oversight of project activities;
Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) management and monitoring including relevant studies; Financial Management
(FM) and procurement; and preparation of Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs), and progress reports,
communication and M&E arrangements, including the setup of an Information Management System (IMS) and a project
beneficiary feedback mechanism. Coordination activities will support the establishment and operation of the CRAS, the
National Steering Committee (NSC), and technical national and subnational committees.
E. Role of Partners35
           Partner                                                      Nature of Involvement/Description
 European Union                         Implements several complementary projects in the Tonkpi region, including Mousso Djidji
                                        (fighting discrimination and GBV, EUR 1.6 million, 2024–2027), PASCI (supporting civil society,
                                        EUR 4 million, 2024–2026), and PRO2M (cassava and market gardening value chains).
 UNDP                                   Joint implementer (alongside FAO and UNIDO) of the SCOLUR-CI project (2024–2027), which
                                        focuses on scaling up cocoa-based food systems, land use, and restoration in the Cavally and
                                        Guémon regions (US$5.35 million, GEF-funded).
 AFDB                                   Finances the Government Social Program Support Project (PA-PSGouv, 2019–2026),
                                        implemented by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (EUR 28 million).
 IFC                                    Provides analytical support and technical coordination through a value chain study aligned
                                        with the AgriConnect initiative, informing the selection of investments under Component 2
                                        (local value chains and socio-economic development). The partnership aims to maximize
                                        public-private synergies, ensure market-aligned economic interventions, and lay institutional
                                        groundwork for broader sectoral operations in the Montagnes District.
 MINHAS                                 Provides technical guidance and oversight for the water needs assessment and
                                        prioritizes/validates water investments and designs in line with national standards and
                                        climate‑resilient, inclusive service delivery.
 Ministry of Economy, Finance           Develops and standardizes national and local planning tools and oversees the consistency and
 and Budget (Ministre de                monitoring of public investment to ensure alignment with national policy.
 l’Economie, des Finances et du
 Budget, MEFB)
 MoI                                    Ensures administrative oversight of CTs that implement LDPs. Issues implementing texts;
                                        reviews and approves tri-annual and AIPs; and oversees the step‑by‑step identification,
                                        validation, and approval process for local projects.

34 Climate change-related content will account for around 40 percent of overall training and focus on improving communities’ understanding of

climate change impacts, such as droughts, floods, and extreme heat; promote climate-resilient livelihoods such as climate-smart agriculture,
sustainable land management; and prevent climate-exacerbated conflicts over natural resources.
35 In this context, partners refer to project stakeholders.

                                                                        15
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



             Partner                                           Nature of Involvement/Description
 ANStat                           Provides inputs to guide dynamic targeting of SPs and supports geo-spatial monitoring of
                                  implementation and investments.

F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
31.     This project is largely built on the lessons learned from the successful COSO North CLD model with a few key
improvements to enhance impact including: (a) clustering and bundling interventions within priority SPs for compound
socio‑economic effects rather than dispersed stand‑alone investments; (b) a multisectoral approach that aligns
community priorities with strategic LED by integrating foundational analytics, front‑line services, and value chain
development; and (c) deeper community engagement by expanding the role of CDVs in planning, targeting, oversight, and
sustainability. Together, these refinements shift from dispersion to concentration and from isolated investments to
integrated packages, maximizing equity, efficiency, and scalability in areas of greatest need.
32.      Crucially, COSO West marks a shift from a regional to a national approach to enhance government ownership
and enable more tailored interventions in the Montagnes District. While COSO North showed that regional coordination
is effective for managing cross-border risks, a national approach is better suited to the Montagnes District context of rural
poverty, migration-driven tensions, and post-conflict dynamics, which differs from the northern border.
33. The project also draws on lessons for institutionalization from the Emergency Post‑Conflict Assistance Project
    (Projet d’Appui Post Conflit, PAPC, P082817), which supported Community-driven Development (CDD) and social
    cohesion in conflict‑affected areas. PAPC transferred funds directly to CDVs, financing 900 socio-economic
    infrastructures in 90 SPs and training 6,000 members from community‑based organizations on CDD and conflict
    resolution from 2007 to 2016. Impact evaluations found that CDD approaches delivered lower unit costs for
    investments and stronger community buy‑in. However, these outcomes proved hard to sustain without
    institutionalization; clear mandates and financing flows for communes and deconcentrated services; and embedding
    of CDVs within local planning. Building on this model, COSO West embeds its CLD approach within national and local
    institutions—standardizing processes, tools, and accountability mechanisms and linking community planning to
    existing government systems. By mapping and clarifying roles and procedures, and by building the capacity of
    government actors, the project ensures that the CLD approach has a sustainable pathway for scaling after project
    completion. A key insight from PAPC and COSO North is that concentrating investments within priority areas — rather
    than dispersing them thinly across communities — is essential to generating the critical mass needed to shift local
    economic dynamics. COSO West builds directly on this lesson by clustering and bundling interventions within priority
    sub-prefectures, creating compound effects and enabling maintenance sub-committees under each CDV to operate
    at a viable and sustainable scale.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

34.     Implementation arrangements build on the COSO North project, with strategic oversight provided by an NSC
chaired by the Prime Minister’s Office. The COSO West PIU will be housed under and report directly to the Prime
Minister’s office. By leveraging the existing (COSO North) PIU’s proven systems, procedures, and approaches—along with
the expertise of senior personnel in fiduciary and Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) compliance, local
governance, and technical domains such as agriculture, climate, value chains, and market development, the project aims
to maximize efficiency and impact.
35.     National project oversight and supervision. The NSC, chaired by the Prime Minister’s Office, which is already in
place will be the strategic decision-making body responsible for guiding the project to achieve its objectives and approving
the AWPB. The NSC will include the (a) Office of the Prime Minister; (b) Ministry in charge of Interior and Security
(Ministère de l’Intérieur et de la Sécurité, MIS); (c) Ministry of Economy, Finance and Budget (Ministre de l’Economie, des
Finances et du Budget, MEFB); (d) Ministry in Charge of Planning and Development (Ministère du Plan et du

                                                              16
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



Développement, MPD); (e) Ministry in Charge of Youth Promotion, Professional Insertion and Civic Services (Ministère de
la Promotion de la Jeunesse, de l’Insertion Professionnelle et du Service Civique, MPJIPSC); (f) Ministry in Charge of National
Cohesion, Solidarity and Fight Against Poverty (Ministère de la Cohésion Nationale, de la Solidarité et de la Lutte contre la
Pauvreté, MCNSLP); (g) Ministry in Charge of Agriculture, Rural Development and Food Crop Production (Ministère de
l’Agriculture et du Développement Rural et de la Production Vivriere, MINADERPV); (h) the Association of Regions and
Municipalities (Union des Villes et Communes de Côte d’Ivoire, UVICOCI); and (i) the Association of Regions and Districs
(Association des Régions et des Districts de Cote d’Ivoire, ARDCI).
36.      National PIU staffing. COSO West and COSO North will be led by the same project coordinator. The current FM
specialist from COSO North will be responsible for FM during the first three months after effectiveness. Key PIU positions
to be recruited no more than three months after effectiveness will include a deputy national coordinator dedicated to the
project, a dedicated FM specialist, a dedicated procurement specialist, a dedicated CDD specialist, a social safeguards
specialist (with expertise on gender mainstreaming and Gender-based Violence [GBV]), and an environmental safeguards
specialist. Within six months of project effectiveness, additional staff will be recruited to include a dedicated M&E
specialist, a senior assistant to the CDD specialist, a senior accountant and two regional accountants, a technology and
IMS specialist, a communication specialist, an LED specialist, a water engineer and a civil engineer, as well as administrative
and support staff as needed.
37.      Regional PIUs. A regional antenna will be established in Man (Tonkpi) with regional offices in Guémon and Cavally,
to ensure proximity to beneficiaries, effective technical support to local actors, and close supervision of activities across
the Montagnes District. The regional antenna in Man will be staffed as follows: a Field Manager (Chef d’Antenne), an M&E
assistant, a procurement assistant, an ESS assistant, a regional accountant, ADCs (supervisors, facilitators, water
specialists, and civil engineers), and support staff (secretary and driver). The regional offices in Guémon and Cavally will
be composed of a field manager; ADCs (supervisors, facilitators, water specialists, and civil engineers), and support staff
(secretary and driver). The two field offices will rely on the staff of the regional antenna for procurement, FM, and M&E
activities.
38.      RCs and the CRAS. RCs are responsible for organizing and coordinating local development planning, aggregating
local-level priorities into communal and regional plans. They house the CRAS,36 which will be responsible for reviewing
and validating the CDV’s local investment priorities in alignment with regional and national development planning. RCs
will receive project funds to pay for works under Subcomponent 1.1 through Designated Accounts (DAs) that will be
opened for each of the three regions. The project will provide capacity building to the RCs and CRAS, including fiduciary
and environmental and social requirements. During implementation, the CRAS will conduct quarterly supervision missions,
with technical and financial support from the PIU to monitor investments.
39.      ADCs. ADCs will be competitively recruited through open calls for candidates. Each facilitator will typically cover
10 localities, and work in teams of two: a social specialist and a water or civil engineer. One supervisor will manage a team
of 20 facilitators. Facilitators will support the implementation of Components 1 and 2, facilitating community mobilization
at the locality level and supporting CDVs. Activities implemented by partner agencies will be monitored and supervised by
local authorities and decentralized services.
40.     Community Development Committees. At the community level, CDVs will lead the local development planning
process. The CDVs will be created or revitalized and supported to register as formal associations. The CDV is usually
composed of 13 members, including a President, a Vice President (VP), a Treasurer, women and youth representatives,
and focal points on economic development; social cohesion focal point; and the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
focal point. To ensure adequate representation, women will make up at least one-third of CDV decision-making roles
(President, VP, or Treasurer).

36 CRAS membership includes the Regional Prefect (chair), a representative of the RC (vice-chair), the project regional field manager (secretary),

representatives of the relevant CTs, sector ministries, local civil society, and resource persons (experts/observers).
                                                                          17
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements

41.     The project will maintain a rigorous M&E system. For monitoring, staff at the national and regional levels will
conduct regular monitoring and reporting of project activities. In coordination with Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring
and Supervision (GEMS), facilitators will use an application software that follows the entire project cycle for facilitators to
report the progress of activities (e-CDD). At the community level, the CDVs will have dedicated resources for community-
led M&E and GRM. The project will also explore the use of community scorecards to measure beneficiary satisfaction with
project activities.
42.      The project will conduct several evaluations to measure impacts and document important lessons learned. The
project will conduct an evaluation/survey to measure access to services, income generation, and value chain development
impacts, satisfaction with the project, and perceptions of social cohesion, among other topics. The project will examine
the feasibility of identifying a control/comparison group for an impact evaluation as described under Component 3. In
addition, the project plans a technical audit of the investments at midterm and closure to examine the quality of the
infrastructure, climate resilience, utilization of services, and job/economic impacts.
C. Disbursement Arrangements

43.    The PIU will access funding from the World Bank using the disbursement methods described in the World Bank
Disbursement Handbook (advance, direct payment, reimbursement, and special commitments). Detailed disbursement
procedures will be documented in the FM Procedures Manual.
44.     The PIU will be required to submit a withdrawal application, including a six-month forecast of expenditures, for
an initial deposit to the DA, drawn from the IDA Credit, as per the provisions of the Disbursement and Financial
Information Letter (DFIL). Further deposits of funds from IDA to the DA will be made upon evidence of satisfactory Interim
Financial Reports (IFRs) as the DA ceiling is variable based on a six-month forecast approved by the World Bank (the current
modality for COSO North).
45.     If ineligible expenditures are found to have been made from the DA and/or Project Operational Accounts, the
recipient will be obligated to refund equivalent amounts to the World Bank. The World Bank will have the right, as
reflected in the terms of the FA, to suspend disbursement of the funds if significant conditions, including reporting
requirements, are not complied with. Additional details regarding disbursement will be provided in the DFIL.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

A. Technical and Economic Analysis

Technical Analysis

46.     The technical design represents a deliberate evolution from earlier CLD programming in Côte d'Ivoire,
translating lessons from PAPC and COSO North into a more institutionally grounded and spatially targeted model whose
principal innovation is the shift from a project-driven to a system-driven approach. This shift is operationalized by
embedding the CLD methodology within national planning frameworks, standardizing tools and accountability
mechanisms across all levels of government and formally linking community planning cycles to existing government
systems thereby creating the institutional conditions for the approach to be sustained and scaled beyond the project
period. The targeting methodology is grounded in a geospatial PTI that triangulates multidimensional poverty incidence,
service access deficits, and fragility risk indicators at the sub-prefecture level, significantly strengthening the rigor and
defensibility of investment allocation decisions relative to predecessor operations and ensuring that resources are
directed to the areas where returns to public investment are highest.
47.     The concentration of investments within priority sub-prefectures to finance both community-level and inter-
village solutions in an integrated manner constitutes the core technical rationale for the project's spatial design,
                                                         18
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



generating the compound socio-economic effects that dispersed, stand-alone investments may not be able to achieve.
Community infrastructure and livelihoods support are deliberately complemented at the regional level by larger
investments in value chain infrastructure creating the critical mass required to unlock productive economic activity and
ensure that community-level investments connect to broader economic systems. The participatory model is a core
technical strength: evidence from prior operations confirms that structured community-led investment cycles generate
lower unit costs, stronger maintenance behavior, and more equitable investment choices than top-down delivery.
Mandatory gender inclusion thresholds embedded in the subproject prioritization process, combined with the deployment
of 130 ADCs at the village level bridging community demand and formal government planning, ensure that the approach
is institutionally self-reinforcing and capable of producing results that are both technically sound and socially sustainable.
Economic Analysis
48.      The economic analysis for Components 1 and 2 shows a positive result, with a base case Net Present Value
(NPV) of US$145.1 million and an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 28.3 percent at a 6 percent social discount
rate (see Annex 4). The present value of quantified benefits is estimated at US$249.3 million, while the present value of
capital and Operations and Maintenance (O&M) costs is US$104.2 million, leading to an NPV of US$145.1 million. Even
under conservative assumptions, including a 10 percent cost increase, a 10 percent benefit reduction, or a two-year lag in
benefits—NPV remains positive, and the EIRR stays well above the social discount rate, confirming a robust economic case
for the operation.
49.       The analysis is aligned with the Corporate Scorecard ‘More and Better Paid Jobs’ (MBJ) methodology, which
distinguishes three levels of jobs impacts: (a) Level 1 captures direct beneficiaries of targeted employment interventions
(in this case IGA beneficiaries); (b) Level 2 captures indirect beneficiaries of employment interventions (local workers on
community infrastructure); and (c) Level 3 indirect economic gains stemming from improved social and economic
infrastructure. For this project, all quantified benefit streams are grouped into these three MBJ levels, which together sum
to the total present value of benefits of US$272.2 million that underpins the NPV and EIRR estimates.
50.      The sensitivity analysis further confirms the robustness of the operation's economic returns. In scenarios with
a 10 percent increase in costs, a 10 percent decrease in benefits, or a two-year delay in the realization of benefits, NPV
remains positive (ranging from US$102 million to US$135 million), and the EIRR remains comfortably above the 6 percent
social discount rate (ranging from 17.3 percent to 25.1 percent). This indicates that the project would continue to generate
substantial net benefits even under conservative downside assumptions. A detailed economic analysis is included in annex
4.
Paris Alignment
51.      The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The operation
has a low material risk of having a negative impact on Côte d’Ivoire’s low greenhouse gas emissions development
pathways. Under Component 1, the operation will invest in small-scale community infrastructure and provide livelihood
support, which meet the criteria to be considered universally aligned. Under Component 2, the operation will support
rehabilitation and development of economic infrastructure, such as access to drinking water, value chains, and market
connectivity. The project will manage mitigation risks by using energy-efficient diode lights, solar-powered water systems,
and ensuring that rural road upgrades do not expand or promote expansion into areas of high carbon stocks or high
biodiversity areas. The project also supports capacity building and institutional strengthening, all of which are considered
universally aligned.
52.     Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The Montagnes District is especially vulnerable to floods,
droughts, and extreme heat. These climate and disaster risks could have substantial impacts on the project’s physical
investments, such as community infrastructure and livelihood activities. Non-physical investments, including capacity
building of local stakeholders, policy dialogue, and knowledge and analytics, are at low risk to climate change impacts. The
residual climate risk impact has been reduced to a low and acceptable level, through the following measures: (a) all
                                                             19
            The World Bank
            Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



infrastructure investments will adopt rigorous climate-resilient design and maintenance standards to withstand relevant
climate shocks, including flooding events and (b) communities and local authorities will follow a participatory diagnostics
process to map and assess local climate risks and vulnerabilities. Investments that respond to these risks and build climate
resilience will be prioritized. Capacity building and training will also be provided to local stakeholders to enhance
understanding of climate change impact and promote the adoption of climate-resilient livelihoods and conflict-sensitive
natural resources management practices.
B. Fiduciary

Financial Management
53.    The proposed operation will leverage COSO North’s fiduciary arrangements, including flow of funds to the RCs.
The COSO PIU has established satisfactory FM arrangements, including qualified staffing, FM manuals, and an operational
accounting system that the COSO West operation will utilize. The RCs have demonstrated their capacity to manage funds
responsibly. The overall FM residual risk for the project is rated Substantial, considering the addition of three new RCs. To
ensure adequate use of the World Bank funds and mitigation of FM risks, the project will introduce the following key
measures, with full details provided in the FM Action Plan (annex 3):
        •      PIM. Adopt and improve the PIM of COSO North, clarifying roles and responsibilities, implementation and
               oversight arrangements, and FM procedures for the RCs, including staffing, budgeting, accounting, reporting,
               funds flows, procurement, and disbursements, including institutional and management controls for
               investments.
        •      FM staffing. In addition to the senior FM specialist, strengthen capacity by recruiting an FM specialist
               experienced with World Bank or comparable donor FM procedures to support the senior FM, and by adding
               two regional accountants (complementing the four already in place) to cover the three RCs.
        •      Use of country systems. Maintain the assigned Financial Controller and Public Accountant from the Ministry
               of Finance and Budget in line with Decree No. 475 on donor‑financed projects to manage project transactions
               within the COSO West PIU. Their operating costs, as well as other expenditures ineligible for IDA financing,
               will be covered by government counterpart funding.
        •      Internal audit and assurance. Confirm the General Finance Inspection (Inspection Générale des Finances,
               IGF) the internal auditor for the operation.
        •      Systems and tools. Configure COSO West’s accounting software to meet project requirements, including
               tracking and reporting of RC transactions and components.
54.     Côte D’Ivoire is committed to using FundsChain, an innovative blockchain-based platform designed and
provided by the WBG to provide end-to-end traceability of funds flow. FundsChain supports real-time disbursement
tracking, automated Statement of Expenditure reporting, and improved operational efficiency at no cost to the borrower.
This financing will be onboarded to the platform. To support adoption, the PIU will receive appropriate training and
capacity-building assistance. More details about the adoption of the FundsChain platform may be outlined in the PIM.
Procurement
55.     Procurement will be undertaken in accordance with the World Bank Procurement Regulations for Investment
Project Financing (IPF) Borrowers (September 2025), the Anti‑Corruption Guidelines (July 1, 2016), and the Financing
Agreement. The World Bank Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs) will be used for international market approaches,
national procedures and documents may be used where permitted by the Regulations. Procurement and contract
management arrangements will be detailed in the PIM, to be agreed with the World Bank three months after
effectiveness. High‑value and/or complex packages identified in the Project Procurement Strategy for Development
(PPSD) will receive enhanced attention from both the IA and the World Bank.
                                                          20
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



56.      A PPSD and an initial 18‑month Procurement Plan, derived from the PPSD, were prepared and cleared by the
World Bank. The PPSD confirms that national and local markets have adequate capacity to support project
implementation. The procurement strategy is built around two core choices: a predominant use of Request for Quotations
to ensure speed and inclusiveness, given the large number of small-scale community sub-projects (US$25,000–US$64,000
each); and aggregation of contracts where feasible to improve efficiency and attract more qualified contractors. The IA
will use the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) for planning, the World Bank review and clearances,
contract award, and contract management; only activities approved in STEP will be implemented, and STEP will be kept
current.
57.      Procurement capacity and risks were assessed using the Procurement Risk Assessment and Management
System (PRAMS). Key risks include delays in procurement and plan execution, weak coordination on technical
specifications and evaluations, contract management weaknesses, limited market research and local capacity for
community‑level activities, and incomplete use of STEP. Mitigation measures include recruiting a qualified procurement
specialist, targeted capacity-building and clear procedures in the PIM, strengthened planning and market analysis,
improved contract management practices, and consistent use of STEP.
58.      The overall procurement risk is rated Substantial. The World Bank will provide ongoing implementation support,
including semiannual missions and periodic post‑review (covering at least 10 percent of post‑reviewed contracts), with
risk ratings updated as needed through PRAMS. Procurement reporting will be included in the Project Implementation
Reports and shared with the World Bank quarterly.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No




C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

59.      The overall environmental and social risk is Substantial, due to the sensitivity of the area and the nature of
activities, including construction/rehabilitation and upgrading of infrastructure such as roads, markets, water facilities,
schools, and health centers, as well as IGA. The project will not fund small-scale irrigation schemes using boreholes or
inland wetlands for agricultural IGAs. The relevant standards are ESS1-ESS6, ESS8, and ESS10. Construction/rehabilitation,
as well as upgrading may adversely affect the bio-physical environment through dust, noise, wastewater, accidental spills,
waste handling, habitat disturbance, and transboundary effects. Occupational and community safety risks include traffic,
unsafe worksites, and sanitation issues. Increased use of pesticides raises contamination concerns, but these impacts are
expected to be site-specific and reversible with appropriate management measures and controls. Social risks stem from
land requirements, potential economic displacement, labor oversight challenges, exclusion of vulnerable groups, and local
tensions. Residual security issues require conflict-sensitive and adaptive management. No access restrictions to protected
areas are planned. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risk is rated Moderate due to contextual
vulnerabilities being limited by the project’s scope and built-in mitigation measures.
60.     A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) outlining inclusive, gender- and vulnerability-sensitive engagement,
disclosure, feedback loops, and GRM with an SEA/SH component, has been developed, consulted upon, and disclosed


                                                            21
               The World Bank
               Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



in-country and on the World Bank website on February 17, 2026.37 The client will develop an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) to establish screening procedures and exclusion criteria for high-risk activities and
activities excluded from the project design. The ESMF will include provisions, screening procedures, and templates for
site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). The ESMF will be approved and disclosed by April 30, 2026. Following the
results of the Côte d’Ivoire environmental and social overview assessment conducted in 2024, the borrower framework
will apply for labor and working conditions, apart from the identified gaps that will be mandated through the
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). The ESCP has been prepared, setting deliverables, timelines, staffing,
training, and reporting requirements and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank Website on April 9, 2026.38 The ESCP
includes measures applicable to labor and working conditions for community workers and subcontractors. Security risks
monitoring will be managed through training and operational protocols, to be detailed in the PIM. Site-specific
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and RAPs will be prepared when sites are known, prior to works,
and will include pollution prevention, traffic and emergency plans, waste management, and chance-finds procedures. An
SEA/SH action plan that includes accountability and response framework, GRM, and codes of conduct, will be prepared
within three months of effectiveness and will be implemented, regularly monitored, and reported to the World Bank.
61.      Institutional arrangements will leverage the COSO North’s moderately satisfactory environmental and social
performance as described under section III.A. The PIU will recruit an environmental specialist, a social specialist at the
central level and an environmental and social specialist based in Man. To mitigate labor inspectorate monitoring gaps in
remote areas, the PIU will operationalize a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Regional Labor Office of Man.
No dedicated security specialist is required at appraisal; however, the environmental and social teams will receive training
for security risk monitoring to maintain context tracking and escalation protocols to be integrated in the PIM.

Citizen Engagement
62.     Citizen engagement is embedded throughout the project cycle, from preparation to closure. During preparation,
community consultations informed the project's design and ensured that needs and priorities of different community
groups—including women, youth, and other marginalized groups—were reflected in the CLD approach. During
implementation, citizen engagement operates through multiple complementary mechanisms. The participatory diagnostic
and CDV-led prioritization process (described under Subcomponent 1.1) provides structured channels for communities to
identify needs and influence investment decisions. Regular CDV meetings, community monitoring activities, and CDV
participation in CRAS sessions further ensure ongoing community voice throughout the project cycle. A GRM provides all
beneficiaries with a formal, accessible channel to raise concerns, with feedback systematically reviewed and used to
inform implementation adjustments. CDVs will communicate to communities how their feedback is used and grievances
handled.
63.     Critically, the project goes beyond standard engagement mechanisms by embedding both a perception survey
and a digital feedback tool into its monitoring design. The perception survey draws on the baseline used at preparation
—capturing community perceptions of participation in local decisions, fairness of conflict resolution mechanisms, and
equitable access to services—and will be remeasured at midterm and closure to formally close the feedback loop and
assess the project's contribution to more inclusive local governance. Complementing this, the project will explore the
adoption of an e-CLD app enabling real-time community feedback on the inclusiveness of the CLD process, procurement
transparency, and the quality and accessibility of completed infrastructure, with all grievances channeled directly into the
GRM. Together, these tools create a layered feedback architecture—combining periodic structured measurement with
continuous community-driven input.
Gender and Youth


37 https://coso.ci/index.php/ressources/documentation?view=frontlist&catid%5b0%5d=
38
     https://coso.ci/index.php/ressources/documentation?view=frontlist&catid%5b0%5d=
                                                                             22
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



64.     Relevant gender gaps. Women in the Montagnes District face two distinct but interrelated gender gaps that the
project directly targets: (a) gaps in leadership and participation in local decision-making and (b) gaps in access to economic
opportunities.
65.      Leadership and participation in local decision-making. Data from a household survey conducted to inform project
design and preparation 39 reveal consistent and measurable gender gaps in community participation and agency. Men are
significantly more likely than women to have participated in community activities in the past year (74 percent versus 63
percent) and to feel fully included in community development processes (48 percent versus 40 percent). The gap is
particularly pronounced when it comes to leadership: Only 30 percent of women agreed that they could play a leadership
role in their community, compared to 39 percent of men. Women also report weaker social cohesion, with lower levels of
trust in other community members (37 percent versus 42 percent) and a weaker sense of belonging (41 percent versus 46
percent), indicating gendered barriers to bridging the social capital needed to access leadership and influence.
66.      Access to economic opportunities. Gaps in ownership and use of economic assets curtail women’s access to
economic opportunities. A structural division of labor concentrates men in higher-return cash-crop production—primarily
cacao and coffee—with 77 percent engaged in this sector compared to only 30 percent of women, who instead rely
predominantly on low-yielding food crops (27 percent) and petty trade (26 percent), limiting their income generation and
financial autonomy. Compounding this, land tenure insecurity disproportionately affects women—while only 44 percent
of households cultivating land report having legal documentation for their plots, that figure is even lower for women, with
only 37 percent of households reporting that women’s names appear on land documents. This exclusion from formal land
tenure weakens women's ability to invest in productive activities and their resilience to shocks. Indeed, when asked
whether they could mobilize emergency funds when needed, over one-fourth of women reported they would be entirely
unable to do so, compared to roughly one in five men. These findings are consistent with broader evidence from the
district of pronounced gender gaps across areas such as ownership of smartphones, access to finance, land ownership, as
well as high rates of child marriage and other forms of GBV, all of which further constrain women's ability to participate
meaningfully in local decision-making structures (such as CDVs).40
67.     Young people in the Montagnes District face similar gaps in both participation and economic resilience and are
specifically targeted by the project for that reason. On participation, data from the survey reveal a pronounced
generational disconnect: over half of the youth (ages 18–35) judge it unlikely that their opinions would be considered in
local development consultations, compared to just over one-third of adults over 35, and only one-third expect that raising
a complaint would result in any tangible change. Weaker institutional trust and a thinner sense of community belonging
further constrain their ability to access leadership and influence local decisions. On economic resilience, youth face acute
and compounding disadvantages. Nationally, young people ages 16–24 face an unemployment rate of 9.5 percent, nearly
three times the national average and more than five times the rate for adults ages 35–44; almost all of those who are
employed are confined to the informal sector.41 At the district level, nearly two-thirds of youth report that mobilizing
emergency funds would be very difficult, and while these rates are comparable to those of other respondents, the youth
report weaker social networks to buffer these shocks.
Key Actions
68.     Leadership and participation. The project addresses women's and youth's limited voice in local decision-making
through the CLD approach described in detail under Subcomponent 1.1. The participatory diagnostic process explicitly
maps the priority needs of women, youth, and other marginalized groups, and the CDV-led consolidation process requires
that at least one of each community's top three investment priorities reflects the choice of these groups. Mandatory
representation of women in CDV decision-making roles further ensures that gender-specific needs are integrated into

39 All findings in this section are from the Innovations for Poverty Actions (IPA). 2025: Côte d’Ivoire Montagnes District Migration & Resilience

Survey. Unless otherwise specified.
40 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2021. Standard DHS Report Côte d’Ivoire.
41 ANStat. (2021).

                                                                          23
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



community plans and financed. Together, these mechanisms directly address the barriers to voice and participation
identified above by creating structured, institutionalized pathways for women and youth to influence local investment
decisions.
69.     Economic empowerment. Subcomponent 1.2 provides targeted support to address the economic constraints
faced by women and youth, with eligibility for IGA grants explicitly limited to these two groups. Recognizing the barriers
women face to access financing and gaps in technical and soft skills, the project adopts a tailored targeting approach:
through existing savings groups (AVEC) established under the PSSN. These groups serve as entry points, with the project
supporting their graduation to productive activities; where no groups exist, new ones are facilitated. Women's groups
receive assistance to formalize, develop viable business proposals, and access grants of up to US$15,000, with support
packages tailored to their needs—including agricultural and trade assets, training, and market access support through
technical implementing partners. Half of the grants are allocated to proposals supporting relevant value chain
development, directly targeting the structural barriers that confine women to lower-return activities.
70.  Gender-related indicators. Progress to close key gender gaps in leadership/participation and economic
empowerment will be measured through the following indicators:
        (a)   On participation in decision-making. Number of climate-resilient investments prioritized by women/youth
              (Target: 300). Counts local investments explicitly prioritized by women, reflecting women’s articulated needs
              through participatory planning processes. A similar indicator is included for youth.
        (b)   On leadership. Share of women in decision-making roles in the VDC (Target: 30 percent). Counts the women
              in decision-making roles in the VDC (President, VP, or Treasurer) as a share of the total available positions.
              CDVs will be established by the project, so the baseline share is zero.
        (c)   On economic empowerment. Beneficiaries of Income Generating Activities who report an increase of
              revenue - women/youth (Target: 12,000). Counts the percentage of IGA beneficiaries who report an increase
              in revenue from baseline, as a result of project activities.
D. Grievance Redress Services

71.      Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute
resolution. There will be an independent or external review tier for escalated grievances and ensuring the GRM is
accessible to non-literate community members (e.g., oral complaint channels). Complaints may be submitted to the AM
at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management and after Management has
been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress
Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s
Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.


 V. KEY RISKS

72.    The overall risk rating is Moderate reflecting strengthened implementation arrangements, a lessons-based design
drawing on COSO North, and readiness actions completed before appraisal that reduce residual risks (including robust
stakeholder consultations). Two Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT) categories remain Substantial.
                                                            24
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



73.     Fiduciary risks remain Substantial, predominantly due to the introduction of decentralized fund flows to new RCs.
Detailed risks and mitigation measures are described under Section IV.B.
74.      Environment and Social risks remain Substantial, predominantly due to the sensitivity of the area and the nature
of activities, including the construction and upgrading of infrastructure and IGA. Detailed risks and mitigation measures
are described under Section IV.C.




                                                           25
       The World Bank
       Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                                              ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate

Program Development Objective Indicators

Program Development Objective(s)

To improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services and economic opportunities in Western Côte d’Ivoire.


PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes


   Baseline                         Period 1                            Period 2                Period 3           Closing Period
   To improve access to inclusive and resilient economic opportunities in Western Côte d’Ivoire.
   Beneficiaries of economic inclusion activities (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                         Dec/2027                            Dec/2028                Dec/2029           Sep/2030
   0                                7,780                               22,780                  29,780             45,780
     ➢Beneficiaries of economic inclusion activities - Female (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                         Dec/2027                            Dec/2028                Dec/2029           Sep/2030
   0                                3,000                               7,000                   12,500             15,000
     ➢Beneficiaries of economic inclusion activities - Youth (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                         Dec/2027                            Dec/2028                Dec/2029           Sep/2030
   0                                4,000                               12,000                  22,000             27,000
   To improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services in Western Côte d’Ivoire.
   People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                         Dec/2027                            Dec/2028                Dec/2029           Sep/2030
   0                                270,000                             720,000                 1,170,000          1,800,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                         Dec/2027                            Dec/2028                Dec/2029           Sep/2030
   0                                135,000                             360,000                 585,000            900,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                         Dec/2027                            Dec/2028                Dec/2029           Sep/2030
   0                                150,000                             400,000                 650,000            1,000,000




                                                                          26
       The World Bank
       Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



Intermediate Indicators by Components


   Baseline                          Period 1                          Period 2                        Period 3                          Closing Period
   Resilient and Inclusive Local Development at the Community Level
   Beneficiaries of Income Generating Activities who report at least a 20 percent increase of revenue over their baseline (Percentage)
   Dec/2025                                                                                                                              Sep/2030
   0                                                                                                                                     70
     ➢Beneficiaries of Income Generating Activities who report at least a 20 percent increase of revenue over their baseline - Female (Percentage)
   Dec/2025                                                                                                                              Sep/2030
   0                                                                                                                                     70
     ➢Beneficiaries of Income Generating Activities who report at least a 20 percent increase of revenue over their baseline - Youth (Percentage)
   Dec/2025                                                                                                                              Sep/2030
   0                                                                                                                                     70
   Climate resilient sub-projects executed by communities (Number)
   Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                          Dec/2028                        Dec/2029                          Sep/2030
   0                                 100                               300                             500                               600
     ➢Climate Resilient investments prioritized by women (Number)
   Dec/2025                          Dec/2028                                                                                            Sep/2030
   0                                 150                                                                                                 300
     ➢Climate Resilient investments prioritized by youth (Number)
   Dec/2025                          Dec/2028                                                                                            Sep/2030
   0                                 90                                                                                                  180
     ➢Share of climate resilient sub-projects with an operational maintenance committee (Percentage)
   Dec/2025                                                                                                                              Sep/2030
   0                                                                                                                                     85
   Socio-economic Development at the Regional Level
   People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                          Dec/2028                        Dec/2029                          Sep/2030
   0                                 54,000                            144,000                         234,000                           360,000
     ➢People provided with at least basic water - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                          Dec/2028                        Dec/2029                          Sep/2030
   0                                 27,000                            72,000                          117,000                           180,000
     ➢People provided with at least basic water - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                          Dec/2028                        Dec/2029                          Sep/2030
   0                                 32,400                            86,400                          140,400                           216,000


                                                                                27
    The World Bank
    Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)


Infrastructures developed to support value chains (Number)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2028                                                                              Sep/2030
0                                 3                                                                                     6
Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening
Share of women in decision-making roles in the VDC (Percentage)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2026                        Dec/2027                                              Sep/2030
0                                 30                              30                                                    30
Village Development Committees operationalized (Number)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2026                                                                              Dec/2027
0                                 300                                                                                   600
Local government officials trained (Number)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2026                                                                              Dec/2027
0                                 100                                                                                   300
Beneficiaries of social cohesion interventions (Number of people)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                        Dec/2028                    Dec/2029                  Sep/2030
0                                 1,000                           2,000                       3,000                     4,000
  ➢Beneficiaries of social cohesion interventions - Female (Number of people)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                        Dec/2028                    Dec/2029                  Sep/2030
0                                 500                             1,000                       1,500                     2,000
  ➢Beneficiaries of social cohesion interventions - Youth (Number of people)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                        Dec/2028                    Dec/2029                  Sep/2030
0                                 400                             1,400                       2,200                     2,400
Project beneficiaries sampled who express that they are able to fully participate in community decisions (Percentage)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2028                                                                              Sep/2030
30                                50                                                                                    80
Impact Evaluation Study completed (Yes/No)
Dec/2025                                                                                                                Sep/2030
0                                                                                                                       YES
Policy report on institutionalizing CLD validated by relevant government authorities (Yes/No)
Dec/2025                                                                                                                Sep/2030
0                                                                                                                       Yes
Project Management
Grievances treated within three months of being recorded. (Percentage)
Dec/2025                          Dec/2027                        Dec/2028                    Dec/2029                  Sep/2030
0                                 60                              60                          70                        70




                                                                        28
The World Bank
Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)




                                                             29
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



 Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators
 Beneficiaries in project target areas provided with improved access to socio-economic services and infrastructure
 Beneficiaries of economic inclusion programs (Number of people)
                             [Scorecard Indicator – SI]: This is a standard SI. In line with the definition provided in the methodological note, it
                             captures the number of number of people benefitting from economic inclusion programs.
                            This indicator also contributes to the More and Better Jobs Scorecard indicator. The methodology and multipliers for
                            the More and Better Jobs impact are defined in the economic analysis.

                            Economic inclusion programs refer to IGA and job opportunities for community workers engaged in the construction,
                            rehabilitation, and maintenance of community infrastructure.
 Description                Economic inclusion refers to the project’s targeting of disadvantaged groups of women and youth in these economic
                            activities.
                            IGA refers to women and youth economic groups supported with grants and technical assistance under Subcomponent
                            1.2
                            Community workers refers to laborers employed in Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) and other low-skilled public
                            works under Components 1 and 2. Duration of employment is estimated at two months minimum.
                            Youth is defined as individuals aged 18 to 35, in line with national standards.

 Frequency                  Annual
                            Project’s IMS including gender and age disaggregated IGA beneficiary lists and community workers contracts and
 Data source
                            attendance lists.
 Methodology for Data
                            Sum of the beneficiaries of IGA and community infrastructure workers.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                            PIU
 Collection
 People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people)
                           Counts the total population in the 35 poorest SPs targeted by the project benefit from improved access to basic
                           services through climate-resilient infrastructure (excluding an estimated 10 percent inhabitants in the urban centers
                           that will not be directly targeted). These investments will be identified based on community needs and priorities in
                           health, education, and water. To ensure a more granular tracking and reporting on the number of beneficiaries
                           reached by climate-resilient infrastructure, the project’s IMS will also track individual beneficiaries benefitting from
                           climate resilient infrastructure disaggregated by sector, including but not limited to health, education, water, and
 Description               value chains.

                            [SI]: This is a standard SI. In line with the definition provided in the methodological note, it captures the number of
                            people directly benefiting from improved climate resilience due to eligible investments. Standards for climate-resilient
                            infrastructure will be defined for each sector in the PIM. All investments will undergo a basic screening to ensure they
                            meet the minimum standard for climate-resilient infrastructure OR by the nature of the investment, improve the
                            resilience of the community to climate risks.
 Frequency                   Annual
                            Population estimates from the most recent census data disaggregated by gender (50 percent women) and age (60
 Data source
                            percent youth)
 Methodology for Data
                             Sum of the population of each of the SPs targeted by the project.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                             PIU
 Collection

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Indicators
 Resilient and inclusive local development at the community level
 Beneficiaries of Income Generating Activities who report at least a 20 percent increase of revenue over their baseline (Number of people)

                                                                    30
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)


Description                   Increase in revenue is considered as at least 20 percent increase from beneficiaries’ self-reported baseline
Frequency                     At baseline and closure
Data source                   Beneficiary survey
Methodology for Data
                              Beneficiary survey conducted at baseline and endline
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Climate resilient sub-projects executed by communities (Number)
                              Captures the priority subprojects selected by the community that are executed and maintained.

                             Climate-resilient subprojects may include: community infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated or other types of
                             local investments (reforestation, plant/seed nurseries, and so on). The definition and standards for climate-resilient
                             infrastructure will be defined for each sector in the PIM. All investments will undergo a basic screening to ensure
Description                  they meet the minimum standard for climate-resilient infrastructure OR by the nature of the investment, improve
                             the resilience of the community to climate risks.

                             This indicator is disaggregated by subprojects selected by women and youth and includes a sub-indicator on
                             maintenance. Maintenance means a local infrastructure operational maintenance committee has been established
                             and is functional.
Frequency                     Annual
                              Project’s IMS, including geo-localized data on infrastructure and on maintenance committees. Triangulated against
Data source
                             community engagement documentation on women’s and youth’s priorities.
Methodology for Data
                              Sum of local investments
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Socio-economic development at the regional level
People provided with at least basic water (Number of people)
                              Total number of beneficiaries reached with water services

Description                  [SI]: This is a standard SI indicator. In line with the methodological note, at least basic drinking water refers to
                             water from an improved source, provided the collection time is not more than 30 minutes for a roundtrip including
                             queuing.
Frequency                     Annual
                              Project’s IMS, including gender- and age-disaggregated beneficiary lists and beneficiary surveys on water collection
Data source
                             wait times.
Methodology for Data
                              Sum of the beneficiaries of water services
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Infrastructures developed to support value chains (Number)
                             Infrastructures that support value chains may include markets, agricultural processing infrastructure, and so on.
Description                  During implementation and once these value chain results are identified, more data on the results from those value
                             chain interventions will be captured (for example, number of beneficiaries of these value chains).
Frequency                    Twice at mid- and end-line
Data source                  Project IMS, including geo-localized infrastructure, triangulated against the value chains study.
Methodology for Data
                             Sum of infrastructure developed.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                             PIU
Collection
Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening
Share of women in decision-making roles in the VDC (Percentage)

                                                                 31
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)


                            [SI]: This is a custom indicator contributing to SI People benefiting from actions to advance gender equality. It refers
Description                 to the share of women in decision-making roles in the VDC as a share of the total available positions. Decision-
                            making roles are President, VP, or Treasurer.
Frequency                   Twice over the first two years of the project
                            Project IMS, including terms of reference, gender-disaggregated leadership lists, and other documentary evidence
Data source
                            of committees’ management roles.
Methodology for Data
                              Share of women in leadership roles/Total number of leadership roles
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Village Development Committees operationalized (Number)
Description                   Operational status means the committee has an established legal existence.
Frequency                     Twice over the first two years of the project.
                              Project IMS, including terms of reference, gender- and age-disaggregated membership lists, and other documentary
Data source
                              evidence of committees’ existence and activity.
Methodology for Data
                              Sum of the committees
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Local government officials trained (Number)
Description                   Local authorities trained on CLD, fiduciary, and ESS principles and standards
Frequency                     Annual
Data source                   Project IMS, including gender- and age-disaggregated training attendees lists
Methodology for Data
                              Sum of training attendees
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Beneficiaries of social cohesion interventions (Number of people)
Description                   Social cohesion interventions are defined as conflict mediation, dialogue, and benefit-sharing practices.
Frequency                     Annual
Data source                   Project IMS, including gender- and age-disaggregated social cohesion beneficiaries lists
Methodology for Data
                              Sum of beneficiaries
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Project beneficiaries sampled who express that they are able to fully participate in community decisions (Percentage)
                              Share of sampled project beneficiaries who report being able to fully participate in community decisions, as
Description
                              compared to the baseline.
Frequency                     Twice at mid- and end-line
Data source                   Survey results updating findings from the IPA baseline
Methodology for Data
                              Household perception survey
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                              PIU
Collection
Impact Evaluation Study completed (Yes/No)
                              An Impact Evaluation is planned under the knowledge generation subcomponent. This impact study will center on
Description                   results and impacts of value chain and economic opportunities support and of social cohesion interventions. A
                              baseline evaluation is being collected by effectiveness.
Frequency                     Once in the last year of the project
Data source                   Study report
Methodology for Data
                              Commissioned Impact Evaluation study validated by the World Bank
Collection
                                                                32
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)


Responsibility for Data
                               PIU
Collection
Policy report on institutionalizing CLD validated by relevant government authorities (Yes/No)
                               A policy report analysing the legal and institutional framework and providing recommendations for a pathway to
                               institutionalizing CLD is published and disseminated among the Government and is endorsed/validated by the
Description                    relevant authories. To track longer-term results of this report, the project’s IMS will also track actions resulting from
                               the publication of the report (for example, guidelines developed/implemented, operational procedures, and legal
                               instruments adopted).
Frequency                      Once at endline
Data source                    Published report with endorsement from relevant authorities
Methodology for Data
                               Verification of publication
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                               PIU
Collection
Component 4: Project Management
Grievances treated within three months of being recorded (Percentage)
                               Share of grievances recorded through the project’s GRM that are closed with a documented treatment within 90
Description
                               days of their registration date, expressed as a percentage of all grievances recorded in the period.
Frequency                      Annual
Data source                    Project GRM
Methodology for Data
                               Number of grievances treated in a timely manner over total number of reported grievances
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                               PIU
Collection




                                                                   33
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                                ANNEX 2: Targeting Protocol

1.       The Montagnes District is one of the regions with the highest concentrations of people living in poverty;
however, the distribution of poverty varies across its SP. The district is characterized by both a high poverty rate and
significant population density, resulting in a substantial number of individuals experiencing poverty within the region.
These trends are highlighted through mapping the prevalence of multidimensional poverty, as reported by ANStat.
                                        Figure 2.1. Number of Poor Distribution by SP




                      Source: World Bank calculation based on ANStat data shared in December 2025.
                      Note: The exact definition of the dimensions included, and the specific weights applied in the formula, are
                      undergoing ANStat internal validation process, with World Bank technical assistance. Revisions of the
                      variables and formula might occur as part of the validation process, which would imply a revision of the
                      number of poor by SP.

2.      The variation in the number of poor people across SPs can largely be attributed to two main factors:
        •    Population density differences—some SPs have more populated localities than others, partly because
             protected forest areas limit settlement.
        •    Differences in access to education, health care, living conditions, water supply, employment opportunities,
             and civil identification coverage. The protocol annex provides further details on how ANStat measures each
             of these factors based on data from the 2021 population census.




                                                               34
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



     Figure 2.2. The Variation in the Number of Poor People Reflects Differences in Population Density and Access to Services

                    Population size                  Proportion of population without                Proportion of the population
                                                        access to improved water                     without access to electricity




    Source: World Bank calculation based on ANStat data shared in December 2025.
    Note: The population estimates and exact definition of the dimensions are undergoing ANStat internal validation process, with
    World Bank technical assistance, revisions of these maps might occur.

Selection of SPs as Clusters for Project Intervention
3.       Available project resources enable the project to reach up to 35 SPs, chosen according to the number of people
living in rural areas and experiencing multidimensional poverty.42 The district’s poverty map reveals that rural poor
populations reside in every SP. While the ideal scenario for COSO West would be to include all SPs, limited budget and
time make prioritization necessary. Therefore, it is recommended to focus on those SPs with the highest numbers of rural
poor, as identified by the ANStat multidimensional poverty map, and excluding urban centers, which do not align with a
rural, CDD strategy. The accompanying map highlights the 35 SPs with the greatest need, representing all three regions
within the district.




42 Multidimensional poverty refers to deprivations that individuals or households face across several essential dimensions of well-being—such as

education, health, living conditions, employment, and identification—captured jointly rather than through income alone. In Côte d’Ivoire, ANStat’s
national Multidimensional Poverty Index (Indice de Pauvreté Multidimensionnel en Côte d’Ivoire, IPM‑CI) identifies a household as
multidimensionally poor when the weighted share of its deprivations reaches or exceeds one‑third (33 percent) across these five dimensions,
following an adaptation of the Alkire–Foster methodology to national data and priorities.
                                                                        35
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



 Figure 2.3. The Montagnes Multidimensional Poverty Map Shows that the 35 SPs with the Highest Number of Rural Poor People
                                                  Span All Three Regions




Source: World Bank calculation based on ANStat data shared in December 2025.
Note: The exact definition of the dimensions included, and the specific weights applied in the formula, are undergoing ANStat
internal validation process, with World Bank technical assistance. Revisions of the variables and formula might occur as part of the
validation process, which would imply a revision of the number of poor by SP.

Selection of Intervention Localities
4.      ANStat has identified 983 localities within the Montagnes District, of which 973 are included on the official list. In
addition, there are supplementary campements—some affiliated with recognized localities and others independent.
These campements often accommodate significant populations and host essential community infrastructure, such as
schools, thereby warranting support. The COSO West strategy adopts an inclusive approach to ensure that all localities
and campements within the designated SPs receive assistance, except for the following:
        •     Areas already covered by the FIP and FIP2
        •     Campements in protected areas (individuals living in these areas will participate in the local development
              planning process, but no infrastructure will be rehabilitated or constructed within these areas)
        •     Urban centers such as chef-lieux not adapted to a rural CLD approach.
5.        The number of localities differs across regions because of variations in population density and how localities
have been recorded. For instance, Tonkpi contains a much higher proportion of localities compared to its share of the
district's population. This is partly explained by protected areas found in the other two regions, as well as more
comprehensive enumeration efforts in Tonkpi. As a result, regularly updating the lists of localities and campements
remains crucial.
                                  Table 2.1. Regional Distribution of the Population and Localities
                                                            Cavally         Guemon            Tonkpi               Total
       Rural poor population                                 81,654         119,624          238,805              440,083
       Population                                           696,417         917,962          1,358,528           2,972,906
       Number of localities                                   137             230               616                 983

                                                                 36
               The World Bank
               Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                                                      Cavally        Guemon             Tonkpi                  Total
                    Share of rural poor population (percent)                    19           27                     54                   100
                                  Share of population (percent)                 23           31                     46                   100
                                     Share of localities (percent)              14           23                     63                   100

6.        The variation in the number of localities and poor people across regions is reflected in the selection of the 35
poorest SPs. In total, selecting the 35 poorest SPs will cover more than 360,000 rural poor people (over 80 percent of the
district’s poor population) across 620 localities.
Table 2.2. Project Intervention Areas: Regional Distribution of the Population and of Localities (35 SPs with the highest number of
                                                            rural poor)
                                                                      Cavally        Guemon              Tonkpi                  Total
          Rural poor population                                        52,075         97,878             210,466               360,419
          Population                                                  385,143         669,405            949,577              2,004,125
          Number of localities                                                  48           111                   462                    621
                            Share of poor population (percent)                  14             27                    58                   100
                                   Share of population (percent)                19             33                    47                   100
                                      Share of localities (percent)              8             18                    74                   100

Field Testing: Target SP Selection
7.      Step 1. Confirm the roster of selected SPs with district authorities, including the governor-minister and prefects,
while excluding the three regional capitals. This process should be informed by ANStat mapping from the 2021 population
census. An additional selection criterion might include the one poorest SP in each department.
8.     Step 2. For the identified 35 SPs, update the inventory of localities and campements to ensure comprehensive
coverage by
              •      Consulting sub-prefects and community leaders and
              •      Identifying substantial campements.
9.      Step 3. Include all localities and campements determined in Step 2 as eligible for project activities, except for those
already covered by FIP and FIP‑2, and chefs-lieux.43
10.     Additionally, geographic coordinates and essential information for each locality should be collected as part of the
project’s M&E activities.
Definition of Multidimensional Poverty Indicators (dimensions and weights)44
EDUCATION
              •      School attendance. Household has a child age 6–16 who is not currently attending school (weight: 0.07)
              •      Years of schooling. No household member age 17–95 has completed 10 years of schooling (weight: 0.07)
              •      Literacy. A member age 17–49 cannot read or write French (weight: 0.07)



43
     Chef-lieu is the principal town (urban center) of the region.
44 The exact definition of the dimensions included, and the specific weights applied in the formula, are undergoing ANStat internal validation

process, with World Bank technical assistance. Revisions of the variables and formulae might occur as part of the validation process, which would
imply a revision of the list of 35 SPs targeted.
                                                                          37
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



HEALTH
      •      Child mortality. At least one child under 18 years died in the 12 months preceding the survey or census
             (weight: 0.20).
LIVING CONDITIONS
      •      Electricity. Lighting source is not electricity, generator, or solar (weight: 0.03).
      •      Housing materials. Roof, wall, or floor materials are inadequate (weight: 0.03).
      •      Drinking water. Household lacks access to drinking water (weight: 0.03).
      •      Cooking energy. Household does not use clean cooking energy (electricity or gas) (weight: 0.03).
      •      Sanitation. Household does not have improved private toilets (weight: 0.03).
      •      Assets. Household owns at most one of: fan, AC, TV, radio, phone, computer, refrigerator/freezer, bicycle,
             motorcycle, internet—AND does not own a car (weight: 0.03).
EMPLOYMENT
      •      Unemployment. Household is deprived if any member age 17–40 is unemployed (weight: 0.20).
IDENTIFICATION COVERAGE
      A.     Birth registration. Household is deprived if a member age 5–15 has no birth certificate, court judgment, or
             registration (weight: 0.20).




                                                              38
     The World Bank
     Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                               ANNEX 3: Fiduciary Management and Disbursement
A. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
1. An FM assessment of the COSO North PIU was conducted during preparation to assess whether the processes
and procedures of this entity could be leveraged to manage the proposed project. The COSO North PIU will be
responsible for the overall implementation of the proposed IPF. The objectives of the assessment were to (a)
determine whether the implementing entity has adequate FM arrangements in place to ensure that the funds will be
used efficiently and economically for the intended purposes and that the entity is capable of correctly and completely
recording all transactions and balances related to the project; (b) the project’s financial reports will be prepared in an
accurate, reliable, and timely manner; (c) the entity’s assets will be safely guarded; and (d) the project will be subjected
to auditing arrangements acceptable to the World Bank. The assessment complied with the World Bank Directive
Financial Management Manual for World Bank IPF operation, effective March 1, 2010, and as last revised on March
10, 2023.
2. This entity has demonstrated satisfactory FM of IPF operations and is familiar with the management of the
World Bank-funded project and is currently managing COSO North. The PIU has adequate FM arrangements in place,
with appropriate staffing and tools, including the use of Tom2Pro accounting software and comprehensive FM
manuals, to support effective FM. The FM team, consisting of a senior FM specialist, a Chief Accountant, an accountant
and four regional accountants, is experienced and well-versed in World Bank FM requirements. The most recent FM
performance rating (December 2025) is satisfactory, with FM risk assessed as moderate. The IGF has been appointed
as the internal auditor. The last external audit report (2024 financial statements) was unqualified.
Financial Management Action Plan
3. The action plan in table 3.1 indicates the actions to be taken for the project to strengthen its FM system.
                                                Table 3.1. FM Action Plan

                                                                                Responsible                      Effectiveness
     Issue/Topic                Remedial Action Recommended                                   Completion Date
                                                                                   Body                           Conditions
                      Recruit an FM specialist under the responsibility of
                      the senior FM specialist, preferably familiar with the
                                                                               COSO PIU                          No
 Staffing             World Bank or other development partner FM
                      procedures.                                                             Three months
                      Recruit two regional accountants.                        COSO PIU       after
 Information system Customize COSO’s accounting software project to                           effectiveness      No
                                                                               COSO PIU
 accounting software handle the requirements for this new project.
                      Elaborate the PIM, including financial,
                                                                               COSO PIU                          No
                      administrative, and accounting procedures
                      Appoint a financial controller and an accountant.                       Three months
                                                                               Ministry of
 Internal control                                                                             after              No
                                                                               Finance
                                                                                              effectiveness
                      Appoint IGF as internal auditor.                         COSO           Six months after
                                                                                                                 No
                                                                               PIU/IGF        effectiveness
                                                                                              Six months after
 External auditing    Recruit the external auditor.                            COSO PIU                          No
                                                                                              effectiveness




                                                            39
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                                                                    Responsible                      Effectiveness
         Issue/Topic                Remedial Action Recommended                                   Completion Date
                                                                                       Body                           Conditions
                          In the internal auditor's work plan (IGF), integrate an
                          anti-fraud and anti-corruption component on all                         Six months after
                                                                                    IGF                              No
     Governance           project components (identify beneficiaries, update                      effectiveness
     Anticorruption       payment information, and so on).
     Measures             Conduct an annual verification mission on fraud and
                          corruption. This mission will cover the GRM, the                        Six months after
                                                                                    IGF                              No
                          complaints received and the treatment of these                          effectiveness
                          allegations.
4.       Planning and budgeting arrangements. The Organic Budget Law introduced a performance-based budgeting
system, where missions, goals, and objectives are used to clearly explain how funds are allocated. According to the Organic
Public Financial Management (PFM) Law No. 2014-336 dated June 5, 2014, budgets must be prepared in accordance with
these guidelines. Each year, the COSO PIU is committed to fulfilling this requirement. Its budget is planned through its
ministry budget. For this project, considering the components, the PIU will coordinate the preparation of a consolidated
AWPB to implement project activities. The work plan and budgets will identify the activities to be undertaken, and the
roles of the respective parties involved in the implementation, including all the implementing entities. The AWPB will
provide detailed information on the amount allocated to each implementing entity per activity, showing unit costs and
quantities. AWPBs will be consolidated into a single document by the PIU. The AWPB will be submitted for approval to the
NSC, and thereafter to the World Bank, no later than November 30 of the year preceding the work plan.
5.       Accounting policies and accounting software. An integrated financial and accounting system is in place and used
by the FM unit of the PIU. The SYSCEBNL accounting system is in use. The COSO PIU uses Tom2Pro accounting software
for the ongoing project, and the chart of accounts is sufficient for accurate recording of financial transactions. The project
code and chart of accounts will be developed to meet specific project needs and documented in the manual of procedures
being drafted. The accounting systems, policies, and financial procedures used by the project will be documented in the
project’s administrative, accounting, and financial manual. COSO North’s accounting software will be customized to
handle requirements for this new project.
6.       Financial reports. Financial reports will be designed to provide quality and timely information on project
performance to project management, the World Bank, and other relevant stakeholders. The unaudited IFRs will be
prepared every semester and submitted to the World Bank regularly (for example, 45 days after the end of each semester)
and on time. The frequency of IFR preparation as well as the format and content of the report will remain unchanged. The
consolidated quarterly IFR for the project includes the following financial statements: (a) Statement of Sources of Funds
and Project Revenues and Uses of funds; (b) Statement of Expenditure classified by project component and/or
disbursement category showing comparisons with budgets for the reporting quarter, the year, and cumulatively for the
project life; (c) cash forecast; (d) explanatory notes; and (e) DA activity statements. Formats of the financial reports were
developed and agreed.
7.       Internal control and internal auditing. The internal control system is intended to ensure (a) the effectiveness and
efficiency of operations; (b) reliability of financial reporting; and (c) compliance with applicable laws and regulations. For
this project, the accounting, financial, and administrative procedures manual to be developed will document, explain, and
describe work processes, information flow, authorization and delegation of authority, timing, job segregation, automatic
and sequential controls, compliance with project objectives, and micro and macro rules and regulations. Applying the
procedures described in the manual will be mandatory for all staff at all levels.
8.      In addition, the IGF serves as the internal auditor for COSO North and will also be the internal auditor of this
project. All deficiencies or circumvented practices identified will be communicated by the coordinator, for immediate

                                                                40
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



corrective action as appropriate. Disbursements under the project will be carried out by the provisions of the
Disbursement Guidelines for IPF dated May 2017, the DFIL, and the Financing Agreement.
9.      A financial controller and accountant (agent comptable) will be appointed.
10.      Disbursements and funds flow. A DA will be opened for disbursement purposes at the Central Bank of West
African States (Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique de l’Ouest, BCEAO). A DA managed by the General Directorate of
Treasury and Public Accountability (Direction Générale du Trésor et de la Comptabilité Publique, DGTCP) will be opened at
the BCEAO. A Project Account, managed by the public accountant assigned to the COSO PIU, opened at the Banque des
depots du Tresor Public under conditions acceptable to the World Bank, will be used to pay expenditures. The Operational
Account (project account) will be managed by COSO PIU. Cash withdrawal transactions from the Operational Account will
be authorized respectively by the Project Coordinator and the project’s FM specialist. RC accounts will also be opened at
the Banque des depots du Tresor Public and will be funded by the COSO PIU. The conditions of utilization will be outlined
in the PIM.
11.      Auditing arrangements. The annual audited financial statements together with the auditor’s report and
Management Letter covering identified internal control weaknesses, will be submitted to the World Bank no later than six
months after the end of each fiscal year. A single audit opinion will be issued that covers project income and expenditures,
DAs, and the IFR. The report will also include specific controls, such as compliance with procurement procedures and
financial reporting requirements and consistency, among financial statements, management reports, and field visits (such
as physical control). The audit report will thus refer to any incidence of noncompliance, ineligible expenditures, and misuse
identified during the audit mission.
12.      Governance anticorruption measures. The risk of irregularities and corruption within the project activities is
substantial given the project implementation approach. A strong fiduciary arrangement has been designed and put in
place to mitigate these risks. The internal auditor's work plan IGF) will specifically integrate an anti-fraud and anti-
corruption component on all project components (beneficiaries’ identification, update payment information, and so on).
In addition, IGF will conduct an annual verification mission on fraud and corruption. This mission will cover the GRM, the
complaints received, and the treatment of these allegations.
13.      The Borrower will (a) take all appropriate measures to ensure that the Program is carried out in accordance with
the World Bank's Anticorruption Guidelines; (b) take all appropriate measures to prevent fraud and corruption under the
project; (c) inform the World Bank, without delay, of all credible and material allegations or other indications of fraud and
corruption brought to its attention, in connection with the project; (d) unless otherwise agreed with the World Bank in
relation to a particular case, take appropriate steps to investigate such allegations and indications and report to the World
Bank on the measures taken in its investigations at intervals; (e) transmit its findings to the World Bank without delay,
once the investigation has been completed; (f) if the Borrower or the World Bank determines that any person or entity is
engaged in fraudulent or corrupt activities in connection with the Program, take timely and appropriate measures,
satisfactory to the World Bank, to remedy or otherwise resolve the situation and prevent its reoccurrence; and (g) ensure
that any person or entity excluded or suspended by the World Bank does not obtain a contract or is not otherwise
authorized to participate in the Program for the duration of such exclusion or suspension.
14.    It is believed that the FM will satisfy the World Bank’s minimum requirements once mitigation measures have
been implemented.
B. PROCUREMENT: Summary of the PPSD
15.      Procurement activities planned for the first 18 months are estimated at US$27.88 million, representing a
significant share of early project implementation and requiring efficient planning and execution arrangements.



                                                             41
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



16.     Goods procurement is estimated at US$1.09 million (approximately 1.1 percent of total project financing). These
expenditures mainly relate to standard, off-the-shelf items such as IT equipment, office supplies, furniture, and light
operational logistics. Given the nature of these goods:
        •     The local market is well developed and competitive, ensuring adequate supply and reasonable pricing.
        •     Procurement methods will primarily rely on Request for Quotations and national competitive approaches,
              ensuring efficiency and value for money.
        •     Risks related to supply are considered low, but attention will be paid to quality assurance and after-sales
              service, particularly for IT equipment.
17.     Consulting services are estimated at US$2.76 million (about 2.76 percent of total financing). These services will
mainly support the following:
        •   Technical studies and feasibility assessments
        •   Capacity building and institutional strengthening
        •   Project implementation support, including PIU staffing.
18.     While a portion of consulting services can be sourced locally, certain specialized expertise may require
international competition to ensure quality and innovation. Procurement approaches will include the following:
        •     Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for complex assignments
        •     Selection Based on Consultants’ Qualification for smaller, well-defined assignments
        •     Individual Consultants (ICs) for targeted expertise.
19.     Key risks include (a) limited availability of highly specialized expertise locally and (b) potential delays in
recruitment processes.
20.      Mitigation measures include (a) early preparation of terms of reference; (b) use of SPDs; and (c) close monitoring
of selection timelines.
21.     Non-consulting services. Non-consulting services are estimated at US$364,204, representing a marginal share of
project financing. These include
        •     Insurance services
        •     Maintenance contracts
        •     Logistics and other operational services
22.     These services will be primarily sourced from the domestic market, which is generally capable of delivering such
services efficiently. Procurement methods will emphasize
        •      Simplified and streamlined procedures
        •      Framework agreements where appropriate
        •      Strong focus on contract management performance
23.      Works. Works constitute the largest share of procurement during the initial phase, estimated at US$17.75 million
(approximately 17.75 percent of total financing). The project includes approximately 1,240 small-scale community
infrastructure subprojects, with individual contract values ranging from US$25,000 to US$64,000.
24.     Key characteristics:
        •    Strong CLD approach
        •    High number of small, geographically dispersed contracts
        •    Significant reliance on local contractors and SMEs
25.     Procurement strategy:
        •    Predominantly Request for Quotations to ensure speed and inclusiveness

                                                            42
        The World Bank
        Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



       •    Aggregation of contracts, where feasible, to improve efficiency and attract more qualified contractors
       •    Development of a Community Procurement Manual to
            o Clarify roles and responsibilities
            o Standardize procedures
            o Strengthen fiduciary controls at the local level
26.    Key risks:
       •    Capacity constraints at the community and PIU levels
       •    Fragmentation of contracts leading to inefficiencies
       •    Weak contract management at the decentralized level
27.    Mitigation measures:
       •    Targeted capacity building for communities and PIU staff
       •    Use of standardized templates and simplified procedures
       •    Enhanced supervision and technical oversight mechanisms
28.     Procurement arrangements and risk assessment. All procurement activities will follow the World Bank
Procurement Regulations, using SPDs to ensure compliance, transparency, and consistency. A strong emphasis will be
placed on
        •    Contract management, including clear delivery schedules and performance monitoring
        •    Procurement planning realism, aligned with implementation capacity
        •    Market engagement, especially for work and consulting services
Based on
       •    Market conditions
       •    Project complexity (high number of small contracts)
       •    Institutional capacity of the PIU
29.    The overall procurement risk is assessed as Substantial.
30.    Key risk mitigation measures. To address the identified risks, the following measures will be implemented:
       •    Strengthening of PIU procurement capacity, including staffing and training
       •    Development and dissemination of a community procurement manual
       •    Use of STEP for procurement tracking and monitoring
       •    Regular post-reviews and supervision missions
       •    Enhanced contract management tools and reporting mechanisms
       •    Gradual introduction of aggregation strategies and framework approaches where feasible.




                                                         43
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                               ANNEX 4: Detailed Economic Analysis
1.      This annex presents the economic analysis of Components 1 and 2 of the operation, using a four-year implementation
period at a 6 percent social discount rate over a 20-year horizon. The analysis follows a social cost-benefit framework consistent
with World Bank guidance and is aligned with the Corporate Scorecard MBJ methodology. It yields an NPV of US$145.1 million
and an EIRR of 28.3 percent for Components 1 and 2 taken together.
2.        The analysis combines (a) typology-level cost–benefit analysis for representative subprojects and (b) aggregate project-
level analysis that consolidates all quantified benefit streams and costs across Components 1 and 2. Typology-level results are
illustrative; actual investment choices and facility mixes will be determined through the CDD process during implementation
and updated at project completion.
B. Subproject-Level Economic Analysis
3.       Given the CDD design, the analysis first assesses a set of representative individual subproject types corresponding to
the main infrastructure categories under Subcomponent 1.1 and Component 2, then aggregates returns across all 600
subprojects under Subcomponent 1.1 and the 825+ units under Component 2. For each typology, a separate 20-year cost–
benefit analysis at a 6 percent discount rate is used to derive indicative NPV and EIRR.
              Table 4.1. Illustrative Economic Returns for Representative Subprojects (20-year Horizon, 6% Discount)
                           Subproject Type                            Unit Cost (US$) NPV (US$) EIRR (%)                Component
Primary school (3–4 classrooms + office + latrines + teacher
                                                                           63,994            125,563      26.1 Subcomponent 1.1
housing + equipment)
Rural health center (dispensary/maternity/integrated center
                                                                           166,315           645,077      63.2 Subcomponent 1.1
with housing + equipment)
Water/sanitation system (solar-equipped mini borehole for
                                                                           41,577             95,000      28.5 Subcomponent 1.1
school/health facility)
Childcare facility/social infrastructure                                   12,000             18,500      22.0 Subcomponent 1.1
Solar-powered borehole + tap stands                                        41,577             98,000      29.2 Component 2
Rural market rehabilitation                                                200,000           285,000      19.5 Component 2
Feeder road rehabilitation (per km)                                        40,000             49,800      17.2 Component 2
Aggregation/storage facility                                               100,000           142,000      18.8 Component 2
Note: For each typology, the NPV is the present value of a 20-year stream of annual net economic benefits (gross benefits minus O&M),
discounted at 6 percent. Annual benefits are derived from conservative assumptions on the number of users and per-user gains in
earnings, health, time savings, and productivity; multiplier (MBJ Level 3) effects are not included here but are accounted for separately.
C.   Detailed Assumptions for Typology-Level Benefits
4.      The typology-level NPVs in table 4.1 rely on simple, conservative parameter assumptions. Table 4.2 summarizes the
core assumptions for each subproject type.
                         Table 4.2. Key Economic Assumptions for Representative Subprojects (per facility)
                               Main Benefit
         Typology                                                                  Core Assumptions
                                Channel(s)
                                                ~300 students enrolled; ~0.75 additional effective years of schooling per beneficiary
                                                due to improved access/quality; private return to schooling ≈ 10 percent of baseline
Primary school              Earnings gains      annual earnings (US$600); 70—80 percent of students reach the labor market; annual
                                                net benefit (after 3.5 percent O&M) consistent with implied ≈ US$10,900/year from
                                                NPV.
                                                Catchment ≈ 10,000 people; ≈4,000 outpatient visits and 350 births/year; ≈1 maternal
                            Health &
Rural health center                             and 1–2 child deaths averted annually; reduced morbidity (≈250 adult cases with 2–3
                            productivity
                                                fewer sick days); mortality valued as a conservative share of lifetime earnings/value of
                                                                   44
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                              Main Benefit
         Typology                                                                Core Assumptions
                               Channel(s)
                                                statistical life; morbidity valued at rural wage; net of 5 percent O&M, annual benefits
                                                ≈ US$55,000—60,000.
                                                ≈1,200 users, 500 women; 0.5–0.75 hours/day saved on water collection on ≈300
Water/sanitation system Time savings,           days/year; time valued at US$0.56/hour with 50 percent of saved time monetized;
(Component 1.1)             health              modest reduction in diarrhea episodes valued via avoided costs; net of 6 percent
                                                O&M, annual net benefit ≈ US$8,000—10,000.
                                                ≈80–100 children and 60–80 caregivers; ~1 hour/day of caregiver time freed on ≈210
                            Time savings, early
                                                days/year; 50 percent of time valued at rural wage; small additional earnings
Childcare/social facility   childhood
                                                premium from improved early childhood development; net of O&M, annual benefit ≈
                            development
                                                US$1,500–2000.
                                                ≈2,500–3,000 users, 1,000+ women; 1.0–1.2 hours/day saved; 50 percent of time
                            Time savings,
Solar powered borehole +                        valued at rural wage; health gains similar to Subcomponent 1.1 systems; some freed
                            health,
tap stands (Component 2)                        time assumed to be used for farm and non-farm work; net annual benefit ≈ US$8,000-
                            productivity
                                                9,000.
                                                Catchment ≈ 10,000–15,000 producers; baseline marketed surplus ≈ US$300/farmer;
Rural market                Productivity and 5–10 percent increase in farmgate prices/volumes (central ≈7 percent); incremental
rehabilitation              prices              income ≈ US$20–25/farmer/year; net of 4 percent O&M, annual benefit ≈
                                                US$20,000–25,000.
                                                ≈1,500–2,000 people served; 10—20 percent reduction in transport costs/time;
Feeder road rehabilitation Productivity and effective 5—8 percent increase in agricultural income over a ≈US$35,000 catchment;
(per km)                    access              plus time savings for access to services; net of 4 percent O&M, annual benefit ≈
                                                US$4,300.
                                                ≈500–700 farmers; baseline post-harvest losses ≈ 15—20 percent; reduction of ≈8–12
Aggregation/storage         Reduced losses
                                                percentage points; combined with small price gains yields ≈US$40 extra marketed
facility                    and prices
                                                value/farmer/year; net of 4 percent O&M, annual benefit ≈ US$12,000—15,000.
Note: These assumptions are indicative and chosen conservatively, drawing on sectoral evidence and the MBJ methodology note. They
will be refined during implementation and at the Implementation Completion Report when actual facility mix, utilization, and impact
data are available.
D. Methodology and Assumptions (project level)

5.       The project-level analysis covers Components 1 and 2, which finance CLD investments, but excludes Components 3 and
4, which support knowledge generation, institutional strengthening, and project management. A social cost-benefit approach
is used over a 20-year period from 2026 to 2045, corresponding broadly to the expected useful life of the core infrastructure
assets created or rehabilitated under the project. A constant social discount rate of 6 percent is applied, in line with World Bank
Guidelines for Côte d'Ivoire.
6.       Key parameters are the following:
         •    Implementation period: 4 years (2026–2029)
         •    Analysis horizon: 20 years (2026–2045)
         •    Social discount rate: 6 percent
         •    Number of community subprojects (Subcomponent 1.1): 600
         •    Total Components 1 and 2 cost: US$74 million.
7.       O&M costs are assumed at 3.5 percent of capital cost for schools, 5 percent for health facilities, 6 percent for water
systems, and 4 percent for markets and roads, yielding a weighted average of 4.85 percent of capital costs per year and a present
value of US$41.2 million over the analysis horizon. O&M costs begin in Year 1 as infrastructure becomes operational.


                                                                  45
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



E. Without-Project Scenario

8.      The without-project scenario assumes a continuation of current conditions in which basic service gaps in health,
education, and water persist, youth and women remain largely confined to low-productivity informal activities, and rural areas
continue to face weak market access and low agricultural productivity. Baseline rural poverty rates in the three regions of the
Montagnes District are between about 61 and 65 percent, significantly above the national average of around 38 percent, and
average per capita incomes are low, at roughly US$180 per year. The analysis assumes an average adult baseline labor income
of about US$600 per year for intended livelihood beneficiaries, consistent with these poverty and income profiles.
F. Costs and Disbursement Profile

9.       Component 1 (Resilient and Inclusive Local Development, US$53 million) and Component 2 (Socio-Economic
Development at Communal/Sub-Prefectural Level, US$21 million) finance community-level and intervillage infrastructure, as
well as IGAs. Illustrative infrastructure mixes for Subcomponent 1.1 and Component 2 are presented in Tables 4.3 and 4.4 and
are used to derive representative unit costs and aggregate benefits, while final facility choices will be determined through the
CDD process.
                              Table 4.3. Subcomponent 1.1 Infrastructure Breakdown (illustrative)
                                                                             Unit Cost      Number of         Subtotal (US$,
                           Infrastructure Type
                                                                              (US$)          Facilities         millions)
Primary schools (3–4 classrooms + office + latrines + teacher housing +
                                                                              63,994     150 schools              9.6
equipment)
Rural dispensaries/maternities/integrated health centers (with housing +                 110 health
                                                                             166,315                             18.3
equipment)                                                                               facilities
Water/sanitation systems (mini-boreholes solar-equipped for schools/health
                                                                              41,577     150 water systems        6.2
facilities)
Childcare facilities and other social infrastructure                          Varies     190 facilities           2.1
Subtotal physical works                                                                  600 subprojects         36.2
Indirect costs (contingencies, design)                                                                            1.9
Total Subcomponent 1.1                                                                                           38.1

10.     Subcomponent 1.2 (US$9.9 million) supports IGAs for 24,000 direct beneficiaries (12,000 women, 12,000 youth),
organized in approximately 800 groups with sequenced grants (approximately US$15,000 per group over two cycles). Additional
operating costs for Component 1 total US$5.0 million.
                                       Table 4.4. Component 2 Infrastructure Breakdown
                         Infrastructure Type           Unit Cost (US$) Number of Units Subtotal (US$, millions)
            Water supply systems (400 localities)
                • Diagnostic/hydrogeological survey         4,500     400 surveys              1.8
                • Solar-powered boreholes + tap stands     41,577     250 boreholes          10.4
                • Borehole repairs/rehabilitations         10,172     100 rehabilitations      1.0
                • School/health connections                 3,500     50 connections           0.2
            Water supply subtotal                                                            13.4
            Economic infrastructure (3 regions)
                • Rural market rehabilitation             200,000     15 markets               3.0
                • Feeder road rehabilitation           40,000 per km 100 km                    4.0
                • Aggregation/storage facilities          100,000     20 facilities            2.0
                • Connectivity diagnostics/studies         Various                             0.5

                                                              46
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                               Infrastructure Type             Unit Cost (US$) Number of Units Subtotal (US$, millions)
                Economic infrastructure subtotal                                                       9.5
                Indirect costs (contingencies, design)                                                 1.1
                Total Component 2                                             825+ units             21.0

11.      Water systems target 1 million people (630,000 women) at approximately US$25,000 per locality. Economic
infrastructure allocates approximately US$3.5 million per region based on value-chain diagnostics.
12.     The analysis assumes a four-year implementation period from 2026 to 2029, with disbursements backloaded to reflect
the time required for community mobilization, participatory planning, and procurement. The disbursement profile is:
          •   Year 0 (2026): US$7.4 million (10 percent)
          •   Year 1 (2027): US$18.5 million (25 percent)
          •   Year 2 (2028): US$25.9 million (35 percent)
          •   Year 3 (2029): US$18.5 million (25 percent)
          •   Year 4 (2030): US$3.7 million (5 percent)
Total: US$74.0 million.

G. Benefit Framework and Alignment with MBJ Methodology
13.      To align with the Corporate Scorecard MBJ approach, the economic analysis distinguishes and quantifies three levels of
jobs-related impacts:
          •      MBJ Level 1: Jobs created within project implementation.
          •      MBJ Level 2: Indirect jobs created through project implementation
          •      MBJ Level 3: Indirect economic gains.
14.       All benefit streams are mapped into these three MBJ levels, as summarized in Table 4.5.
                                                Table 4.5. Benefit Framework by MBJ Level
                                                                                                                  Present
                                                                                                                            % of Total
MBJ Level                                        Benefit Stream (Examples)                                      Value (US$,
                                                                                                                            Benefits
                                                                                                                 millions)
              Direct MBJ for project beneficiaries, including (a) income gains from IGAs; (b) lifetime earnings
              gains from improved education and health; (c) monetized time savings and productivity effects
      1       from improved water access and childcare/social infrastructure; and (d) social cohesion,          172.5        69.2
              women's empowerment, youth inclusion, and community resilience effects valued through their
              impact on beneficiaries' income and productivity
              Jobs created within project implementation (labor-intensive community public works and
      2                                                                                                          13.8         5.5
              construction jobs across Components 1 and 2)
              Indirect MBJ for nonbeneficiaries via (a) consumption multipliers stemming from grants and
      3       transfers and (b) industry and value-chain linkages from construction spending and improved        63.0        25.3
              markets, roads, and storage
   Total
 benefits                                                                                                    249.3         100.0
    (PV)
Note: The total present value of benefits (US$249.3 million) minus the present value of costs (US$104.2 million, including US$74.0
million in capital and US$35.9 million in O&M) yields the base case NPV of US$145.1 million and an EIRR of 28.3 percent.
MBJ Level 1: Direct jobs, employment and economic gains created for project beneficiaries (US$172.5 million)

15.      MBJ Level 1 captures all direct increases in employment and earnings for project beneficiaries. For this project, MBJ
Level 2 includes four main channels:
                                                             47
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



         •      IGAs. For 24,000 beneficiaries (12,000 women and 12,000 youth) under Subcomponent 1.2, a 12 percent increase
                in labor income over a baseline of US$600 per year is assumed, consistent with evidence from graduation and
                economic inclusion programs in similar contexts.45
         •      Education. Lifetime earnings gains for approximately 137,000 students benefiting from improved access to and
                quality of primary education, valued using standard private returns to schooling.
         •      Health. Productivity and survival gains from upgraded health centers, including maternal and child deaths averted
                and reduced morbidity in adult patients.
         •      Water, childcare, and other social infrastructure. Time savings and related productivity gains for an estimated
                630,000 women benefiting from improved water access, and for caregivers using childcare and social facilities,
                with part of the freed time monetized at rural wage rates and combined with associated health and early
                childhood development benefits.
16.     These streams together yield a present value of US$172.5 million and represent direct MBJ impacts for beneficiaries
through higher current earnings, increased future earnings, or more productive use of time.
MBJ Level 2: Indirect jobs created through project implementation (US$13.8million)

17.     MBJ Level 2 captures jobs created directly by the project during implementation, primarily through labor-intensive
community public works and construction activities under Components 1 and 2. The calculation follows the MBJ methodology
using the standard formula "job impact = (percent change in labor income) × (baseline employment)," expressed in MBJ-
equivalent terms.
         •      Baseline employment: approximately 20,150 people engaged in community public works and construction across
                the roughly 1,325 infrastructure subprojects, with an average job duration of 4.5 months (0.375 years).
         •      Percent change in labor income: a conservative 35 percent increase in labor income during the employment
                period compared to baseline informal agricultural or casual labor, based on evidence from Côte d'Ivoire's Youth
                Employment and Skills Development Project (Projet Emploi Jeune et Développement des Compétences, PEJEDEC)
                and similar public works operations in Sub-Saharan Africa.46
18.      This yields an employment impact of about 7,053 MBJ-equivalent jobs. Converting these labor-income gains into
present value terms using a baseline annual income of US$1,215 (rural construction wage) over the implementation period
results in Level 1 benefits of US$13.8 million.
MBJ Level 3: Indirect MBJ for non-beneficiaries (US$70.3 million)

19.    MBJ Level 3 captures indirect jobs generated for non-beneficiaries via broader economic spillovers from the project.
Two main channels are considered:
         •      Consumption spillovers. Application of a conservative net consumption multiplier to transfers and grants under
                Subcomponent 1.2 (US$9.9 million), using a net multiplier of 0.8 to avoid double-counting direct Level 2 income
                gains already captured for beneficiaries.
         •      Industry and value-chain links. Productivity gains associated with construction spending (approximately US$57
                million) and with improved markets, roads, and storage, including an assumed 5 percent agricultural productivity
                increase in the target area.


45 Graduation programs across six low- and middle-income countries show 10–17 percent increases in consumption and self-employment income,

with effects sustained over 3+ years. Economic inclusion programs in West Africa demonstrate 12–15 percent increases in business revenues and
labor income 18 months post-intervention. Similar IGA interventions in rural Côte d'Ivoire and neighboring countries show income gains ranging
from 9–17 percent, with multi-faceted packages (grants + training + assets) achieving stronger impact
46 The Côte d'Ivoire PEJEDEC public works program, which showed a 45 percent increase in monthly earnings for participants. Labor-intensive

public works programs in Sub-Saharan Africa, which demonstrate wage increases averaging 30–50 percent during participation.
                                                                      48
         The World Bank
         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



20.     These spillovers are converted to MBJ-equivalent terms using the MBJ methodology (linking incremental value added
to employment via national SAM-based multipliers and labor force statistics), resulting in a present value of US$63.0 million for
MBJ Level 3 impacts.
H. Economic Returns and Robustness

21.     Aggregating MBJ Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 benefit streams yields a total present value of benefits of US$249.3 million.
The present value of costs is US$104.2 million, comprising US$74.0 million in up-front capital expenditures and US$35.9 million
in O&M costs over the 20-year horizon. The resulting base case NPV is US$145.1 million and the EIRR is 28.3 percent.
                                            Table 4.6. Sensitivity Analysis of Economic Returns
                                            Scenario        NPV @ 6% (US$, millions) EIRR (%)
                                   Base case                        145.0              28.3
                                   Costs increase by 10%            135.0              25.1
                                   Benefits decrease by 10%         120.0              24.6
                                   2-year benefit lag               102.0              17.3

22.      In all scenarios, NPV remains positive, and EIRR stays well above the 6 percent social discount rate, indicating that the
project remains economically justified even under adverse assumptions regarding costs, benefits, or timing.
Conclusion

23.      The economic analysis demonstrates that Components 1 and 2 represent a sound investment in the Montagnes District,
with substantial net economic benefits and strong job-related impacts across all three MBJ levels. The analysis is consistent with
the Corporate Scorecard MBJ methodology and explicitly traces project effects through jobs created during implementation,
direct income and productivity gains for beneficiaries, and wider indirect spillovers, supporting the project's contribution to
poverty reduction, shared prosperity, and more and better-paid jobs in Western Côte d'Ivoire.




                                                                49
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                ANNEX 5: Mapping of Select World Bank and Partner Projects
                              Table 5.1. Select Ongoing World Bank-financed Projects in Côte d’Ivoire
                                                           Net
                                            Time       Commitment                                            Alignment with COSO
 P-code          Name of Project                                                     PDO
                                           Frames         (US$,                                                     West
                                                         millions)
P177800      Côte d'Ivoire               2023–2028       364.70        To improve: (a) equitable access    COSO West to work closely
             Strengthening Basic                                       to education and school health      with TT to ensure national
             Education System                                          services in basic education, (b)    norms and standards are
             Operation (PRSEB)                                         learning outcomes, and (c)          followed.
                                                                       performance-based
                                                                       management along the
                                                                       education service delivery
                                                                       chain.
P179338      Côte d'Ivoire Rural Land    2024–2029        240.00       To digitize and increase            Localities will overlap;
             Tenure Management                                         coverage of customary rural         COSO West will refer land
             Strengthening Program                                     land administration systems         titling disputes to PRESFOR
             (PRESFOR)                                                 and increase customary land
                                                                       registration efficiency and
                                                                       inclusivity.
P177062      Sustainable and Inclusive   2023–2029        300.00       To (a) improve access to green      Is limited to Man (urban);
             Secondary Cities Project                                  and climate resilient urban         COSO West targets rural
                                                                       infrastructure and basic            areas only.
                                                                       services, and (b) strengthen CT
                                                                       capacity for participatory and
                                                                       climate risk-informed urban and
                                                                       economic planning in selected
                                                                       secondary cities
P175982      Forrest Investment          2022–2029        150.50       To conserve and increase the        COSO West will not cover
             Project, phase 2 (FIP2)                                   forest stock and improve access     FIP and FIP2 localities.
                                                                       to sources of income from
                                                                       sustainable forest management
                                                                       for selected communities in
                                                                       target zones.
P175594      Côte d'Ivoire Productive    2022–2026        766.00       To increase access of poor and      Localities will overlap;
             Social Safety Nets                                        vulnerable households to safety     COSO West will build on
             System Strengthening                                      nets programs and improve the       AVEC where they exist and
             Program                                                   performance of delivery             encourage creation of
                                                                       systems.                            AVECs where they do not
                                                                                                           yet exist.
P172800      Côte d'Ivoire Youth         2022–2026        150.00       To enhance labor market             COSO West will finance
             Employment and Skills                                     outcomes for all Project            IGA primarily in
             Development Project -                                     beneficiaries and strengthen        agricultural sector; no
             Phase 3 (PJEDEC)                                          the Technical and Vocational        TVET.
                                                                       Education and Training (TVET)
                                                                       sector.
P171613      Côte d'Ivoire Agri-Food     2021–2028        267.13       To support the development of
             Sector Development                                        inclusive, resilient and
             Project                                                   competitive agri-food value
                                                                       chains benefiting their actors in
                                                                       Project areas.
P177118      Côte d'Ivoire Water         2024–2030        250.00       To strengthen the management        Currently covering the
             Security and Sanitation                                   of water resources and increase     North; COSO West will
                                                                50
           The World Bank
           Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



                                                                Net
                                               Time         Commitment                                                Alignment with COSO
    P-code          Name of Project                                                        PDO
                                              Frames           (US$,                                                         West
                                                              millions)
              Support Program                                                access to improved drinking           work closely with MINHAS
              (PASEA)                                                        water and sanitation services in      and TT for all water-
                                                                             selected regions of Côte              related interventions.
                                                                             d'Ivoire.
P176776       Côte d’Ivoire National        2023–2028              300.00    To (a) increase access to             COSO West will work with
              Electricity Digitalization                                     electricity and (b) improve the       TT to ensure community
              and Access operation                                           quality of electricity service, in    infra is connected to the
              (NEDA)                                                         the lagging regions of Côte           grid.
                                                                             d’Ivoire; and (c) enhance
                                                                             institutional capacity to support
                                                                             the electrification programs in
                                                                             the country.
                                Table 5.2. Similar CLD Projects of Development Partners in Côte d’Ivoire
#                                                                                                                  Geographic       Financing
              Donor                          Name                    Time Frame         Implementer
                                                                                                                    Coverage        Envelope
1     African Development        Côte d'Ivoire - Government          2019–2026    Ministère de l'Économie         National incl.     EUR 28
      Bank (AfDB)                Social Program Support                           et des Finances                 Montagnes           million
                                 Project (PA-PSGouv)
2     European Union (EU)        Appui à la lutte contre toutes      2024–2027    AVSI Côte d'Ivoire              Tonkpi             EUR 1.6
                                 les formes de discrimination                                                                        million
                                 et de violence basée sur le
                                 genre en Côte d’Ivoire. «
                                 Mousso Djidji »
3     EU                         PASCI Projet d’appui à la           2024–2026    Save the Children               Tonpki             EUR 4
                                 Société Civile en Côte d’Ivoire                  /CERAP/Social Justice                              million
4     United States              Projet d'Appui au Système           2021–2026    World Food Programme            Cavally            US$1.8
      Department of              Éducatif et à la Pérennisation                   (WFP)                                              million
      Agriculture (USDA)         des Cantines Scolaires
                                 (MGD2)
                                 Target: 33 schools with 7,144
                                 primary school students
                                 4 production groups
                                 composed of 228 members
5     Global Environment         SCOLUR-CI (Scaling up Cocoa-        2024–2027    Food and Agriculture            Cavally and        US$5.35
      Facility (GEF)             based Food Systems, Land                         Organization                    Guémon             million
                                 Use and Restoration /                            (FAO)/United Nations
                                 Transformative Innovations                       Development Programme
                                 in Côte d’Ivoire)                                (UNDP)/United Nations
                                                                                  Industrial Development
                                                                                  Organization (UNIDO)
6     Italian MoI                Border Management                   2022–2026    International                   Tonkpi             US$3.2
                                 infrastructures and capacity                     Organization for                                   million
                                 building, social cohesion                        Migration (IOM)
7     Private Sector             Projet intégré d’appui aux          2025–2027    WFP                             Guémon           US$4 million
                                 cantines scolaires et de
                                 renforcement de la
                                 sécurité alimentaire et
                                 nutritionnelle dans les zones
                                 cacaoyères de Côte
                                                                        51
          The World Bank
          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire Project (P507888)



#                                                                                                         Geographic       Financing
             Donor                       Name                 Time Frame           Implementer
                                                                                                           Coverage        Envelope
                              d’Ivoire à travers
                              l’autonomisation
                              socioéconomique des femmes
                              et des jeunes

                              Target:
                              88 schools with 23,475
                              primary school students
                              67 production groups
                              composed of 2,117 members
                                                        Recently Closed Projects
8    International Fund for   Credit and Financial Services:    2021–2025 Government of Côte              National incl     US$51
     Agricultural             Agricultural Emergency                          d’Ivoire                    Montagnes         million
     Development (IFAD)       Support Project
9    French Development       ECOTER                            2019–2024 CTs, ONG International          Cavally,          US$38
     Agency (Agence           Appui au développement                          Friendship service (IFS),   Guémon,           million
     Française de             économique et écologique                        ONG COSTO                   Tonkpi
     Développement, AFD)      des territoires ruraux en Côte
                              d'Ivoire
10   EU                       Programme d'Appui au              2017–2025 FIRCA                           Tonkpi            EUR 17
                              Développement des Filières                                                                    million
                              Manioc et Maraîchers en
                              Côte d'Ivoire-PRO2M
11   US Agency for            ILAW (Améliorer l’accès           2021–2025 TetraTech Ard ;                 Cavally          US$5.25
     International            foncier des femmes)                             Initiative de Dialogue et   Guémon           million
     Development (USAID)                                                      de Recherche-Action pour    Tonkpi
                                                                              la Paix ;
                                                                              Conseil d’Aide
                                                                              humanitaire et au
                                                                              développement (CAHD) ;
                                                                              Association des Femmes
                                                                              Juristes (AFJCI)
12   WFP Innovation           Projet Pilote Cacao               2023–2025 WFP                             Tonkpi          US$180,000
     Accelerator (INKA)       Target: 5,111 smallholder                                                   Cavally
                              farmers




                                                                 52
