Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 03/04/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04807




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 06, 2025                                                                           Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507256                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       BF - ABEP                   2026

                     Operation Name            Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Burkina Faso              Burkina Faso                             WESTERN AND CENTRAL         Agriculture and Food
                                                                                        AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and    21-Jul-2025                 30-Oct-2025
                     and Forecasting           Fisheries

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     25-Feb-2025               300,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase productivity, competitiveness, and climate resilience of farmers
                     and businesses along selected value chains in the project areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project is designed with four components: (i) Improving agricultural productivity and resilience to climate change,
                     (ii) Improving storage, agro-processing and access to Markets, (iii) Promoting Access to Finance and private sector
                     investment, and (iv) Institutional Strengthening and Project Coordination. The project includes a zero funded Contingent
                     Emergency Response Component (CERC). COMPONENT 1: IMPROVING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND RESILIENCE
                     TO CLIMATE CHANGE (INDICATIVE FINANCING US$150 MILLION) The objective of this component is to increase crop
                     productivity, strengthen farmers resilience to climatic shocks, and diversify crop production in response to effective
                     market demand. Expected outcomes from this component include improved farm-level productivity, increased volume

                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)



                     and quality of marketable produce, diversification of production, and improved nutrition. The component will focus on
                     promotion and delivery of technologies and services that enhance resilience. Activities to be financed under this
                     component include (i) strengthening of existing input (seeds, fertilizers) supply systems for improved availability and
                     timely access to high quality inputs. More specifically, this will include assessment of existing systems, strengthening
                     quality control mechanisms, expanding production and dissemination of improved planting material, certified seeds,
                     fertilizers, and agrochemicals, among others; (ii) strengthening the delivery of advisory services (including support to
                     capacity strengthening and outreach to farmers); and (iii) improving access to appropriate mechanization. The project
                     will support irrigation scheme and lowland development with special focus on integrated soil fertility, organizational
                     support regarding water management, including financing rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development
                     of new ones and land tenure to ensure rights to cultivate for farmers benefiting of irrigated and low land allocation
                     under the project. This will be done in close coordination with the Bank-financed Water security project (P177094) to
                     enhance synergies with this project. The project will support and finance demand-driven applied agronomic research
                     and strengthen advisory services to selected priority value-chains. The focus would be on testing and adapting a basket
                     of climate smart technologies, innovation, and expertise to optimize the productivity of targeted crops as well as the
                     profitability of investments. The project will also support the improvement of the competitiveness and climate
                     resilience of the priority value chains. COMPONENT 2: IMPROVING STORAGE, AGRO-PROCESSING AND ACCESS TO
                     MARKETS (INDICATIVE FINANCING US$70 MILLION) The objective of this component is to improve producers and actors
                     along the value chains (aggregators/off-takers, processors, marketers, etc.) connection to domestic and export markets,
                     as a way to generate jobs and economic opportunities for youths and women. Indeed, better connection to markets
                     would increase farm profitability and incomes, incentivize continued adoption of productivity and resilience enhancing
                     practices, and increase the range and quantity of locally produced agricultural commodities in both rural and urban




Public Disclosure
                     markets. The component would support (i) the construction/rehabilitation of marketing infrastructures (including
                     aggregation/storage facilities and drying areas) to facilitate market access, including investments needed for
                     postharvest management to reduce food waste and loss and (ii) development of quality norms and standards, technical
                     support, support to market knowledge and capacity-building for structures in charge of sanitary and phyto-sanitary
                     control. Supported investment would be screened through climate lenses to ensure resilience to climate related shocks
                     and use the best pathways to ensure sustainability and mitigation (ex. using solar powered technology for storage and
                     processing). COMPONENT 3: PROMOTING ACCESS TO FINANCE AND PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT (INDICATIVE
                     FINANCING US$55 MILLION) The objective of this component is to enhance access to finance for agri-entrepreneurs and
                     farmers across production, processing, and marketing stages by improving financial education, supporting financial
                     institutions in designing customized financial products, and developing adequate mechanisms to de-risk investments. It
                     promotes the alignment of financial services with commercial value chain needs, encouraging the adoption of
                     innovative practices and technologies that integrate small farmers into these value chains, and developing risk
                     management tools to address climate risks and reduce information asymmetry between lenders and borrowers. The
                     component will fund a Matching Grants (MGs) mechanism to provide partial support to agriculture and agri-business
                     operators to finance their investment Sub-Projects (SPs). The MG mechanism will target (i) smallholder producers,
                     Producer Groups (PGs), cooperatives, and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) that need financing to create,
                     upgrade and/ or modernize their existing production, storage and processing facilities, as well as (ii) all other private
                     sector players and entrepreneurs involved in the agriculture value chain selected (e.g., traders, transporters, equipment
                     manufacturers, service providers) with similar needs. The project will assist value chain operators to (i) identify potential
                     investment activities, and prepare viable business plans to secure access to funding: this activity cluster will support the
                     creation and/or expansion of Business Development Services (BDSs ) to help investors develop viable business plans and
                     coach them to ensure the success of their projects and provide technical assistance and capacity building to the service


                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)



                     providers so that they can in turn strengthen the technical, entrepreneurial and management skills of their client
                     investors; and (ii) identifying and mobilizing tools, technique and partners to de-risk investment across the supply chain
                     segments, including support for the development of agricultural insurance instruments to protect farmers and
                     agrobusinesses against insurable risk. COMPONENT 4: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND PROJECT COORDINATION
                     (INDICATIVE FINANCING US$25 MILLION) This component will focus on all aspects of overall project management,
                     including fiduciary and safeguards aspects, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), knowledge management, and
                     communication. It will also address critical cross-cutting institutional strengthening and training needs identified.
                     Activities to be financed under this component include: (i) strengthening extension and the technical backstopping
                     capacity of Government staff at all levels, filling the identified human resource gaps by financing higher technical
                     qualifications of appropriate staff; (ii) establishing a rigorous M&E and Management Information Systems (MIS) and in
                     their coordination with other essential line ministries; and (iii) support the capacity of the ministries to establish an
                     effective fiduciary system for program funds management. The project will also support government ability for live
                     monitoring of food and nutrition security crisis, leveraging on the Food Security Crisis Preparedness Plan. This would
                     include early warning on plants and animal disease, pest, (locus, fall army worms, etc. in addition to other climate,
                     market risks-drought, flood inflation etc. Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0):
                     This component will enable the government to quickly mobilize funds in the event of an emergency that requires
                     immediate response.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be implemented nationwide. Burkina Faso, with about 20.5 million people (RGPH (General census of



Public Disclosure
                     population and housing), 2019), is a low-income, landlocked and FCV (Fragility, Conflict and Violence), and has an
                     extreme poverty headcount (32.7% in 2022 with 7.5 million people). Its recent political history is turbulent with two
                     coup d'états in one year (2022) and a military transition. The country's economy is informally centered around rainfed
                     agriculture and agropastoralism. Despite relatively strong economic performance in the past decade, Burkina Faso
                     remains one of the poorest countries in the world. More than half of rural people are poor. Agriculture is the most
                     important sector of the economy, with 80% of the labor force primarily employed in agriculture. Over 90% of livelihoods
                     are dependent on agriculture. The volatile security situation has made the humanitarian situation more complex, with
                     persistent food insecurity and the absence of basic services in several regions as well as massive population
                     displacement. Climate shocks such as droughts and floods are a threat, particularly to agriculture, and hence, are a risk
                     to rural livelihoods and food security. Floods have also become recurrent events, causing severe impacts on lives,
                     livelihoods and the economy. Irrigation potential is considerable but only a fraction of the potentially irrigable land has
                     been developed.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The General Directorate of Agricultural Development and Irrigation Development (DGAHDI), within the the Ministry of
                     Agriculture, Animal Resources and Fisheries (MARAH) is the implementing agency. DGAHDI has experience
                     implementing projects funded by World Bank such as Burkina Faso Agriculture Resilience and Competitiveness Project
                     (P167945) under implementation under the Safeguards Operational Policies (OP) with a Moderetaly Satisfactory E&S
                     performance rating in the last Aide-Memoire, December, 2024 and West Africa Food System Resilience Program
                     (P172769) currently being implemented under the WB Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) with Satisfactory E&S
                     performance rating in the last Aide-Memoire, December, 2024. The PIU to be recruited will include dedicated staff to
                     manage the project, including E&S Specialists. In addition, at the regional level, the Client will recruit E&S assistants to

                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)



                     support project implementation on the field. The client will produce an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                     (ESCP), a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and a Labor Management Procedures (LMP), operational E&S instruments
                     for known sites during the preparation phase and before appraisal.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is classified as substantial at concept stage, based on the type of project and the nature
                     of its activities and the substantial environmental risks and impacts that may result. The key activities include
                     rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones, lowland development, development of
                     climate-resilient market infrastructures, construction or rehabilitation of rural roads, development of subprojects
                     related to agriculture and agri-business operators, activities of upgrading/modernization of existing production,
                     storage and processing facilitiesetc. These activities are often associated with substantial environmental negative
                     risks/impacts, mainly dam safety and health risks on communities, risks of construction site accidents and traffic
                     accidents, risk of drowning in dams and irrigation canals, risk of soil and land degradation during construction,
                     biodiversity risks associated with habitat destruction, risk of water and soil pollution by solid and liquid waste from
                     living bases and construction sites, risk of disturbance runoff, risk of poaching by site workers, groundwater and
                     surface water pollution through improper use of agrochemicals (pesticides and fertilizers) as well as risk of soil and
                     water pollution during the operation phase, risk of poisoning of producers by using empty pesticide containers as



Public Disclosure
                     drinking water containers, risk related to insecurity, occupational Health and Safety of workers, etc. A screening
                     process will be put in place to ensure that the E&S risks and impacts associated with the activities will be addressed
                     appropriately by the client. The potential for cumulative impact exists but can be readily avoided or mitigated by
                     adequate mitigatory and/or compensatory measures.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Potential social risks that could be raised by the investments expected from the project are rated substantial based on
                     the project activities (rehabilitation and development of irrigation schemes, development of lowland and market
                     infrastructures, construction or rehabilitation of rural roads, development of subprojects related to agriculture and
                     agri-business operators, ...) and anticipated social impacts like economic and physical displacement. Most project
                     activities are small-scale ( construction/rehabilitation of marketing infrastructures, development of low land and rural
                     roads to open up producing areas) and intended to improve social cohesion and inclusion, as well as support
                     sustainable livelihoods and the social inclusion of women and other disadvantaged groups, as the project will
                     facilitate technology transfer, technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training, improved availability and
                     access to resilient germplasms, and efficient advisory service delivery. In addition, the project will support productive
                     land development by increasing the provision of irrigated water on sites with high production potential and by
                     securing land tenure to produce staple and high value crops. While expected physical activities planned under both
                     components 1 and 2 are expected to have positive social impact and physical footprint, they will be implemented in a
                     fragile, highly volatile environment where there are threats of security and violence . The main social risks from
                     expected activities of the project are risks related to permanent and temporary loss of assets or physical and/or
                     economic displacement, the restriction of access to traditional land, social exclusion of some communities or people


                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)



                     among potential beneficiaries, SEA/SH and community conflict between livelihood groups as a result of the possible
                     influx of labor, and the possible expansion of certain transmissible diseases during civil works.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The major works that will generate high E&S risk and impacts are : rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and
                      development of new ones, lowland development, development of climate-resilient market infrastructures,
                      construction or rehabilitation of rural roads, development of subprojects related to agriculture and agri-business
                      operators, activities of upgrading/modernization of existing production, storage, etc. The ESCP/POM of the proposed
                      project will establish the procedures for screening subprojects, as well as mitigation measures and implementation
                      arrangements. The impacts will be managed during project implementation in accordance with the ESCP/POM that
                      will guide the preparation of ESIAs/ESMPs for the subprojects. The Borrower will monitor the environmental and
                      social performances in accordance with the ESCP. Prior to project effectiveness, the client will develop and disclose at
                      least one ESIA for known sites after required E&S screening and feasibilities studies.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be developed by updating SEP of West Africa Food System Resilience



Public Disclosure
                      Program (P172769) and will include an identification mapping of project key stakeholders and a description of the
                      Grievance Mechanism (GM) that is accessible to key stakeholders—mainly vulnerable groups, including referrals to
                      locally available medical, psychosocial and/or legal aid services for any SEA/SH survivor signaling abuse. The GM will
                      be used to receive and resolve project-related complaints; it establishes a systematic approach for consultation and
                      engagement and helps promote an inclusive and participatory approach for stakeholder engagement in addressing
                      any potential risks and negative impact; promotes and provides means for effective and inclusive engagement of the
                      project’s affected parties throughout the project life-cycle; it will also ensure that appropriate program information is
                      disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable and accessible.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The Borrower will prepare a Labor Management Procedures (LMP) by updating LMP of West Africa Food System
                      Resilience Program (P172769). It will establish the terms and conditions of employment, as well as non-discrimination
                      and equal opportunity; the freedom to associate with workers’ organizations; exclusion of child and forced labor from
                      project activities; prevention and control against sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual harassment (SEA/SH);
                      outlining adequate occupational health and safety measures and a labor grievance mechanism (GM). The PIU and
                      contractors will be required to sign and abide by a code of conduct for workers that would address community health
                      and safety risks, including risks of SEA/SH and child labor risk. Contractors will be required, as a condition of their
                      contracts, to prepare, implement and comply with their ESMP, including LMP and OHS measures outlined in the
                      ESIA/ESMP and security management plans consistent with the project Security Management Plan.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant


                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)



                      The proposed project will support rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones, lowland
                      development, development of subprojects related to agriculture and agri-business operators, etc. These activities
                      may require the use of agrochemicals. The project will develop a Pest Management Plan (PMP) that will include
                      guidance and measures to promote good agricultural practices, and guidance on the safe use of agrochemicals.
                      Preparation of the PMP will consist of updating PMP of West Africa Food System Resilience Program (P172769). The
                      Borrower will put in place the necessary measures to promote the sustainable use of resources (e.g. energy, water
                      and raw materials). The waste generated by the construction/rehabilitation work will be disposed of at approved sites
                      in keeping with national laws and regulations. The ESMPs will include mitigation measures to minimize and manage
                      the noise levels. There are no plans to purchase electronic equipment for farmers.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The PIU will be required to enforce and monitor the application of CoC for workers, which addresses community
                      health and safety risks, including SEA/SH and child labor risk mitigation measures. The expected civil works will
                      finance the construction and rehabilitation and the overall risks and impacts to community health and safety are
                      considered to be substantial and mitigation measures within the LMP and SEP will provide safe and confidential
                      grievance mechanism channels to report all types complaints. Due to the security conditions in the whole country,
                      the Borrower will conduct a security risk assessment and prepare a security management plan (SMP) proportionate
                      to the security risks level no later than 6 months after project effectiveness and these provisions will be outlined in
                      the ESCP. A Dam Safety Panel (independent dam specialists) will be recruited to advise and support the government
                      of dam safety matters including legacy issues for all dams identified for irrigation.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      Project activities associated with irrigation schemes and lowland development may require land acquisition,
                      involuntary physical resettlement and/or economic displacement. Given the volatile security situation in the whole
                      country and inaccessibility of some areas, the mitigation hierarchy will be applied to avoid involuntary resettlement .
                      If this cannot be avoided, measures to minimize involuntary resettlement will include preparation of Livelihood
                      Restoration Plans (LRP) for people and communities affected by economic displacement. Prior to project
                      effectiveness, the client will develop and disclose at least one RAP for known sites after required screening. The other
                      RAPs will be developed during the project implementation. All the RAPs will be implemented to the satisfaction of the
                      Bank prior to the start of works.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The proposed project is not expected to have an impact on protected areas and biodiversity sites. Among the
                      activities supported by the project that could affect biodiversity conservation and the sustainable management of
                      natural resources are the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones and lowland
                      development. The same goes for activities related to the construction or rehabilitation of rural roads for access to
                      irrigated areas and the resurfacing of certain segments of departmental road network in the project area. The ESIAs
                      to be prepared will help screen and manage biodiversity issues for the different types of activities funded and help
                      screen out activities that may have unintended negative consequences on the ecological functions of habitats and the




                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)



                      biodiversity they support. The ESIA/ESMPs will also provide mitigation measures to ensure that project activities do
                      not alter or cause the destruction of any critical or sensitive natural habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      There are no known Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Undeserved Traditional Local Communities
                      in the project area.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The project will finance rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones and the
                      construction or rehabilitation of rural roads that will likely require small-scale excavation. These types of activities
                      may affect, or lead to the discovery of, both known and unknown cultural heritage. Though the possibility is not
                      considered significant, the ESMFs will contain Chance Finds procedures which should be included in the ESMPs and
                      subsequently in bidding documents to guide the treatment of cultural heritage that may be encountered during civil
                      works. Site-specific ESIAs for the subprojects will determine, through consultations, the presence of cultural heritage
                      and recommend measures to avoid doing harm to any identified cultural heritage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      The project will not involve an FI.




Public Disclosure
                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       The Borrower Framework will not be used. The project is not proposing to rely on the Borrowers’ Environmental and
                       Social Framework but will comply with relevant national laws and regulations (cultural heritage, labor, ESIA, etc.).


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following documents have been or will be prepared by the government and disclosed both in-country and on the
                     World Bank's external website :

                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project (P507256)




                     Before Appraisal
                     -Updated Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) including a GRM of West Africa Food System Resilience Program
                     (P172769)
                     -Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     -Updated Labor Management Procedures (LMP) of West Africa Food System Resilience Program (P172769)
                     -updated Pest management plan (PMP) of West Africa Food System Resilience Program (P172769)

                     Before effectiveness
                     - Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for at least one subproject
                     - Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for at least one subproject




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Idriss Serme                         Title:          Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  iserme@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                      TTL Contact:            Erick Herman Abiassi                 Job Title:      Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  eabiassi@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                               Idriss Serme, Erick Herman Abiassi

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                      Yacouba Ouedraogo

                     ADM Social Specialist:                             Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre




                    Mar 06, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 9
