Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01083




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
Burundi, Burundi, Tanzania     P507207                       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           30-Sep-2025                   15-Dec-2025                   Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Republic of Burundi -         Ministry of Water, Energy
Financing (IPF)                Ministry of Finance and       and Mines
                               Economic Planning

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To increase access to drinking water supply and sanitation services in selected urban and rural areas of Burundi and to
strengthen institutional capacity for service delivery

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            95.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                 95.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    80.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                    80.00
      IDA Grant                                                                                                   80.00


                                                                                                                    Page 1
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


     IFC Own Resources/Mobilization                                                                                  7.00
   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Commercial Financing                                                                                            8.00
       Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                             8.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                    Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                     The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context


1.       The Republic of Burundi is a low-income country whose economic growth is recovering. As of 2023, 62.1 percent
of its 13.2 million people live below the international poverty linei of US$2.15/day, and 75 percent live in multi-
dimensional poverty (as of 2021/2022).ii Burundi is one of the most densely populated countries in the world, with a
population density of 442 people per square kilometer, exacerbating pressure on arable land. It ranks near the bottom for
all global measures of human capital, with a Human Development Index of 0.42, making it one of the least developed
nations.iii Gender disparities remain high in Burundi, ranking low on the Gender Inequality Index, placed 132nd out of 170
countries.
2.      The country has an undiversified economy heavily reliant on public services and agricultureiv. It’s multi-
dimensional fragility results in political, economic, and security risks.v The political crisis of 2015 halted 11 years of
growth, and Burundi’s GDP per capita - in decline since 2016 - was only US$ 200vi (2023), roughly one-eighth of the Sub-
Saharan Africa average (US$ 1,637).vii A peaceful transfer of power in June 2020 marked a turn toward peace and stability,
but challenges remain. Although economic growth in 2024 is expected to improve to 3.8 percent, this is insufficient to
cope with rapid population expansion. Potential challenges include regional instability, influenced by the recent influx of
refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo, postponed exchange rate unification, and restricted external financing.
3.      Burundi remains largely rural, with only a 15 percent urban population. However, it is one of the fastest-growing
urban populations, growing by 5.7 percent per year between 2000 and 2021. The current urban population of 2 million
will double by 2050. Approximately 58 percent of the urban population lives in unplanned areas, often under-resourced
and without basic services. Adequate provision of basic services, conflicts over land ownership, exposure to disaster risks
(see paragraph 6), as more people move to cities in search of livelihood opportunities, housing, and access to services.
Bujumbura, the largest city, where 61 percent of the urban population lives, could play a key role supporting the economic



                                                                                                                       Page 2
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


drivers in the country. Gitega, the country’s political capital and second largest city, faces a similar rapid urbanization
process.
4.       Burundi has embarked upon a territorial reform that is expected to take effect after the May 2025 municipal
and parliamentary elections. The administrative set-up will be consolidated from 18 provinces and 119 communes to five
new provinces and 42 communes with enlarged competencies. The aim is to streamline governance, improve resource
allocation at the local level, and enhance service delivery, though such reforms may take several years to mature.
5.      Although Burundi has the lowest per capita greenhouse gas emissions globally; climate change poses a serious
threat to its weak infrastructure and livelihoods. Changes in rainfall patterns have led to increased frequency of extreme
weather events such as floods, storms, landslides, and prolonged dry spells, which harm crop yields and threaten food
security. Water levels in Lake Tanganyika surged to their highest level in 60 years due to heavy rains in early 2024, forcing
over 230,000 people to relocate.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context


6.       Despite the country's considerable water endowments,viii a lack of investments and poor governance have led
to widespread water insecurity. From 2016 to 2022, access to water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services barely
improvement, with population growth absorbing gains. A 2021 directive from the Ministry of Interior halted water fee
collection at public standpipes, especially rural service providers faced financial strain and services collapsed. As of 2022,
only 62 percent of the population has basic water supply (urban: 90 percent; rural: 48 percent), and 46 percent has basic
sanitation (urban: 41 percent; rural: 46 percent).ix
7.       Achieving the SDGs for Universal Access to WASH by 2030 requires drastic acceleration. Yearly, over 1 million
must gain access to basic sanitation, seven times faster than 2010-2020 progress. For water, over 0.8 million annually,
three times faster than the past decade. In urban areas, only 58 percent have household connections, with 48 percent
availability. This reflects the situation in the main cities of Bujumbura and Gitega where water production capacity is
largely insufficient and water is rationed, with rotations to different quartiers every 2-3 days. In rural areas, only 3 percent
of the population has access to a household connection. Only 2 percent of the urban population is connected to a sewer
system, and proper sewage treatment is not guaranteed.
8.      Lack of WASH services disproportionally impacts women and girls, with 78 percent of women responsible for
water collection versus 17 percent of men. This highlights a deeply rooted inequality in the distribution of WASH-related
domestic labor, with 40 percent of women fetching water for longer than 30 minutes per trip, exposing women to risks of
gender-based violence (GBV).x Poor WASH services are a main contributor to diarrheal disease, the leading cause of child
mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).xi Access to water and sanitation in schools is about 45 percentxii and only 18 percent
have handwashing facilities with soap, which negatively impacts school attendance, especially of girls during their periods.
Malnutrition, directly linked to poor WASH services, stands at 53 percentxiii.
9.      The Government’s Vision "Burundi Emerging Country 2040, Developed Country 2060" prioritizes WSS for
urbanization, economic growth, health, and social stability. The National Development Plan (NDP) for Burundi 2018-2027
plans investments in water supply, digital operations, sanitation facilities, and reforms. Public expenditure on WASH is
modest at 1.5 percent of total spending, or US$ 6.6 million in 2022-2023. Development partners' spending, mostly off-
budget, was US$7 million in 2022-2023. The government plans PPPs and sectoral reforms to improve investment climate.
A national agency (ARCPxiv) has been set up to facilitate PPP-transactions.
10.    The Ministry of Water, Energy and Mines (MINHEMxv) is the key government institution for the water supply
sector and partially for the sanitation sector, mostly through its General Division for WSS (DGEPAxvi). MINHEM
implements the code on the liberalization of the water and electricity sector of 2000,xvii although provisions relating to the


                                                                                                                           Page 3
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


water supply sector are not fully applied due to lack of by-laws. A new law, expected later in 2025,xviii will clarify delegation
of service provision to operators, including REGIDESO (the state-owned enterprise responsible for water and electricity
services), private, or not-for-profit operators. A sustainable tariff policy is under development to address non-cost
reflective tariffs and limited collection rates.
11.     The rural arm of the MINHEM is the Agency for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (AHAMR), responsible for
construction and rehabilitation of rural water systems and sanitation activities.xix A major bottleneck for rural service
provision is the current situation where water at standposts is free. Addressing these issues is essential for investment
sustainability, necessitating a tariff policy, based on which the water supply regulator (AREENxx), under MINHEM can
further develop regulatory instruments.
12.      REGIDESO provides water services in urban areas to 8.5 percent of the population through 137,500 private
connections and 880 water kiosks. Non-Revenue Water (NRW) is estimated at 40 percent (2019) and bill collection
efficiency is around 80 percent (2023). The energy-side of REGIDESO has benefited from a long-standing World Bank
engagement and performance improvement trajectoryxxi . A diagnostic for its water services and a prioritized performance
improvement plan is under development.xxii REGIDESO has implemented an Enterprise Resource Management System to
enhance operational, accounting, and commercial processes. Tariff reviews and operational improvements are crucial to
eliminating energy subsidies to water services, especially since water tariffs haven't changed since 2012.xxiii
13.      The urban sanitation sector is fragmented and suffers from a lack of clarity on institutional mandates and
coordination. Sustainability concerns, due to a lack of tariff policy for sanitation, hinder investments in the urban
sanitation sector from development partners and the private sector. MINHEM has implemented better government-
partner coordination mechanisms through a WASH Sectoral Coordination Group. A roadmap with reform measures was
jointly developed, and UNICEF and the World Bank are supporting the development of a national WASH investment plan
2040. Key rural WASH partners include the European Union (EU), the African Development Bank, UNICEF, and Amazi
Water, an NGO, and KfW for urban water supply. Potential co-financing for the WSS investments is being explored.

 Relationship to CPF
14.       The project contributes to the objectives laid out in the World Bank Group Burundi Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Fiscal Year FY19-FY23 (Report No. 122878-BI), and the Performance and Learning Review (PLR)
(Report No. Report 181794-BI) that extended the CPF to FY24xxiv. The project will promote public and private investments
in critical water infrastructure to strengthen the foundations for economic and social resilience (Focus Area II). The project
focuses on reaching the underserved, especially alleviating the burden of lack of WASH services for women and girls.
Hence, the project indirectly supports human capital development (Focus Area I) and inclusion of women, poor and
vulnerable groups. The project addresses fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) focus areas, such as urbanization and youth
employability (FCV Focus Area 3), through urban investments to support economic transformation, mobilization of the
private sector and the creation of new WASH sector jobs. The project aims to build more accountable service provision,
(FCV Focus Area 4) and is aligned with the WBG 2020-2025 Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Strategy.
15.      The Project is aligned with the Mobilizing Finance for Development (MFD) principles, using a one WBG approach
working in tandem with IFC and MIGA in support of the Scaling-up Water Finance initiative. The project will finance
viability-gap financing for the proposed Bujumbura water treatment plant and prepares all tender documents for a second
hybrid PPP for the treatment plant in Gitega, to be financed at a later stage. The project is thus tagged as Private Capital
Mobilization (PCM) as well as Private Capital Enabling (PCE). The project is tagged as MFD -enabling as it supports reforms,
the legal and regulatory framework, REGIDESO performance measures. The preparation will explore the need for
deploying risk insurance instruments and payment guarantees through MIGA to unleash private investments.



                                                                                                                            Page 4
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


16.      The project is aligned with the WBG Strategy on Water Security, the Global Challenge Program (GCP) on Water
Security and Adaptation and the WBG Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience 2021–2025.
Accelerating access to WASH is one of the three pillars of the GCP on Water Security and Climate Adaptation. On
mitigation, the project will (a) promote the use of renewable energy (solar) in rural areas where grid access is not available
and (b) increase energy and water use efficiency in water systems for the urban areas through NRW reduction and
efficiency measures. On adaptation, the project will address vulnerabilities through (a) developing climate-resilient
infrastructure by enhancing designs and protecting WSS infrastructure from flooding, droughts and landslides.
17.     The Project is aligned with the WBG’s Gender Strategy 2024–30.xxv Project activities contribute to narrowing
gender gaps on i) human endowments (i.e. time reduction for water collection and better learning environments for girls
in schools), ii) economic opportunities through professional development programs and iii) agency through empowering
women in water system oversight. The Project addresses security and GBV risks through at-home access to WSS facilities.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To increase access to drinking water supply and sanitation services in selected urban and rural areas of Burundi and to
 strengthen institutional capacity for service delivery


  Key Results (From PCN)
  The Project aims to achieve the following results:
 • PDO indicator 1: number of people with access to at least basic water supply services (650,000). Disaggregated by
   gender, by rural-urban and by level of service (400,000 people with access to safely managed water supply)
 • PDO indicator 2: number of people with access to basic sanitation services (180,000). Disaggregated by gender, by
   rural-urban.
 • PDO indicator 3: number of schools and health centers with WASH facilities (70).
 • PDO indicator4: number of beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (650,000).


 D. Concept Description

18.   The proposed project is part of a proposed Africa East and South (AFE) WASH Access Multi-phase Programmatic
Approach (MPA) (P506439). The concept description is below.

19.      The Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Project development objective is to increase access to WSS services
in selected urban and rural areas of Burundi and to strengthen institutional capacity for service delivery. The Burundi
WSS Access Project aligns with the AFE WASH MPA, which is planned for Board review in September 2025. The GoB
priorities are the expansion of water supply systems in Bujumbura, the largest city and economic capital, in Gitega, the
political capital and second largest city, as well as in rural areas that are most deprived in terms of WASH services. The
project will improve access to safely managed drinking water services, through new access to previously unserved
populations and through improving the quality of existing services through safe and available water access at home. The
project will improve access to at least basic water supply and basic sanitation services in rural communes prioritized by
the GoB and improve WASH access in selected schools and HCs in these communes.
20.      The project will develop a national WASH program and prepare for phased investments to increase access,
attract private capital, and utilize financing from development partners. Considering the allocation of up to US$80 million


                                                                                                                         Page 5
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


in IDA financing, the scope of the project limits investments to the city of Bujumbura and prioritized rural centers within
the selected communes.xxvi The project assumes a private capital mobilization for the hybrid PPP of up to US$15 million,
bringing the total project cost to US$95 million. It is estimated that the project will provide basic water supply to 650,000
people (of which 400,000 with safely managed water access), basic sanitation access to 180,000 people, and ensure
functioning WASH facilities in 70 schools and HCs. All activities in this operation align with the scope of activities outlined
in the proposed WASH MPA framework.
21.     Component 1: Strengthening National WASH Platforms, Governance and Reforms (US$4 million IDA). This
includes activities that are MFD-enabling and Private Capital Enabling (PCE) and consists of two subcomponents [each
mapped to Pillars 1 and 2 of the MPA].
• Subcomponent 1.1 – Strengthening National WASH Platforms (US$2.4 million) thereby increasing climate resilience and
  promoting the design & development of climate informed city-specific sanitation systems: this subcomponent finances
  technical assistance, training and equipment for (i) the preparation of a medium-term national WASH investment plan
  (2040), (ii) technical assistance for coordination and the establishment of a National WASH Platform, (iii) the
  development of a Management Information System (MIS) for the WASH sector, (iv) city-wide inclusive sanitation plans
  and feasibility studies for Bujumbura and Gitega, (v) technical preparatory studies, including for initiating affermage
  contracts for rural water supply with communes.
• Subcomponent 1.2 – Improving Governance and Reforms (US$1.6 million) thereby increasing institutional capacity and
  resilience to climate change impacts: this subcomponent finances technical assistance, training, equipment (including
  vehicles) for the implementation of sector reforms and improvement of sector governance notably for: (i) the
  dissemination of the proposed new law on WSS, (ii) the development of legal implementation texts, instruments and
  policies for the WSS sectors, (iii) capacity development of the national WSS regulatory entity (AREEN) to better oversee,
  monitor performance and determine tariffs thus enabling O&M investments & cost recovery, (iv) the institutional
  strengthening and capacity development of the national WSS department (MINHEM-DGEPA), the rural water agency
  (AHAMR), selected commune administrations, specifically their WSS unit (”services eau et assainissement”) to boost
  policy coordination, (v) transaction advisory services for PPPs in Bujumbura and Gitega and (vi) exchange visits and
  participation in international and regional training and forums.
22.     Component 2: Service Providers Performance Improvement (US$12.5 million IDA) [Mapped to Pillar 3 of the
MPA]. This component aims to enhance service delivery by improving the sustainability, efficiency, social inclusion and
climate resilience of operations in both urban and rural areas. In urban areas the focus is on improving the performance
of REGIDESO to improve its financial viability. In rural areas, the focus is on supporting the GoB in implementing a
commune-wide professional management model through delegation contracts (affermage) with private operators for
increased operational sustainability. It consists of two subcomponents.
• Subcomponent 2.1 – Support to REGIDESO (US$10.5 million): this finances technical assistance, training, works, and
  equipment specifically for: (i) capacity development and professional development of REGIDESO staff, including delivery
  of courses on digitalization, water quality and NRW, (ii) improved customer engagement and female employment in
  technical and management positions, (iii) the reorganization process into an independent water utility, (iv) measures to
  reduce NRW, implementation of digital applications and automatic control systems (SCADA), and improved water
  quality management systems, increasing energy efficiency and boosting climate resilience, (v) optimization of existing
  water treatment plant capacity, and (vi) connections for 40,000 households in Bujumbura and technical assistance to
  develop REGIDESO policies and procedures for a household connection revolving fund.
• Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for Rural Water Service Providers (WSPs) (US$2 million) contributing to reduced climate
  vulnerability and increased capacity: this finances technical assistance, training, works, and equipment specifically for:
  (i) transaction advisory to communes and AHAMR to prepare and supervise the affermage contracts, (ii) business

                                                                                                                          Page 6
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


  incubation support, capacity development and mentoring of domestic private service providers, (iii) development and
  delivery of vocational courses and internships on solar pumping, plumbing and management of water operations, (iv)
  communication and community mobilization in selected communes, including provision of connections for 6,000
  households.
23.       Component 3: Leveraging Finance to Increase WASH Access (US$ 73.3 million, US$58.3 million IDA, and US$15
million in Private Capital Mobilization) [Mapped to Pillar 4 of the MPA]. This component aims to leverages equity (30
percent) and debt (70 percent), through IFC and other lenders under a proposed hybrid PPP for the bulk water treatment
plant in Bujumbura. The hybrid PPP with a VGF-grant aims to ensure an acceptable tariff for REGIDESO as off-taker and a
tariff structure affordable to different consumer groups. It includes two subcomponents:
•   Subcomponent 3.1 (US$53 million; US$38 million IDA, US$15 million PCM) – Access to climate-resilient drinking water
    services in urban areas to reduce flood and drought vulnerability. This subcomponent finances infrastructure
    investments in climate-resilient urban water supply distribution and production systems for Bujumbura. It includes (i)
    a VGF-grant for a private developer of the bulk water production plant, including intake in Lake Tanganyika and
    pumping station, (ii) investments for REGIDESO-managed urban drinking water systems, including transmission lines,
    reservoirs and primary and tertiary distribution mains, (iii) preparation and implementation of Environmental and
    Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) for Bujumbura and Gitega water supply
    investments, (iv) supervision costs, and (v) resettlement costs associated with the water system in Bujumbura, and
    (vi) necessary preparation studies related to water supply investments for Gitega, including hydrogeological studies.
•   Subcomponent 3.2 - WASH access in rural areas and in institutions (US$20.3 million). This subcomponent finances (i)
    the rehabilitation, expansion and construction of new gravity-fed and/or solar-pumped climate-resilient rural water
    systems in the selected communes and associated preparation studies (including ESIA and PAR as needed) and
    supervision costs,xxvii (ii) community mobilization and awareness activities, (iii) investments in WASH facilities in
    schools and health care facilities that promote climate-proof infrastructure, (iv) community-led total sanitation (CLTS)
    activities, including material support for latrine construction, (v) education programs for girls on menstrual hygiene
    management, and (vi) resettlement costs related to the rural water systems.

24.    Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$ 5.2 million). This component finances all project
coordination, management, communication, implementation, monitoring and evaluation costs for the proposed Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) within the MINHEM (subcomponent 4.1 of US$ 4.4 million), as well as a PIU within REGIDESO
(subcomponent 4.2 of US$ 0.8 million).
25.     Citizen Engagement, Social Inclusion and Gender: The project will integrate citizen engagement and social
inclusion interventions to enhance voice and participation, including e.g. strengthening customer feedback for REGIDESO
water services and a household connection program to remove barriers for those without services. In line with the WASH
MPA framework on gender, the project will close gender gaps in the burden for water collection and enhances girls’ school
attendance in schools through WASH facilities and menstrual hygiene education programs.
26.      Climate Co-Benefits: The project increases access to WSS services essential for climate adaptation. It focuses on
reducing water losses, climate-proofing WSS infrastructure in the face of increasing floods and droughts, as well as
landslides. Subcomponent 3.1 finances expansion and improvement of the water production and supply systems for
Bujumbura, which will make the city’s population resilient to droughts and its water supply system more resilient to lake
flooding. Subcomponent 3.2, finances rural water systems, which will increase the adaptive capacity of rural communities
now faced with water scarcity, arduous collection, and extremely high costs for a small amount of water consumed.
Subcomponent 2.1 will contribute to mitigation by supporting REGIDESO in reduction of NRW and energy efficiency
measures while subcomponent 2.2. will build capacity of rural operators in operating solar-pumped systems. Component


                                                                                                                        Page 7
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)


1 strengthens institutional capacities for climate resilient WASH investment planning and an enhanced regulatory
environment.
27.      Paris Alignment: The proposed project is considered aligned with the Paris Agreement on both climate mitigation
and adaptation. It is consistent with the country’s nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and the National Strategy
and Action Plan on Climate Change 2013-2025. Developing resilient WSS services is among the priority adaptation actions
in the NDC 2021.xxviii The project directly supports climate adaptation through expansion of resilient water supply for urban
and rural populations, and enhanced capacity of operators to manage and maintain systems in the face of climate risks
(particularly flooding and drought in Bujumbura and water scarcity in rural communes). Regarding climate mitigation,
project investments are on the Universally Aligned list and do not present risks of having a negative impact on Burundi’s
low-GHG-emissions development pathway. The project has been screened for climate change and disaster impacts, and
specific resilience-building measures will be identified and considered in the project documents prior to appraisal. No
specific risks regarding the mitigation and adaptation aspects of the Paris Alignment assessment are reported at this stage.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


Potential environmental risks/impacts are expected for the activities under components 2 and 3 which include
infrastructure investments in urban water supply distribution and production systems for Bujumbura, activities to be
carried out through subsidies to a private developer of the bulk water treatment plant, investments for urban drinking
water systems managed by REGIDESO, infrastructure investments for rehabilitation and construction of solar-based
climate-resilient rural water systems in selected communes, investments in WASH facilities in schools and healthcare
facilities.

Key anticipated direct, indirect and cumulative risks and impacts associated with water and sanitation investments will
entail : temporary disruption of utility services in the project area; traffic disruption as the excavation of trenches and
laying of pipeline work will be done along main roads and streets; interference with fish and other aquatic organisms at
intake sites; risk of increased turbidity and sedimentation downstream that may affect aquatic habitats; risk of pollution
and oil spill; management of chemicals; waste generation; occupational and health and safety for workers; community
safety due to active construction sites and activities within the community.

The project will also support Technical Assistance (TA) activities of Types 1, 2 and 3 under components 1 and 2 which
include the preparation of investment plans, preparation studies, transactions advisory services, capacity building,
development of national legal and regulatory text and policies, etc. TA activities may have potential downstream
environmental risks because of potential new investments. However, the risk level of these activities is not expected to
exceed Substantial.

                                                                                                                        Page 8
       The World Bank
       Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)




This classification takes also into account the capacity of the Borrower, as well as all stakeholders involved in this
project, including public entities and a potential private developer for the Bujumbura bulk water treatment plant, to
manage potential risks. Potential social risks associated with the project include the exclusion of women and members
of vulnerable groups from project benefits and activities such as training and capacity building and household
connections under components 1 and 2, and work opportunities under components 3 and 4. Planned civil works under
component 3 also present risks associated with influx of labor such as SEA/SH, communicable diseases, and labor, social
conflicts, economic and physical displacement (mostly temporary), and community health and safety impacts. As
indicated in the Environmental risk section, TA activities of Types 1, 2 and 3 under components 1 and 2 are likely to carry
downstream impacts and the capacity of the foreseen MINHEM-PMU and REGIDESO-PIU will likely be low and will need
substantial capacity building.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Susanna Smets
   Senior Water Specialist

   Feriha Mukuve Mugisha
   Senior Water Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Republic of Burundi - Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Water, Energy and Mines
  Nestor Girukwishaka
  Director General Drinking Water and Sanitation
  ngirukwishaka@gmail.com

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL



                                                                                                                       Page 9
         The World Bank
         Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project(P507207)



  Task Team Leader(s):                                       Susanna Smets, Feriha Mukuve Mugisha

  Approved By

  Practice Manager/Manager:                                  Soma Ghosh Moulik                                         26-Mar-2025

  Country Director:                                          Kofi Nouve                                                22-Apr-2025




i World Bank Macro Poverty Outlook update (April 2024).
ii UN Human Development Index Report 2021/2022. Table 6.
iii https://data.undp.org/countries-and-territories/BDI (2022)
iv https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/burundi/overview#1
v World Bank Burundi Country Economic Memorandum (2022). Republic of Burundi - Country Economic Memorandum (CEM): the challenge of achieving stable and
shared growth (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
vi World Bank data (2023) (https://data.worldbank.org/country/burundi)
vii GDP in current prices; World Bank data (2023) (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=ZG)
viii Estimated at a total renewable water resources availability of 1,002 m3/inhabitant per year (2021) and with a low water stress indicator of 10 percent, reflecting
that only 10 percent of freshwater resources are withdrawn for usages (AQUASTAT 2021); (https://data.apps.fao.org/aquastat).
ix As per Joint Monitoring Program of UNICEF/WHO, https://washdata.org/ . For drinking water, a basic water supply means access to an improved source (standpost,
protected spring, borehole) within 30 minutes return trip (including waiting time), while a safely managed water service means access at the premises/yard, availability
when needed (> 16 hours a day), and free of contamination. A basic sanitation service means household level access (no sharing) to an improved facility that safely
separates feces from human contact. A safely managed sanitation service requires an improved sanitation facility that is not shared with other households and where
excreta are safely disposed of in situ or treated off site. Basic hygiene means presence of a handwashing facility with water and soap.
x The World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/data/interactive/2024/03/13/gendered-burden-of-water-collection-in-afe-afw-sub-saharan-africa
xi Ngabo F, et al Can routinely collected national data on childhood morbidity and mortality from diarrhea be used to monitor health impact of rotavirus vaccination in
Africa? Examination of pre-vaccine baseline data from Rwanda. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2014 Jan;33 Suppl 1: S89-93.
xii https://washdata.org/data/school#!/dashboard/new
xiii National Nutrition Survey (2024)
xiv Agence d'appui à la Réalisation des Contrats de Partenariat Public-Privé
xv Ministère de l’Hydraulique, de l’Energie et des Mines
xvi Direction Générale de l’Eau Potable et de l’Assainissement
xvii With several amendments to this law and a new law on the electricity sector approved in March 2024.
xviii The law has been submitted to the Council of Ministers for approval
xix Although not strictly its mandate, it sometimes takes the role of operator taking care of operation and maintenance (O&M) for larger rural systems.
xx Autorité de Régulation des secteurs de l'Eau potable et Energie
xxi Through the Jiji and Mulemwba Hydropower project (P133610) and the ASCENT project (P181494)
xxii Financed under the Urban Resilience Emergency project (P177146)
xxiii An increasing block tariff is applied with the first domestic consumer block of 20 m3 charged at BIF 310/m3 (US$ 0.10/ m3). Non-domestic customer categories are
charged higher rates. REGIDESO is self-reporting that the cost of production is over BIF 600 m3.
xxiv A new CPF is under preparation.
xxv World Bank Group Gender Strategy 2024 – 2030: Accelerate Gender Equality to End Poverty on a Livable Planet. World Bank Group; Washington DC.
xxvi Baseline and feasibility studies are launched for four communes (June 2025 administrative boundary) to inform the selection of sites.
xxvii Annex 3 illustrates the communes.
xxviii This is alongside a suite of other measures such as promoting increased carbon stocks in the land use sector, protecting riverbanks, ensuring floodplain protection,
identifying the most severely climate risk–affected areas, and building the country's capacity for climate risk management.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
