Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 05/11/2026 | Report No: ESRSA05007




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 13, 2026                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507957                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       Water Security             2026

                     Operation Name            Chad Water Security and Resilience Project - PASER

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Chad                      Chad                                    WESTERN AND CENTRAL         Water
                                                                                       AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance,      Societe Tchadienne des Eaux (STE)       11-May-2026                 18-Jun-2026
                     Budget, Economy,
                     Planning and
                     International
                     Cooperation



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     05-May-2026               160,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Enhance water security and increase the adaptation of the population to climate change in selected provinces of Chad


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Due to Chad’s climate-driven water variability and reliance on water-based livelihoods, a comprehensive approach (a
                     platform) is vital for tackling water security and climate risks. The Project integrates infrastructures, reforms, and
                     nature-based solutions to boost resilience and sustainable development. It aims to widen access to water services,
                     invest in rainwater harvesting infrastructure, safeguard water resources at the sub-basin level and help reduce drought
                     and flood impacts. Key reforms will improve urban utility (STE) as well as domestic private sector in rural areas’

                    May 13, 2026                                                                                                    Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                     performance and sustainability. The mutually reinforcing investments in Nature Based Solutions and operational
                     capacity, strengthening the basis for ecological and financial sustainability. This comprehensive platform for
                     engagement is a sound basis for building durability and provides opportunities for varied implementation. The Project
                     will be foundational by combining infrastructure, ecosystem restoration, and social resilience. It aims to: (i) expand
                     drinking water and sanitation access in urban and rural areas; (ii) create multi-purpose water infrastructure, and (iii)
                     restore watersheds for sustainable resources. Activities are planned with conflict sensitivity to strengthen social
                     cohesion and prevent violence primarily in provinces affected by refugee influx and other province. The project
                     supports local conflict management related to natural resources and aligns with Chad's National Strategy for Social
                     Cohesion (2024-2029), and the World Bank Group’s FCV Strategy, addressing climate change, land degradation, and
                     supporting communities affected by the Sudan crisis. Given that all provinces in Chad face significant deficits in water
                     services and challenges related to natural resource management, the Project will adopt a targeted and phased approach
                     to geographic prioritization . Based on these criteria, the Project will focus on the Bahr El Gazel, Batha, Borkou, Ennedi
                     East, Ennedi West, Ouaddai, Sila, Tibesti and Wadi Fira as well as the city of N’Djamena.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     According to Country Index - Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative, 2021, Chad is the most vulnerable country in the
                     world to the risks of climate change, with a dry tropical climate in the south and the arid conditions of the Sahara Desert
                     in the north. Climate change contributes to desertification; degradation of forests, soil, and natural habitats; loss of
                     biodiversity; reductions in the level of water tables; and the silting of oases. Between 2011 and 2019, forests,
                     savannahs, and cultivated lands lost 5,000, 22,600, and 46,300 hectares annually, respectively. The Chadian population



Public Disclosure
                     can be characterized as vulnerable given their lack of access to basic services, such as water, education and health.
                     Women and girls in particular bear the cost of economic and social vulnerabilities, driven by social and cultural norms.
                     Gender inequality in Chad is widespread, with women facing limited autonomy and high rates of gender-based violence
                     (GBV). The project will be implemented in the provinces of Bahr El Gazal, Batha, Borkou, Ennedi Est, Ennedi Ouest,
                     Ouaddai, Sila, Wadi Fira, Tibesti and Ndjamena. Except Ndjamena, these areas are sparsely populated and were
                     recently ranked as among the least developed in terms of access to basic services and governance under the Local
                     Development Index (LDI). Livelihoods in this area are mostly focused on agriculture and livestock which are highly
                     dependent on the rainy season. However, the area is also the most vulnerable to climate change. In addition, flood
                     events affected some of these areas from 2022 causing enormous human and material damages. Food insecurity and
                     long term low level conflict especially in the border areas with Libya, Sudan and Niger have also contributed to
                     deepening and entrenching poverty in these regions. Since the outbreak of the conflict in Sudan in April 2023, Chad has
                     received over 600,000 refugees fleeing the violence across its eastern border, further straining the already limited
                     resources of the project area. The target regions have limited access to reliable water sources and electricity (access
                     rates at 20 percent in urban area and less than 1 percent in rural area). Populations in the provinces targeted by the
                     project are some of the most affected by poverty (national extreme poverty reached 36.5 percent in 2024). Also
                     livestock sector concerned by this project is one of those sectors with a high level of child labour and forced labour that
                     is exacerbated by the refugees situation. From a security standpoint, N'Djamena is prone to occasional public
                     demonstrations and disturbances of public order. . The Project will reinforce and strengthen natural reserve of Ouadi-
                     Rime Ouadi-Achime one of the largest protected areas in Africa, covering approximately 77,950 square kilometers. The
                     project area is considered to be a transition zone against desertification and it is also home to several endangered
                     species of animal, such as the oryx, Dama, and Dorcas gazelles. It is a refuge for species critical to the existence of the
                     Sahelo-Saharan zone, such as the great bustard, vultures, and a diverse range of birds and small and medium-sized

                    May 13, 2026                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                     carnivores. Climate change and refugee influx is exacerbating existing conflicts between human resource users and
                     contributing to inter-community violence in several provinces, including those covered by the reserve.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Finance, Budget, Economy, Planning and International Cooperation
                     (MFBEPCI) with the involvement of the Ministry of Water and Energy (MEE) and the Ministry of Environment, Fisheries
                     and Sustainable Development (MEPDD). The MFBEPCI has several WB financed projects under his supervision with
                     moderately satisfactory to satisfactory performance in E&S management but capacity (technical and institutional) at
                     the national, provincial, and local levels is weak in the water and environment management sectors. Therefore, the
                     MFBEPCI will be responsible for establishing a PIU with an environmental specialist, a social specialist, an Occupational
                     Health and Safety –OHS specialist and a GBV specialist. Subnational offices will also be established in target areas where
                     E&S assistants will be hired during implementation. Project implementation will be supported by a dedicated capacity
                     building program, developed on the basis of the Overview Assessment (OA) (May 2026), the OA’s action plan (to be
                     finalized by August 2026) and the corresponding training needs assessment. This capacity building program will
                     translate the ESCP commitments into concrete actions and will be financed through a dedicated budget line under sub-
                     component 1.3. Different modalities, including GEMS and IT based monitoring solutions, will be explored. Sustainability
                     will be fostered through citizen engagement and private sector involvement. The program will target all the ministries
                     and agencies in charge of labor, women, health, infrastructures, road safety, biodiversity protection... as defined in the
                     OA report.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS




Public Disclosure
                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                              Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                       Substantial
                     The environmental risk is Substantial. Potential risks and adverse impacts during the construction phase may include:
                     (i) increased pollution due to the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste (oil, paints, asbestos), dust,
                     noise, vibration, and accidental spills of fuel and lubricants; (ii) traffic congestion, (iii) ecosystems disturbance, and (iv)
                     occupational and community health and safety issues. During the operational phase, the risks and adverse impacts of
                     sanitation infrastructure may include soil and water pollution; community health and safety issues. As works may
                     include excavation there is a possibility of negative impacts on cultural heritage. The above mentioned risks and
                     impacts are readily identifiable and can be avoided, minimized, or mitigated by appropriate assessment and
                     appropriate mitigation measures. The project will not support activities related to dams or intakes that would rely on
                     existing dams. Also, the project will reinforce and strengthen the natural reserve of Ouadi-Rime Ouadi-Achime
                     (OROA) through investments in communities around these areas to reduce pressures on the areas of global
                     importance to biodiversity, therefore, potential impacts on biodiversity in the protected area are to be considered.
                                                                                                                                         Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is Substantial, given the nature of the activities planned and the fragile context in which the
                     project will be implemented. The main social risks relate to potential small-scale economic displacement and
                     restrictions on land use and access to natural resources ; security related risks may hinder stakeholder consultations,
                     the delivery of compensation payments, and contractor access in insecure or hard-to-reach project areas; possible


                    May 13, 2026                                                                                                            Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                     exclusion of marginalized and vulnerable groups -including youth, women and persons with disabilities - from water
                     services and project benefits and social tensions among different water user groups in water-stressed areas where
                     access to resources is already limited;. The risk of child labor is also relevant given the high levels of poverty and the
                     presence of construction activities. In addition, risks are further amplified by the presence of refugees and internally
                     displaced persons (IDPs), a volatile security situation across project areas, limited institutional capacity, and
                     challenges to inclusive stakeholder engagement.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      ESS 1 is relevant. The Appraisal Environmental and Social Commitment Plan prepared and disclosed by the client by
                      May 8, 2026, define the material environmental and social measures and actions that the recipient shall implement
                      throughout the project lifecycle with clear timeframes and institutional responsibilities. Environmental risks and
                      adverse impacts are mainly associated with civil engineering works (construction/rehabilitation and equipment of
                      water supply infrastructure and agrosylvopastoral activities) and the presence of protected areas in the project
                      intervention areas. Other risks and adverse impacts are related to occupational health and safety, pollution, traffic,
                      ecosystem disruption, and community health, cultural heritage and safety during the construction, operation and
                      maintenance activities. Social risks include the potential impact on land tenure and use rights and on the economic
                      activities of the local population. The impacts of civil works will be identified and addressed through site-specific



Public Disclosure
                      ESIAs to be prepared by the client prior to the commencement of project activities. Contractors’ ESMP will be
                      prepared based on the identified risks and mitigation measures in the site specific ESIAs. Public health risks during
                      maintenance and service operations will be addressed as part of design measures and capacity building. The Project
                      Operation Manual will capture details for the E&S assessment and monitoring, community health and safety, “Chance
                      find” procedure and biodiversity management. All technical assistance activities under the project will be managed in
                      accordance with the World Bank ESF and OESRC’s Advisory Note for Technical Assistance.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      ESS 10 is relevant. To ensure the engagement of stakeholders throughout the project cycle, the Borrower have
                      prepared and disclosed a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) by May 8, 2026 in consistence with the requirements of
                      ESS10 and proportional to the nature and scale of the project and associated risks and impacts. The SEP prepared for
                      this Project identifies three types of Stakeholders (i) Project-affected people (urban/rural households; farmers,
                      herders, fishers; community organizations; refugees/returnees/IDPs and host communities); (ii) Other interested
                      parties (relevant ministries and decentralized services, municipalities, traditional leaders, CSOs incl. women/youth
                      groups, private sector/service providers, media, and development partners); and (iii) Vulnerable groups (women and
                      girls, youth, persons with disabilities, poor households, remote communities, and displaced populations).
                      Consultation rounds were conducted in 2025 under the Albia Project (during preparation activities in the OROA
                      reserve and in response to the refugee influx), and between March 17- April 10 2026 through in person meetings in
                      N’Djamena, remote exchanges with provincial stakeholders, and local consultations in selected sites, involving
                      government entities, CNARR/UNHCR, local authorities, traditional leaders, and women’s and youth associations. Key
                      feedback emphasized the need for reliable water and sanitation services, strengthened institutional and technical

                    May 13, 2026                                                                                                          Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                      capacity, and inclusive benefits with community participation and local employment opportunities, particularly for
                      women and youth. Concerns were also expressed regarding land tenure, environmental risks, GBV/SEA H prevention
                      and referral, and the need for a trusted and accessible grievance mechanism with clear procedures and
                      confidentiality. The SEP includes a SEA/SH-sensitive grievance redress mechanism.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The Project will involve direct workers, contracted workers and primary supply workers. A Labor Management
                      Procedure (LMP) that specifies the terms and conditions of employment, management of worker relationships,
                      protecting the workforce, non-discrimination and equal opportunities, workers' organizations, measures against child
                      and forced labor, grievance redress mechanism for labor disputes, occupational safety and health measures for the
                      workers (direct and contract), and provisions to prevent and manage GBV will be prepared prior to engaging project
                      workers. The labor management procedures will include a SEA/SH sensitive grievance mechanism for project workers
                      based on national laws and regulations and the provisions of ESS2 to be operational before engaging project workers.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant. The construction, operation and maintenance of water distribution and other infrastructure are
                      likely to generate dust and noise emissions, hazardous (including asbestos) and non-hazardous waste, wastewater
                      and sludge, and vibrations that may cause significant harm to local populations. The risks and adverse impacts of
                      sanitation infrastructure may include soil and water pollution. Measures to improve the efficiency of water use,
                      reduce water losses by improving the water network and management, and minimize GHG emissions by installing




Public Disclosure
                      energy-efficient pumping equipment will be taken into account in design of the project. The Project may support
                      agriculture activities and include storage and transportation activities that could involve the use of pesticides. The
                      site-specific ESIAs will provide further guidance and guidelines for the pollution prevention of water and soil as well as
                      the treatment and disposal of waste and pest management procedures.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. Project activities may generate significant health and safety concerns, particularly during the
                      construction phase, as some of the project intervention sites are located in densely populated and very active urban
                      and rural areas. Public health risks during maintenance and service operations and the construction of latrines in
                      public settings such as schools and health centers are important and need to be addressed as part of design measures
                      and capacity building. In addition, labor influx and associated SEA/SH risks are relevant risks to consider in the context
                      of the construction of water supply and other infrastructure. Each site-specific ESIA which will be prepared for the
                      planned works will require contractors to secure the work site to safeguard property and protect local communities
                      from any risks associated with construction. A security risk assessment related to project implementation zone and a
                      security management plan will be prepared no later than three months after effective date per the provisions of the
                      ESCP.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant because project activities may involve land acquisition, restrictions on land use, and/or limitations on
                      access to natural resources.. The installation of infrastructure for water supply services may affect structures, assets
                      and economic activities of the local populations. Works in urban areas may lead to temporary or permanent


                    May 13, 2026                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                      disruption to economic activities, though limited in scale. To minimize resettlement, project will prioritize sites that
                      do not require physical displacement of populations. Where resettlement is unavoidable, Resettlement Action Plans
                      (RAPs) will be prepared as needed during implementation and guidance regarding the preparation and timing of the
                      RAPs will be included in the ESCP and POM. The implementation of project activities within the OROA Reserve (land
                      restoration with Nature-Based solutions technics, small scale irrigation investments, protection perimeter area,
                      improvement of pasture areas...) may result in changes to existing patterns of access to, use of, and exploitation of
                      natural resources by local communities. Accordingly, a Process Framework will be prepared to establish a process by
                      which members of potentially affected communities participate in design of project components, determination of
                      measures necessary to achieve the objectives of this ESS, and implementation and monitoring of relevant project
                      activities.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant. The project is not anticipated to adversely affect biodiversity or natural resources. Activities will aim
                      to restore or conserve biodiversity. However, there is always a potential risk that civil works and some livelihood
                      (agriculture) activities may lead to some encroachment on protected areas. To manage these potential risks and
                      adverse impacts on habitats and protected areas , all project activities and sites E&S screening will be carried out in
                      accordance with the requirements of ESS 6. A pre-screening of proposed sites for ecological sensitivity will apply
                      mitigation hierarchy. Adequate measures will be integrated into the ESIAs. Where appropriate, a specific Biodiversity
                      Management Plan will be developed. Thus, in case critical habitats or protected areas are affected during
                      implementation, appropriate instruments will be developed as per the requirements of the Guidance Note on



Public Disclosure
                      Managing the risks of projects involving protected area.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                  Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This ESS is not relevant as there are no communities nor peoples who meet the WB criteria for Indigenous
                      Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities in Chad. Should the presence of
                      indigenous communities be confirmed through further screening during implementation, the necessary assessments,
                      consultations and instruments will be undertaken per the requirements of this standard.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      ESS8 is relevant. Since the project will be financing significant civil works for the construction of water pipeline, water
                      supply system, earth movement and disturbance are to be expected. These types of activities and project areas
                      (urban and rural) pose the possibility of encountering cultural heritage. The risks, and likely adverse impacts on
                      cultural heritage will be addressed in the site-specific ESIAs which will identify known heritage in the areas of project
                      intervention. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will consult with local communities and other stakeholders as
                      part of the ESIA process to identify any possible cultural heritage that could be affected. The procedures for “Chance
                      Find” will be included in the POM, screening process and bidding documents, to be further developed in the site-
                      specific ESIAs as per the provisions of the ESCP. Though the possibility is not considered significant, the PIU will avoid
                      any impact on known cultural heritage sites and, where such avoidance is not possible, will identify and implement
                      measures to address the impact.


                    May 13, 2026                                                                                                          Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                             Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not currently relevant as this is not an FI operation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                  Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                            No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       No
                       The overview assessment of the Borrower's national E&S system conducted by the Bank is not finalized yet. However
                       the Bank have a MOUs with DEELCPN which is the entity in charge of environmental evaluation and a part of the
                       PASER preparation committee, DEELCPN is also a major stakeholder in the OA process. Therefore, this project will
                       finance part of the implementation of the overview assessment action plan once finalized.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                          No
                       The common approach will not be applied.




Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Prepared and disclosed by Appraisal
                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), appraisal version disclosed may, 8 2026
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), disclosed may, 8 2026

                     Post appraisal and during implementation the following instruments will be prepared:

                     - Project Operation Manual (POM) including SEA/SH action plan, chance find procedures
                     - Labor Management Procedure (LMP)
                     - Security Risk Assessment and Security Management Plan (SRA/SMP)
                     - Site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)
                     - Resettlement Plans (including Livelihood Restoration Activities)
                     - Process Framework




                     III. CONTACT POINT




                    May 13, 2026                                                                                                Page 8 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security And Resilience Project - Paser (P507957)



                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Taibou Adamou Maiga                 Title:        Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                Specialist

                     Email:                   tmaiga@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Taibou Adamou Maiga

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Halime Mahamat Hissene

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Paivi Koskinen-Lewis, Nghi Quy Nguyen



Public Disclosure




                    May 13, 2026                                                                                               Page 9 of 9
