Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Jul-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01300




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID               Operation Name
Madagascar                     P507944                    Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience
                                                          Project For Greater Antananarivo
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           12-Jan-2026                26-Mar-2026                  Urban, Resilience and Land
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Economy and    Ministry of Water,
Financing (IPF)                Finance                    Sanitation, and Hygiene ,
                                                          Ministry of
                                                          Decentralization and
                                                          Planning

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To enhance living conditions through strengthened flood resilience and improved solid waste and land management in
Greater Antananarivo

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                    150.00

  Total Financing                                                                                         150.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                            150.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                              0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing



                                                                                                               Page 1



                                                                                                       Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


        International Development Association (IDA)                                                                       150.00
          IDA Credit                                                                                                      150.00




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                        Concept Review Decision
High                                                                The review did authorize the preparation to continue



    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

    1. Despite its many assets, Madagascar remains trapped in a low-growth, high-poverty equilibrium. Notwithstanding
    a steady economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic, many sectors have yet to return to their pre-2020 output
    levels. Almost 70 percent of the population lives below the international poverty line of US$2.15 per capita per day1. The
    number of people living in poverty rose from 15.4 million in 2012 to 21.1 million in 2022, an increase of 50 percent.
    Average real income has declined over the years, with per capita GDP (Gross Domestic Product, in constant 2015 US
    dollars) falling from US$818.3 in 1960 to US$433.8 in 2020.2
    2. Madagascar's rapid urbanization rate of 4.4 percent annually is increasing urban poverty, outpacing the rest of
    Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).3 Currently, 30 percent of the population lives in cities, with half of those in Greater
    Antananarivo.4 Despite urban areas generating 75 percent of GDP, urbanization is failing to yield economic
    transformation and shared prosperity for the country. Urban poverty has worsened, with extreme poverty rising from 22
    percent in 2012 to 55 percent today, due to declining economic opportunities, a poor business environment, and
    insufficient investment in education, healthcare, and infrastructure.5
    3. Intensifying climate-related disasters, including severe rainfall events, cyclones, droughts, and rising
    temperatures are exerting a heavy toll on socio-economic development. Madagascar is one of the most exposed and
    vulnerable countries to climate change and extreme weather events, with 25 percent of the population highly exposed.6

1
  In June 2025, the World Bank updated the international poverty line to US$3 per capita per day; Data for Madagascar has not been
released yet.
2
  World Bank. 2025. Madagascar Economic Update: Bridging the Productivity Divide
3
  Madagascar Urbanization Review. Leveraging Cities as Drivers of Growth and Structural Transformation. World Bank.
4
  Ibid.
5
 World Bank estimates based on 2012 National Survey on Monitoring Millennium Development Goal Indicators (Enquête Nationale
sur le Suivi des indicateurs des Objectifs du Millénaire pour le Développement) and 2022 Periodic Household Survey (Enquête
Périodique sur les Ménages) data cited in World Bank. 2024. Madagascar Poverty Assessment: Navigating Two Decades of High
Poverty and Charting a Course for Change. Washington DC.
6
  https://www.ireus.uni-stuttgart.de/Internationales/WorldRiskIndex/

                                                                                                                               Page 2



                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
             The World Bank
             Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


       Annually, over US$100 million in damages (0.9 percent of 2015 GDP) are caused by floods and cyclones on average.
       Impacts of climate7 shocks tend to be geographically distributed with droughts mostly affecting the South of the country,
       cyclones in the North and the East coast, and floods occurring everywhere but felt most severely in urban areas. Climate
       change scenarios forecast that these weather events will increase in intensity over the coming decades.

       Sectoral and Institutional Context

4. Antananarivo, the capital city and national economic backbone, is expanding at an unprecedented pace. As the primary
   city in Madagascar, it generates over 50 percent of the GDP and houses half of the nation's urban inhabitants. Its
   population of 3.3 million has more than doubled over the past 20 years and is expected to double again by 2035. This
   rapid expansion is driven by natural population increase and migration for jobs, better healthcare, education, and
   services, with an estimated 100,000 people moving each year to the metropolitan area.8
   5. Antananarivo's rapid, largely unplanned expansion has increased its exposure and vulnerability to climate events,
   particularly floods. The city, once confined to hilly terrain, has now spread into the flood plains of the Ikopa River.
   Subdivision and sales of larger rural and peri-urban land parcels have proceeded without land management or planning,
   furthering urban sprawl. Densely populated informal settlements with limited infrastructure have proliferated in the
   southern plain, while unplanned urban sprawl is occurring in the less developed northern plain. As a result, the city
   regularly experiences both fluvial and pluvial flooding, with an estimated 700,000 people living in flood prone areas,9
   with pluvial floods occurring on average twice a year.10 The outdated stormwater drainage system, hindered by poor
   maintenance and waste dumping, exacerbates flooding in low-lying areas. A 100-year river flood event could flood
   24,000 hectares, with an associated physical damage of US$160 million.11 These figures could be significantly higher if
   breaches in the existing aging dike system were to occur. Furthermore, the lack of digital land records would risk the
   destruction of paper land records, delaying access to post disaster relief services and rebuilding of infrastructure.
   6. Antananarivo's rapid expansion is outpacing investments in buildings, infrastructure, and services, which remain
   inadequate.12 About 77 percent of settlements in Antananarivo are informal and lack basic infrastructure and services.13
   Only 64 percent of residents have reliable drinking water, and just 22 percent have basic sanitation services.14,15 High
   multidimensional poverty increases vulnerability, while rapid migration strains infrastructure and raises rental prices.
   This forces households to choose between flood-prone areas near economic centers or the outskirts with limited
   opportunities.




   7
     World Bank. 2016. Southwest Indian Ocean Risk Assessment and Financing (SWIO-RAFI).
   8
     World Bank. 2017. Greater Antananarivo: Urban poverty and Resilience study
   9
     World Bank. 2023. Technical input to the urbanization review, based on data from German Aerospace Center (DLR). 2020.
   11
      BRL. 2020. Antananarivo Sanitation Master Plan, Technical mission for the Integrated Sanitation Program of Antananarivo (PIAA)
   11
      ARTELIA. 2023. Fluvial Flood Risk Management Master Plan, Technical mission for the Integrated Sanitation Program of Antananarivo
   (PIAA)
   12
      Madagascar Urbanization Review. Leveraging Cities as Drivers of Growth and Structural Transformation.
   13
      UN Habitat. 2012. Antananarivo Urban Profile
   14
      World Bank. Diagnosis informing the drinking water supply Master Plan for the Greater Antananarivo. Madagascar National Water
   Project (PAAEP) (P174477).
   15
      World Bank. 2023. Access to basic sanitation services. (accessed April 14, 2025)

                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


 7. Insufficient municipal revenue constrains the government’s ability to finance and sustain public infrastructure
 investment and deliver municipal services. Urban municipality budgets range from US$2 to US$5 per person.16 In 2024,
 government revenue and grants totaled only 13.6 percent of GDP (compared to 18.9 percent on average in SSA
 percent).17 This is driven largely by Madagascar’s low tax-to-GDP ratio of 10.9 percent compared to the average in Africa
 of 14.6 percent and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) of 25.3 percent; property tax
 comprised just 0.57 percent of total taxes versus the average in Africa of 1.5 percent and OECD of 5.3 percent.18 Own
 source revenue collection, via recurrent annual property taxes, could be increased by improving land tenure and
 management. Property taxes contribute up to 35 percent of the municipality’s tax resources, yet approximately 61
 percent of the buildings (183,000 of 300,000) in the capital elude the Property Tax on Building Property (IFPB) due to
 informality and lack of land records. This has also led to lower collection of land fees and taxes on capital gains on
 property, which currently represent 3-5 percent (US$ 3.5-9 million) i of total tax revenues. Registering properties in the
 capital, and related property related fees and taxes, could hence provide substantial own-source revenue for funding
 infrastructure investments.
 8. The Greater Antananarivo area has developed an ambitious urban development vision, outlined in the 2020-2038
 Antananarivo Agglomeration Master Plan. This vision focuses on creating a competitive economy in Antananarivo
 through sustainable and inclusive growth, fostering interconnected, resilient, and healthy urban structures, while
 preserving and enhancing the city's unique identity. From this Master Plan, additional sectoral plans on drainage,
 transport, and solid waste management (SWM), totaling US$3.5 billion, have been developed to harness the city's
 economic potential and increase its climate resilience.19 To begin implementation of this vision, Antananarivo has
 benefited from investments of multiple partners, reaching a total of US$250 million in the last 5 years targeting priority
 infrastructure needs.
 9. Several large-scale projects, such as the World Bank- financed Integrated Urban Development and Resilience
 Project for Greater Antananarivo (PRODUIR 1, P159756) and the Integrated Sanitation Project of Antananarivo (PIAA)
 financed by the French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement, AFD), have contributed to
 addressing some of the issues, by implementing priority actions defined in the Sanitation Master Plan. The first phase of
 PIAA (2017- 2023, €34 million) supported the dredging of 7.5 km in the Canal Andriantany, while another AFD-financed
 project (Access and Sanitation for priority areas of Greater Antananarivo, €71 million) contributed to the rehabilitation
 and construction of around 1,000 infrastructures like pathways, stairways, drainage channels, carriageways, libraries and
 sports fields. Complementing these efforts, PRODUIR 1 (US$140 million) has strived since 2018 to improve the capacity
 of the other main drain of Antananarivo, by dredging 12 km of the C3 canal. Priority embankment rehabilitation works
 have been undertaken along 6 km of the Ikopa river, contributing to the protection of 315,000 people, from fluvial risks.
 The Regional Climate Resilience Program for Eastern and Southern Africa 1 Project (RCRP1, P180171) reinforced flood
 early-warning systems in Antananarivo through the provision of hydrological monitoring equipment and the
 development of a riverine flood risk model.



16
   World Bank, 2020. Towards an urban land reform in Madagascar? Support for Urban Land Policy in Madagascar Advisory Services.
17
   World Bank. 2025. Madagascar Economic Update: Bridging the Productivity Divide.
18
   OECD. 2024. Revenue Statistics in Africa.
19
   These include Antananarivo Agglomeration Master Plan, 2020; Fluvial Flood Risk Management Master Plan, 2023; Antananarivo
Sanitation Master Plans, 2020 and 2023; Antananarivo Transport Management Plan, 2022; Antananarivo SWM plan (in prep.)

                                                                                                                          Page 4



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


 10. However, these projects faced delays and increased costs due to unclear land rights and boundaries. Efforts to
 mobilize land for public infrastructure projects such as drainage channels, waste processing sites, relocation zones,
 access alleyways, and sanitary blocks have faced delays of several months to years due to uncertainties regarding
 ownership, making compensation for expropriation of public infrastructure particularly challenging.20 The government
 faces difficulties to identify landowners with only 25 percent of official land documents in Antananarivo corresponding
 to the actual occupancy. Only 53 percent of the land is titled of which only 25 percent of the parcels are registered in
 the name of the current owners. Existing land certificates and titles also lack necessary rights of way and related property
 easements to facilitate land access for investments and land plans, which are based on outdated property ownership and
 land boundaries. In addition, many buildings and parcels do not meet urban planning regulations due to smaller sizes
 than required or overlaps with buffer zones and high-risk areas. Overall, an estimated one in ten parcels are in dispute
 with nearly one in five households facing tenure insecurity. The land dynamics observed in Antananarivo are beginning
 to manifest in the surrounding peri-urban areas as well. Since the 2000s, the pressure on land has been intensifying in
 the suburbs, driven by an annual population growth rate exceeding 5 percent. Due to the lack of reliable land information,
 informal constructions are increasing, and illegal land acquisitions are becoming sources of conflict. If measures are not
 implemented, it is highly probable that the land situation in Greater Antananarivo will mirror that of the city itself.
 Although municipal land offices are present in some peri-urban communes, their capacities are insufficient to provide
 official land documentation to landholders through systematic registration.
 11. Many priorities identified in the Sanitation Master Plan remain unaddressed.21 Priority drainage interventions
 identified include improving and rehabilitating primary, secondary and tertiary canals in the lower-lying parts of the city
 center, preserving retention spaces to temporarily store water during heavy rainfall events and increasing the outfall
 capacity with pumping stations along the Ikopa River. Along the Ikopa River and its tributaries, rehabilitation and
 reinforcement of embankments in existing weak spots is prioritized with a total investment of US$30 million. Improving
 Solid Waste Management is crucial to reducing flood and public health risks in Greater Antananarivo. The SWM system
 faces inefficiencies in collection, disposal, financing, and governance, with fragmented institutional frameworks causing
 overlapping responsibilities and poor coordination. The city produces over 530,000 tons of waste annually, a volume
 projected to almost double by 2037, yet waste collection and disposal systems remain highly inadequate. Only about 50
 percent of the waste generated in the capital is collected, with urban areas faring better than peri-urban ones.22 Since
 2007, the main disposal site at Andralanitra, operational since 1966 23 has reached maximum capacity. The disposal site
 lacks essential infrastructure such as leachate treatment, landfill gas management, and a weighbridge. Efforts to
 establish a new landfill have stalled due to land and financing issues (for capital investment and operating costs). Without
 alternative disposal sites or transfer stations, transportation inefficiencies further strain municipal waste collection
 services. Informal dumping, especially in waterways, worsens flooding and undermines drainage infrastructure
 investments. Waste transformation and/or resource recovery is only happening at the margins: even though organic

20
   The Northeast Bypass Project, financed by the AFD and the European Investment Bank, required the freeing up of several agricultural
parcels along the path of the new road. Out of 232 parcels impacted by the first segment of the work, almost 75 percent of the owners
could not be compensated because their land status was not up-to-date, generally because of unregistered changes in status
21
    Antananarivo Sanitation Master Plans, 2020 and 2023
22
   Diagnostic report, capitalization studies and support for the implementation of SWM in the Antananarivo metropolitan area,
ARTELIA, January 2024, PRODUIR Project (P159756)
23
    BCEOM-SOGREAH. 2007. Feasibility Study of the Greater Antananarivo Program - Improvement of Solid Waste Collection and
Management"

                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


 waste makes up around 65 percent of the total waste production, it is ultimately disposed of due to poor segregation at
 source. Recycling is small scale and informal, lacking legal recognition. Without a structured financing model, waste
 collection services remain inconsistent, forcing municipalities to operate at a financial deficit, which often results in
 service interruptions and increased illegal dumping. The garbage collection tax (Redevance sur les Ordures Ménagères,
 ROM) and the IFPB are unevenly applied across municipalities, with low collection rates.

 Relationship to CPF

The proposed operation aligns with the 2023-2027 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Madagascar. By reducing
flood risk, improving drainage and SWM, and enhancing urban living conditions with a focus on governance, gender
empowerment and citizen engagement, PRODUIR 1 supports all three CPF high-level outcomes: (i) Improved job
opportunities; (ii) Improved human capital outcomes and (iii) Enhanced resilience against shocks. Specifically, the
operation will contribute to CPF Objectives: #1.3 Improve access to basic infrastructure services; #2.1. Increase access to
quality education and health services, with a focus on hard-to-reach populations including access to improved services
such as water, sanitation, hygiene and electricity; #2.2 Promote Women’s and girls’ empowerment; and #3.2 strengthen
Disaster Risk Management. The proposed operation is well-aligned with the Paris Agreement on climate change24 and the
World Bank Gender Strategy 2024–2030.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To enhance living conditions through strengthened flood resilience and improved solid waste and land management in
 Greater Antananarivo

     Key Results (From PCN)

        -     Number of people with increased resilience to climate risks (of which women (number) and youth (number) –
              CRI.
        -     Number of people with access to improved SWM and drainage in the Greater Antananarivo ((of which women
              (number) and youth (number)
        -     Number of people benefiting from more secure peri-urban and urban land tenure (of which women (number)

 D. Concept Description

 12. The PRODUIR 2 is a second phase of a Series of Projects (SoP) under a long-term programmatic approach to help
 improve integrated urban development and resilience for Greater Antananarivo. It builds on to the first phase of the SOP
 by further strengthening the resilience against floods through next phase of investments under the Integrated Sanitation
 Master Plan and the implementation of the SWM strategy developed under the first phase.
 13. Component 1. Advancing resilient urban services and drainage infrastructure (US$85 million). This component
 aims to reduce flood risks by rehabilitating and constructing dikes along priority river sections and improving stormwater
 drainage systems in vulnerable urban hotspots through dredging canals, retention pounds, and enhancing pumping
 capacity. These actions are aligned with the priorities outlined in the Antananarivo drainage master plan and coordinated

24
     UNFCCC. 2015. “Paris Agreement.” FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1. Paris: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

                                                                                                                             Page 6



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


spatially with AFD operations. Investments will be supported by cost-effective operations and maintenance programs to
maintain hydraulic capacity and clear waste from the canals. Private sector participation will be assessed to support
infrastructure development and O&M.
14. Component 2. Optimizing SWM system (US$35 million). Guided by the metropolitan SWM strategy from PRODUIR
1, this component aims to enhance performance and financial sustainability of the SWM services in the Greater
Antananarivo Area by establishing a metropolitan waste management governance structure to strengthen the
institutional and legal framework, and promote policy development, coordination, and inter-municipal cooperation.
15. Component 3. Strengthening Land Management and Tenure (US$15 million). Building on the experiences gained
from World Bank initiatives with PRODUIR 1 and the Madagascar Agriculture Rural Growth and Land Management Project
(Projet de Croissance Agricole et de Sécurisation Foncière à Madagascar, CASEF, P151469), this component aims to
establish a foundation for comprehensive urban land reform in Madagascar. Additionally, it will facilitate land access and
enhance own-source revenue for municipal infrastructure investments under PRODUIR2. Specifically, the component will
i) facilitate procedural and regulatory reform, ii) conduct systematic land regularization using a participatory planning
approach in select “hotspot” urban and peri-urban areas, iii) establish a digital Land Information System (LIS), and iv)
build institutional capacity in land planning and management, including property taxation.
16. Component 4. Reinforcing metropolitan and municipal governance (US$10 million). This component aims to boost
municipal revenues by digitalizing urban services and implementing a comprehensive resource mobilization strategy. It
will improve coordination and clarify roles across municipal services like water supply, drainage, waste management, and
land-use planning for integrated service delivery. Enhancements will be made to digital data sharing and data
interoperability for better flood forecasting, land administration, and taxation. Component 5. The Project
Implementation Support component (US$5 million) will finance activities related to project management and
coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and communication. This component will finance operating costs of
the project implementation unit, (including safeguards and fiduciary), M&E, communication, staff, procurement of goods,
consultant services, organization of workshops and trainings.
17. Component 6. Contingency Emergency Response Component ($0M). The Government of Madagascar can request
the World Bank to activate this component following a major disaster, allowing quick response using uncommitted funds
or reallocating financing from other project components.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                    Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



                                                                                                                      Page 7



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)



In accordance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), the environmental and social risk
classification (ESRC) of the project is rated as High. Environmental risk is substantial, social risk is high and SEAH risk
substantial. To effectively manage the environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the project, (08) eight
relevant Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) have been identified relevant for the project: ESS1 (Assessment and
Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts); ESS2 (Labor and Working Conditions); ESS3 (Resource
Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management); ESS4 (Community Health and Safety); ESS5 Land Acquisition,
restrictions on land use and involuntary resettlement; ESS6 (Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of
Living Natural Resources); ESS8 (Cultural Heritage); ESS10 (Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure).

Key potential environmental risks and impact include generation of construction and domestic waste, potential for
hazardous waste from SWM activities, noise and dust pollution from civil works, water and soil contamination, increased
traffic and associated community safety disruptions, and resource efficiency concerns related to water and energy
consumption, water pollution, odors and air pollution from decomposing organic matter in dredged materials, health and
occupational risks; temporary traffic disruptions, and soil and groundwater contamination from leachate if not properly
managed.

Key potential social risks and impacts include: informal recycling (waste pickers, which may include highly vulnerable
individuals in extreme poverty), as a result of the potential changes to the existing landfill operations, as well as of those
involved in informal commerce in areas targeted for infrastructure development; (ii) risk of increased tensions and
conflicts, particularly as part of the land tenure certification process; (iii) community health and safety risks, including
those associated with the expected occurrence of labor Influx , which can strain local resources, increase competition for
jobs, cause construction accidents for the surrounding population, increase traffic, and potentially lead to increased levels
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Harassment (SH) as well; (iv) involuntary resettlement risks, including physical
and economic displacement, business interruption resulting from the land acquisition expected to be carried out for the
project’s infrastructure works; (v) risks associated with the downstream social impacts of the new landfill ; (vi) impacts on
cultural heritage.

Mitigation hierarchy should be applied, prioritizing avoidance of E&S impacts where possible, followed by minimization,
mitigation, and as a last resort, compensation or offsetting.

The project should continue to use the current GM to capture any grievance during the preparation of the project. The
The project will be part of the citizen engagement tools of the project.

The following environmental and social (E&S) documents, proportionate to the project’s anticipated risks, are planned to
be prepared by the Borrower, consulted upon, and disclosed prior to or by Appraisal:
• Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP): This document will outline the legally binding E&S commitments of
the Borrower, including specific measures and actions to be undertaken to address identified risks and impacts, as well as
timelines for their implementation.
• Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): The SEP will detail the strategy for engaging with project-affected parties and other
interested stakeholders throughout the project lifecycle, including mechanisms for information disclosure, consultation,
and a robust Grievance Mechanism (GM).
• Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): As specific sites for all interventions are not yet fully defined,
the ESMF will establish a framework for assessing and managing environmental and social risks and impacts of sub-
projects, including procedures for screening, assessment, mitigation, and monitoring. This will include specific guidance



                                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


for managing potential impacts related to drainage infrastructure, solid waste management facilities, and land
regularization activities.
• Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): Given the potential for land acquisition and physical or economic displacement
associated with infrastructure development (e.g., dikes, drainage canals, waste facilities) and land regularization efforts,
the RPF will set out the principles and procedures for addressing involuntary resettlement, including compensation,
livelihood restoration, and grievance redress.
• Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs): The
rehabilitation of dikes and drainage improvements could have significant impacts on the environment and communities.
The ESIA helps identify and evaluate these impacts to define appropriate measures to prevent, mitigate, or compensate
for negative effects, while ensuring the project's sustainability, compliance with ESS under ESF. As part of the ESIA / ESMP,
a Dredging Management Plan should be prepared to address EHS issues that may arise during dredging works, including
the temporary storage and final disposal of dredged material/waste. Standalone GBV action plan to be developed before
civil wors start to address potential for Gender-Based Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. Contractor-ESMP (C-ESMP)
must properly address issues related to community health and safety, such as construction-related hazards (noise, dust,
odors, vibration from machinery and transport, disruption of routes, and safety hazards from construction sites etc.),
increased traffic and road safety concerns, impacts from hazardous materials during transport, storage, handling and
disposal.

Key measures and timelines from these documents will be consolidated and legally committed to in the Environmental
and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Gael Fetraniaina Raserijaona
   Senior Urban Specialist

   Jennifer Beth Lisher
   Senior Land Administration Specialist

   Tahir Akbar
   Senior Urban Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Economy and Finance

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                         Page 9



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Second Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Greater Antananarivo(P507944)


      Ministry of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
      Kléoni MANDIMBISOA
      Directeur Général de l'Assainissement et de l'Hygiène
      mkleoni@yahoo.fr

      Ministry of Decentralization and Planning
      Miangaly RABODOMALALA
      Directeur Général de l'Aménagement du Territoire
      dgat.mdat@gmail.com

     FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

    The World Bank
    1818 H Street, NW
    Washington, D.C. 20433
    Telephone: (202) 473-1000
    Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
    APPROVAL


    Task Team Leader(s):                      Gael Fetraniaina Raserijaona, Jennifer Beth Lisher, Tahir Akbar

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager:                 Catalina Marulanda                      01-Jul-2025

    Country Director:                         Fily Sissoko                            25-Jul-2025




i
    16-40 billion MGA




                                                                                                                       Page 10



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
