Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 01/29/2026 | Report No: ESRSA04739




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 04, 2026                                                                        Page 1 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507658                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      HPRDP                       2026

                     Operation Name            Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Viet Nam                  Viet Nam                                EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC       Transport


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Socialist Republic of     Hai Phong City People's Committee       04-Feb-2026                 27-May-2026
                     Viet Nam

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     28-Jan-2026               394,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objectives (PDO) are to improve Hai Phong City’s connectivity and access to resilient
                     infrastructure services and strengthen capacity for urban resilience management in selected areas of Hai Phong City.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project aims to improve the resilience of Hai Phong city through multisectoral investments in transport
                     connectivity, sanitation improvement, urban inundation reduction, and urban resilience capacity. The project will have
                     four components. Component 1 will support development of a new greenfield 18 km-long section of Ring Road 3. It will
                     act as an extension of the Hanoi-Hai Phong Expressway to create better connections from the north to the Lach Huyen
                     port, Cat Bi airport and Hai Phong’s industrial parks/economic zones, resulting in lower net GHG emissions. Component
                     2 would help improve environmental sanitation in the catchment area of Re River. It would include support for Re River
                     infrastructure upgrades, Re River basin environmental sanitation improvement including construction of a Waste Water


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     Treatment Plant (WWTP) and construction of tertiary sewer network. Component 3 will help reduce flood risk in the
                     historical city center through an urban resilience strategy of delay, store and discharge and includes construction of two
                     new sluice gates at the joints of existing Tam Bac River with Thuong Ly river and Cam River, thus transforming it into a
                     regulation lake for meeting the increasing storm water regulation demand. Component 4 will help enhance capacity.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Hai Phong, located in the Red River Delta, is Vietnam’s third-largest city by economic scale and serves as a strategic hub
                     for industry, commerce, technology, and defense in the Northern Coastal Region. Hai Phong is one of six centrally
                     governed cities and ranks third nationwide in economic scale. Its location along key economic corridors, including
                     National Highway 5A and the Trans-Asia Highway AH14, positions Hai Phong as a vital link for regional trade and
                     Vietnam-China cooperation. Its deep-water port positions Hai Phong as the Northern region’s primary gateway for
                     transport and a center for economic, cultural, and technological advancement. Just 106 km from Hanoi, Hai Phong
                     anchors the Northern Key Economic Zone, promoting regional collaboration and growth. The project spans urban and
                     rapidly developing peri-urban areas, focusing on flood-prone districts in the city center and expanding zones such as
                     Thuy Nguyen. Interventions follow major transport corridors and river basins. The city is home to approximately 4.66
                     million residents, predominantly Kinh, along with 16 ethnic minority groups including the San Diu, Hoa, Tay, Nung, Thai,
                     Dao, and Muong. However, there is no presence of ethnic minority communities, as defined by ESS7, within the project
                     area. Social risks are mainly associated with land acquisition, resettlement, and labor influx.

                     Civil works will occur in both urban areas and peri-urban zones, with primary impacts on agricultural land and



Public Disclosure
                     populations in peri-urban areas. Key interventions include WWTPs, pumping stations, sluice gates, and large-scale
                     transport infrastructure such as Ring Road 3 and bridges crossing the Cam and Ruot Lon rivers. While activities occur in
                     modified urban landscapes, Hai Phong’s extensive 125 km coastline and river systems render it highly susceptible to
                     climate challenges like typhoons, saline intrusion, and coastal erosion. The project does not affect high-biodiversity or
                     protected habitats and does not involve critical tangible or intangible cultural heritage. Environmental risks are largely
                     confined to water quality and disturbances from construction. This initiative offers substantial opportunities to
                     strengthen climate resilience, improve water security, and enhance urban environmental conditions. It incorporates
                     nature-based solutions for flood management, advanced wastewater treatment technologies, and real-time systems for
                     monitoring water and air quality. Institutional capacity-building and strengthening components will help Hai Phong
                     integrate disaster risk management and environmental monitoring, supporting the long-term sustainability of these
                     investments.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Hai Phong City People’s Committee (CPC) is the legitimate authority responsible for making project investment
                     decisions, overall project management, and providing strategic guidance and oversight, reporting directly to the
                     Government. Under CPC’s leadership, the Hai Phong Project Management Unit (PMU) functions as the designated
                     implementing agency, managing the project through all stages. The special mechanisms for Hai Phong is currently being
                     implemented, with the goal of resolving challenges and driving breakthrough growth for the city. National Assembly
                     Resolution 226/2025/QH15, which supersedes Resolution 35, adding many stronger mechanisms. Specifically, regarding
                     land management, a pilot will apply in three more specific categories of land acquisition for special cases (in addition to
                     the Land Law 2024), granting Hai Phong City People’s Council the authority to stipulate streamlined procedures for land
                     acquisition in these cases, thereby facilitating swift mobilization of land resources. Procedurally, the “Green Lane”

                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     applies a streamlined and simplified process for national strategic projects in Hai Phong, including projects funded by
                     development partners. In other priority areas, the City People’s Council and People’s Committee are given greater
                     authority to proactively allocate capital and regulate medium-term resources for strategic infrastructure projects.

                     The PMU brings relevant experience from previous World Bank-funded operations in various sectors of transport, water
                     and sanitation, urban and DRM, and its departments, including those with E&S staff, are knowledgeable of the former
                     WB safeguard policies. However, they have no prior experience in preparing and implementing a project under the ESF.
                     This highlights the need for targeted training and capacity-building to ensure familiarity with ESF principles such as
                     proportionality, adaptive management, and new requirements related to labor and working conditions, community and
                     occupational health and safety (OHS), modified natural habitats, and robust stakeholder engagement. Additionally, the
                     responsibility for LAR implementation and grievance redress primarily falls to commune-level agencies, which currently
                     face staffing shortages and capacity limitations, which may hinder the timely execution of land-related tasks.
                     Consequently, the Bank team is providing ongoing hands-on support for E&S during project preparation and anticipates
                     that this need will continue during implementation. Compared to the previous safeguard frameworks, this project will
                     require additional resources and staff time to ensure effective compliance with ESF requirements. Recent changes in
                     implementation arrangements - resulting from the merger of Hai Duong province into Hai Phong city and the
                     reorganization of implementing agencies (with the former Project Management Unit under the Department of
                     Transport now combined into the Hai Phong Transport Construction Project Management Unit) - make it increasingly
                     important to ensure that the personnel responsible for environmental and social (E&S) risk management, including a
                     dedicated Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) focal point, are present to provide effective oversight and support.




Public Disclosure
                     To address these challenges, proposed mitigation measures include ESF implementation training and comprehensive
                     capacity assessments provided by the WB team during project preparation and rollout. Capacity building efforts will also
                     involve recruiting additional qualified staff, delivering hands-on extended implementation support (HEIS), and
                     mobilizing supervision and monitoring consultants to strengthen overall E&S management. The Construction
                     Supervision team will ensure the mobilization of qualified, frequent ESF and OHS specialists.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                               High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     The Project’s environmental risk rating is Substantial. The project will be implemented in an urban setting and is
                     unlikely to affect any critical habitats or any IUCN-listed Endangered or Critically Endangered species. The proposed
                     infrastructure includes urban roads and bridges, river embankments, storm water drainage, wastewater collection
                     and treatment systems, and sluice gates. The key environmental risks and impacts during the construction include: (i)
                     increased levels of dust, emission, and construction waste; (ii) partial removal of river protection forest (0.76 ha) to
                     accommodate bridge supports, which may lead to localized river erosion and scour; (iii) impact on water quality and
                     aquatic habitats from river embankment and bridge works, including flooding risks due from drainage disruption and
                     related construction activities; (iv) occupational and community health and safety on and off site; (v) land degradation
                     from the extraction of large quantities of construction materials; (vi) Risks from unexploded ordnance; (vii) cracking


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     and subsidence risks to nearby houses and infrastructures during river embankment and bridge piling; (viii) potential
                     water and soil pollution from disposal of a moderate amount of excavated materials from acquired aquaculture
                     ponds; (ix) pollution impacts to surrounding agricultural land due to construction of ring roads and embankment
                     adjacent road. Excavation activities could increase the likelihood of UXO findings. OHS and community risks during
                     construction include heavy machine operations, working over water and at height, traffic safety risks, especially at
                     intersections with the national highway. As the project is located in an urban area, with certain sections of the ring
                     road and embankment works occurring in densely populated zones, which increases community safety risks. The
                     removal of organic soil under component 1 will generate about 49,000 cubic meters of saline organic material that, if
                     mismanaged, could contaminate nearby freshwater or agricultural areas through saline and organic rich runoff. The
                     construction phase risks and impacts are short term, mostly site specific, and moderate to substantial in magnitude.
                     They are reversible and can be effectively mitigated through good construction practices. Operational risks and
                     impacts include accidents and injury due to road traffic in some densely populated areas or near sensitive
                     establishments, as well as environmental impacts related to and sludge management and OHS concerns at
                     wastewater treatment system (WWTS), pollution risk from WWTS malfunction or overload during wet periods . In
                     addition, there are added risks related to waterway traffic safety due to bridge operation, drainage and irrigation
                     disruption, erosion and scouring around embankments and bridge structures, operational flooding risks associated
                     with sluice and pump malfunction, and noise and odor from pumping stations and treatment facilities. Most impacts
                     are expected to be site-specific, long-term, reversible, and can be effectively managed with GIIP-consistent design
                     measures, and targeted operational safeguards.
                                                                                                                                           High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating




Public Disclosure
                     The project has a High social risk, primarily due to significant land acquisition and resettlement (LAR) activities. About
                     197 ha of land will be permanently affected, impacting around 2,460 HHs, of which 280 will need to physically
                     relocate. The project interventions will cause adverse impacts on urban livelihoods and business operations,
                     particularly during sewer and road construction. In addition, risks also encompass challenges in acquiring land for and
                     development of resettlement sites, and disproportionate impacts on encroaching households. The relocation of
                     graves may have implications for cultural practices and may generate sensitivities within affected communities.
                     During construction and operational phases, risks to community health and safety may arise, such as increased traffic
                     accidents and exposure to hazards. Labor influx could cause risks related to sexual exploitation, abuse, and sexual
                     harassment (SEA-SH) and communicable diseases. Disadvantaged households may struggle to access project benefits,
                     like connecting to the new sewage system. There is the possibility of temporary disruptions to livelihoods, businesses,
                     fishing activities in the Re River, and residential establishments, which could affect people's living conditions and
                     income in the short term. Lessons from previous World Bank–financed infrastructure projects underscore the
                     importance of (i) adequate budgeting during project design and (ii) timely government allocation of land acquisition
                     and resettlement (LAR) funds to prevent implementation delays. Past operations also show that delays in preparing
                     and developing resettlement sites (RS) slow down LAR execution, while complex land-use issues can trigger lengthy
                     disputes and complaints—sometimes leaving resettlement matters unresolved through project closure and into
                     Post-Closure Action Plans. Despite accumulated experience, the city government and implementing agencies continue
                     to face institutional constraints in LAR planning and delivery, particularly at the ward level where grievance handling
                     and LAR execution responsibilities are concentrated. These agencies often contend with limited staffing and
                     insufficient technical expertise, and ward People’s Committees (PCs) are frequently tasked with concurrent land
                     clearance for multiple projects that need to also work for the WB’s projects tight timelines—factors that routinely
                     delay Resettlement Plan (RP) implementation. The PMU comprises experienced staff familiar with WB-financed


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     projects and safeguards policies. However, there is currently not much knowledge of the ESF requirements, especially
                     labor conditions, non-discrimination, community health and safety, cultural heritage, and stakeholder engagement.
                     This will require additional hands-on support and continued monitoring to ensure compliance with the different ESSs.
                     Regarding the resettlement arrangements, HPCPC has approved the investment for two multipurpose RSs, including
                     1,410 plots to meet the project’s resettlement needs. The remaining plots are for other city projects. Land acquisition
                     for the RSs is set to start in January 2026 and finish by March 2026, with phased construction beginning in April 2026
                     and completion expected by December 2026 to ensure availability for project resettlement. The identified potential
                     risks and impacts require well-designed mitigation strategies, comprehensive discussions, and meaningful
                     engagement with stakeholders from the beginning of the project. This approach ensures that effective mitigation
                     measures are established and continuously applied throughout project preparation and implementation. Proactive
                     planning and targeted interventions, including the development of the Resettlement Plan (RP)/Livelihood Restoration
                     Program (LRP), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP), are proportionally
                     developed by appraisal and adaptively implemented to address emerging needs and challenges.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      The ESRC is rated at High. The project involves infrastructure construction and upgrades in the relatively dense urban
                      setting, with potential impacts on residential areas, transport corridors, and sensitive receptors. The environmental



Public Disclosure
                      assessment process has confirmed a substantial environmental risk rating, given the type and scale of the proposed
                      works and the magnitude of the associated impacts and risks. . Key construction risks and impacts include dust and
                      emissions, water quality impacts from river embankment and bridge works, and OHS and CHS concerns. Operational
                      risks encompass traffic hazards and odor and sludge management at WWTS, requiring robust mitigation through
                      good design and management measures. A sets of draft E&S documents have been developed for the Project:
                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP);
                      Resettlement Plan (RP); Labor Management Procedures (LMP); Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEP); Environmental
                      and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). The documents are in line with the Bank’s ESF and national regulations. With the
                      exception of the ESIA; the E&S documents have been reviewed, found acceptable to the Bank, and disclosed by the
                      Clients. The draft ESIA has been prepared and will be finalized prior to negotiation. The ESIA includes generic E&S
                      measures for general construction related impacts, as well as specific measures for each component to be
                      implemented during both construction and operation. The ESMPs require UXO surveys and clearance at all necessary
                      sites before construction and set measures to manage E&S risks during detailed design (stakeholder engagement,
                      safe construction practices, resilient infrastructure design, compliance with wastewater treatment standards, and
                      operational readiness). They also include ESCOPs for common construction impacts and risks (dust, emissions, noise,
                      vibration, waste, OHS/CHS), site-specific construction measures, and controls for operation-phase impacts. In
                      addition, excavation management procedures are incorporated to guide excavation activities, mitigate impacts on
                      aquatic life and water quality, protect agriculture, and prevent pollution at temporary disposal sites. To manage
                      traffic safety risks, the ESMPs include traffic management plans for both construction and operation, including
                      coordination with local authorities, temporary signage and routing during construction, and operational measures
                      such as structured waterway schedules, and deployment of traffic controllers during peak hours. CHS and OHS risks


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      will be managed through the project’s E&S management system, with measures set out in the ESCOP and site-specific
                      actions and instruments (e.g., Traffic Management Plan, Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan), which will be
                      incorporated into contractual documents and monitored throughout implementation. The ESIA also assess, and
                      address risks proportionate to control risks and impacts relating to associated facilities during construction and
                      mitigation measures to control these risks and impacts are include in the ESMP. A grievance redress mechanism has
                      been developed to provide guidance on the reception, recording, handling, and reporting of complaints that may
                      arise during project implementation, in accordance with World Bank standards and the complaints law.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      Key interested parties include authorities at all levels such as the Ministries of Finance (MOF), Construction (MOC),
                      Agriculture and Environment (MAE), the Hai Phong City People’s Committee (CPC), and project ward People’s
                      Committees. City-level departments also play an important role are agencies responsible for overseeing agriculture,
                      environment, and sanitation (DAE); planning, design, and construction management (DOC); compensation and
                      resettlement, including land fund development (LFDC); as well as the Water Supply and Drainage Companies.
                      Additionally, interested parties include research institutes and academies, local and international NGOs, development
                      partners operating in the city, mass organizations like the Fatherland Front, the Women’s Union, and the Farmer’s
                      Union, in addition to private sector entities. Key stakeholders are project-affected parties and other interested
                      parties, including all-level city agencies and departments, the PMU, local communities, marginalized groups,
                      resettlement units, and mass organizations. Project-affected parties comprise individuals and households impacted
                      by the loss of land, assets, and/or businesses/livelihoods, vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, street vendors and
                      fishermen. Consultants and contractors engaged in the project are also considered key stakeholders. Throughout the



Public Disclosure
                      EIA assessment and E&S planning stage from September 2025 to January 2026, various consultations and stakeholder
                      engagement activities (16 consultation meetings, 11 focus group discussions) were carried out in the project areas (all
                      13 wards) with the affected people and communities and other key stakeholders. A comprehensive social assessment
                      has been carried out, with particular attention to resettlement-related risks and impacts. This process included
                      meaningful and inclusive consultations were held with all affected wards, communities, and project-affected
                      households (PAHs), ensuring that their feedback was fully integrated into both the project design and the SEP and
                      other E&S instruments. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been developed to ensure transparency and
                      meaningful consultation with affected and interested parties throughout the project cycle. The SEP takes into account
                      inputs for E&S assessment, project design, mitigation plans, monitoring reports, and further evaluation of the project.
                      The SEP, along with other social and environmental instruments, will be publicly disclosed as required by ESS10 and
                      will be updated regularly during project implementation. Following, an assessment of the national grievance process,
                      the project will establish a project-wide Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that will be publicized, building on the
                      operational practices of the national grievance redress system and complemented by project-specific procedures as
                      needed, for example for anonymous complaints. This will help ensure that concerns are effectively captured and
                      addressed by the authorities and the PMU. This mechanism will build on existing systems, such as the one-stop shops
                      at the ward/commune and grassroots levels, as well as the people’s courts, which are effective in resolving issues like
                      land-related issues and construction-related EHS impacts. Feedback and concerns from the consultations were
                      incorporated into the project design and draft versions of the ESCP, ESIA/ESMP, LMP, RP, and SEP. These instruments
                      will be disclosed in-country at the Client's websites prior to project appraisal to inform stakeholders about the project
                      activities, the potential E&S risks and impacts, and mitigation measures. The disclosure through the Bank's operations




                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      systems will be completed prior to project appraisal. The final instruments will be disclosed locally in accessible places
                      to project-affected parties and other interested parties as set out in ESS10.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The project will mobilize a total of 735 workers, comprising 25 direct workers (PMUs’ staff and consultants), 710
                      contracted workers (about 270 skilled and 440 nonskilled construction workers), and primary supply workers (for
                      essential construction materials as defined in ESS2). Community workers are not expected. The mobilization of
                      workers during the average and peak times varies from 530 to 735. Following an evaluation of the national labor
                      laws, it was found that Viet Nam has a comprehensive labor and working conditions framework, including the Labor
                      Law (2019), the Law on Occupational Health and Sanitation (2015), the Social Security Law (2014), and the Civil
                      Servant Law (2019). Viet Nam ratified the Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining Convention, effective July 2020.
                      These laws align with ESS2 principles on fair treatment, non-discrimination, equal opportunities, workers’ rights,
                      prohibition of sexual exploitation, forced labor, child labor, and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks. As a
                      government entity, the PMU follows these laws, with trade unions and grievance mechanisms in place, minimizing
                      ESS2 risks for direct project workers. OHS risks during construction of road, embankment, drainage, and dredging
                      works include dust, noise, water pollution, chemical exposure, road and waterway traffic hazards, and risks of falling
                      into water and drowning. Worker safety risks include accidents from heavy machinery, working at height, water
                      environments, and traffic hazards near busy intersections. OHS mitigation measures and plans have been
                      incorporated into the ESMPs. They align with national laws, World Bank Group EHS Guidelines, and good
                      international industry practice; require contractors to be trained and properly equipped; and provide sufficient
                      budgets for implementation and oversight—recognizing that OHS performance on WB-financed projects suffers



Public Disclosure
                      without strong supervision and enforcement. The Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be applied to all project
                      workers. The LMP will further ensure that the health and safety of workers, especially women, are given adequate
                      attention and equal opportunities. The LMP will also include a grievance mechanism (GM) for workers, that will also
                      be building on the operational practices of the national grievance redress system and complemented by project-
                      specific procedures as needed. The LMP will be revisited and updated as required and as additional labor-related risks
                      or issues unfold. A Workers Code of Conduct, which contains the obligations for all workers involved in the project,
                      will be prepared. Adherence to the Code of Conduct will be a condition of employment for all workers. The LMP, GM
                      and the Code of Conduct will be part of the bidding documents for construction.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      Risks and impacts under ESS3 include pollution, waste generation, and risks to soil, water, and air quality. During
                      construction, embankment, bridge, and sluicegate works may increase turbidity, erosion, and sedimentation,
                      affecting aquatic ecosystems and nearby aquaculture operations. Construction of the ring road and the road adjacent
                      to the embankment may introduce pollutants to agricultural lands and irrigation canals through runoff carrying
                      suspended solids, dust deposition, or fuel and oil spills. These impacts are temporary and reversible but require
                      appropriate controls, including erosion and sediment control (e.g., silt fences, sediment traps, timely surface
                      stabilization), runoff and spill management (bunded refueling areas, spill kits, oil–water separators), and dust/noise
                      suppression in line with the ESMP and applicable standards. Regular site monitoring with corrective actions will be
                      implemented to ensure effectiveness. Construction activities will also generate approximately 400,000 m³ of
                      excavated material, including 96,000 m³ of non saline organic topsoil and 49,000 m³ of saline organic topsoil from
                      aquaculture areas, as well as about 11,000 m³ of demolition waste from destroyed houses with no asbestos


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      containing materials. Although testing confirms these materials are non hazardous, saline or organic soils may still
                      cause soil salinization, nutrient rich runoff, or localized water contamination if mishandled. During operation, the ring
                      road, the road along the embankment, embankment structures, sluice gates, and the Wastewater Treatment Plant
                      (WWTP) may generate ongoing pollution risks, including dust, noise, stormwater runoff with suspended solids, and oil
                      and grease leaks. If the WWTP malfunctions or is overloaded, untreated or inadequately treated effluent could be
                      discharged. Without regular maintenance and monitoring, these impacts could affect nearby communities, water
                      bodies, and agricultural activities. Robust O&M, routine inspections, and prompt corrective actions are therefore
                      required to prevent and mitigate these risks. The ESMP set out ESS3-compliant pollution prevention measures
                      consistent with Vietnamese regulations and Good International Industry Practice (GIIP), including controls for air
                      emissions, dust, noise and vibration, and management of construction and hazardous waste. The contractor method
                      statements and emergency response plans to be approved before works. Contractors will use serviceable equipment,
                      implement dust suppression (e.g., water spraying and speed limits), and ensure all construction or contractor’s camps
                      wastewater is contained and managed in accordance with legal requirements. Construction and hazardous waste will
                      be segregated, securely stored, and managed by licensed units, following reduce–reuse–recycle principles. Excavated
                      materials will be managed at designated locations: non saline topsoil reused for embankment slopes and landscaping,
                      and saline topsoil temporarily stockpiled in aquaculture ponds for drying before transfer to designated treatment
                      sites. The WWTP will incorporate odor control and sludge management systems consistent with national standards,
                      and O&M will follow preventive maintenance, standard operating procedures, operator training, monitoring, and
                      contingency planning to minimize environmental risks across the project lifecycle. Resource efficiency is a core ESS3
                      objective for this project. The detailed design minimizes earthworks and new material demand by optimizing
                      alignments, excavation depths, and structural configurations; reusing suitable onsite soils; and prioritizing locally




Public Disclosure
                      sourced materials to reduce transport impacts. Operations will incorporate energy-efficient drainage, pumping, and
                      wastewater treatment systems. Durable, climate-resilient materials and low-energy design features will enhance
                      lifecycle performance, reduce maintenance needs, and support safe, sustainable access for surrounding communities.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      Construction activities may pose risks to nearby communities due to noise, vibration, dust, vehicle emissions, and
                      increased traffic hazards, particularly at highway intersections and in densely populated areas. Additional community
                      safety concerns include the presence of UXO; the potential for house cracking or subsidence during embankment
                      piling; and risks of soil and water contamination from construction waste and excavated organic saline materials from
                      aquaculture ponds. UXO clearance will be conducted prior as construction, and evidence of clearance shall be
                      mandatory prior to issuance of site access permit. The construction of the Ngo Quyen Bridge may also disrupt
                      waterway navigation, creating safety hazards for vessel operators. During operation, community health and safety
                      risks include traffic accidents along project roads and community exposure to odors or improper sludge handling at
                      the WWTP, which may affect surrounding households and sensitive receptors if not properly managed. Poorly
                      controlled stormwater runoff, oil and grease leaks, or failures in WWTP systems may also pose risks to nearby
                      communities, watercourses, and agricultural areas. Mitigation measures to prevent CHS impacts and risks have been
                      incorporated into the ESMP. These include UXO screening and clearance, strict construction site and traffic
                      management measures, robust waste control procedures, waterway traffic safety protocols, odor and sludge
                      management systems at the WWTP, and SEA/SH prevention and monitoring. Design phase measures have also been
                      included, such as road safety–by design features, excavation support requirements near houses, navigational safety
                      provisions at bridge crossings, and receptor specific avoidance and access maintenance measures, ensuring risks to


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      communities are effectively minimized throughout construction and operation. No expectation of security personnel
                      will be used for the project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      According to the inventory of loss (IOL), the project will permanently require a total of 197 ha of various types of land,
                      including agricultural, residential, garden, aquaculture, and public. IThe project is expected to affect approximately
                      2,460 households through the loss of land and/or assets. Of these, about 280 households will require relocation to
                      two designated multi-purpose resettlement sites. In addition to land and asset impacts, construction activities will
                      temporarily disrupt livelihoods and business operations. Both formal landowners and informal users—including
                      roadside vendors and tenants within the existing right-of-way—will be affected. Two multipurpose resettlement sites
                      totaling 34 hectares will be developed in Bach Dang and Nam Trieu wards, primarily on agricultural land. These sites
                      will provide 1,410 residential plots, with additional plots reserved for other city projects. The layouts follow national
                      standards and will include full basic infrastructure: internal roads, water supply, drainage, wastewater treatment, and
                      public facilities such as kindergartens, clinics, and cultural houses. At the Nam Trieu RS, approximately 13.66 hectares
                      are expected to be acquired, mostly agricultural land (11.31 hectares, accounting for 83%). The remaining area (17%)
                      includes ponds, in-field irrigation canals, land for transport, several small structures, graves, and facilities. The land
                      acquisition will affect about 420 households, who will be loosing agricultural land and suffer from disruption of
                      livelihoods. For the Bach Dang RS, approximately 19.93 hectares will be acquired, primarily agricultural land (16.72
                      hectares, accounting for 84%), with the remaining 16% consisting of water surface, in-field irrigation canals, existing
                      transport land, vacant land, and some facilities. The acquisition will affect about 426 households who will be loosing
                      agricultural land, face disruption of livelihoods, and have to relocate assets on their land. There are 12 households



Public Disclosure
                      whose residential lands are completely affected in Bach Dang RS, making them eligible for a resettlement plot. With
                      the fast-track process, HPCPC has approved the investment decisions, and land acquisition for the resettlement site is
                      set to start in January 2026 and finish by March 2026, with phased construction beginning in April 2026 and
                      completion expected by December 2026. Extensive consultations have been conducted with the households to be
                      physically relocated to discuss the Resettlement Site layout, site readiness, plot sizes and timelines, ensuring their
                      feedback is incorporated into the final design and decision making. With this arrangement Bach Dang has 958 plots
                      with minimum 60 sq.m. to maximum 210 sq.m. and Nam Trieu has 451 plots with minimum 55 sq.m. to maximum
                      134 sq.m. The the RSs are expected to cover the resettlement needs of the entire project. The city’s counterpart
                      financing for RS development (including compensation and civil works) has been budgeted in the city’s approved
                      investment decision and in the MTIP 2026-2030. A detailed implementation plan has been prepared and embedded
                      to the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), outlining the required actions, timeframes, and budget allocation (front-
                      loading activities to be carried out for LAR implementation, and UXO clearance) to ensure the RSs are developed and
                      available in advance of LAR implementation for component’s investment. To address the impacts of LAR, detailed
                      mitigation measures are being developed through an intensive resettlement planning process. Comprehensive
                      resettlement planning is underway, with detailed mitigation measures being developed. Technical alternatives to
                      avoid or minimize land have been taken into consideration and will continued to be explored. Efforts have been made
                      to avoid or minimize potential land acquisition or involuntary resettlement during the design phase by using
                      environmental and social screening tools in conjunction with early stakeholder engagement activities. The
                      Resettlement Plan (RP) has been prepared to ensure that the mitigation measures are adequate to restore the living
                      conditions of those affected and includes a robust Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for resettlement-related
                      complaints. The RP also includes a detailed and well-tailored livelihood restoration program (LRP). Viet Nam’s recent


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      administrative reorganization aims to boost decentralization by giving more power and resources to the commune
                      level. Despite challenges in implementing LAR, the WB Task Team will collaborate closely with the PMU and relevant
                      authorities to ensure the resettlement planning process is timely and adequately funded, as outlined in the MTIP
                      2026-2030 for the city. The E&S team will coordinate with the Task Team and clients to develop a tailored
                      implementation plan included in the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), which will be updated through the Annual
                      Work Plan. This plan will ensure all activities are completed before project closure and will feature comprehensive
                      consultations during project design and resettlement execution, as well as capacity-building initiatives for the PMU
                      and key stakeholders to ensure efficient performance and oversight of LAR activities aligned with procurement and
                      construction progress. Law No. 90/2025/QH15—amending the Laws on Bidding, Investment via PPP, Public
                      Investment, and Construction—was enacted on June 25, 2025. Together with National Assembly Resolution
                      254/2025/QH15 (adopted December 11, 2025; effective January 1, 2026), these measures introduce streamlined
                      mechanisms to accelerate project implementation and resolve LAR bottlenecks. The new framework allows
                      implementing agencies to begin land preparation, compensation, and resettlement early in the planning phase;
                      enables faster procedures, including direct contractor selection; synchronizes steps from land acquisition through
                      compensation; and reduces the land-use levy by 70% when converting agricultural land to residential use, facilitating
                      faster clearance for public investment projects. This is relevant for ESS5 risk management because earlier,
                      better-sequenced LAR reduces the risk of civil works advancing without verified handover, while the levy reduction
                      and procedural streamlining help ensure budgets and processes are in place for replacement-cost compensation,
                      timely resettlement site readiness, and livelihoods support consistent with ESS5 before construction proceeds.
                      Lessons from ongoing projects show that mixing national and Bank requirements can cause confusion and delays. To
                      avoid this, the project will proactively sequence Resettlement Plan (RP) preparation and implementation under




Public Disclosure
                      national regulations, while ensuring alignment with ESS5. This includes expediting the Detailed Measurement Survey
                      (DMS) and Replacement Cost Survey (RCS), and updating the assessment of livelihood restoration needs, so that the
                      RP is fully consistent with ESS5 prior to Board approval. These steps will enable more precise LAR costing and
                      budgeting, ensuring that compensation estimates in the RP are accurate prior to any displacement. Stakeholder
                      engagement with project affected households (PAHs) will be inclusive and thoroughly documented, with transparent
                      communication regarding entitlements, timelines, and grievance redress mechanisms, as required by ESS5 before
                      Board approval. The project will also provide early technical assistance and training to the PMU and local authorities.
                      Independent monitoring consultants will be mobilized early on to oversee compliance and recommend corrective
                      actions during implementation. At a minimum, preliminary DMS and RCS data will be available before Board approval
                      to inform the RP and cost estimates. Finally, the project will commit to finalizing the RP with independent quality
                      control and public disclosure, reflecting best practices and lessons learned from Hai Phong and other WB projects.
                      Additionally, the RP outlines procedures for managing escrow accounts in situations where PAHs are unreachable
                      and/or cases of dispute, including contingency measures. It also covers the provision of rental assistance to PAHs
                      awaiting plot allocation, legal support for issues related to documentation, inheritance, and land eligibility, as well as
                      an affordability review and potential subsidies for resettlement plots.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      Project activities will take place near and on rivers, including construction of bridges, sluice gates, embankments,
                      WWTS, and road works. These activities may affect water quality and aquatic life by increasing turbidity and altering
                      natural conditions. The ESIA confirm that the project is not expected to impact on critical habitats or high biodiversity


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      areas. However, poor handling or disposal of construction and excavated material could degrade aquatic habitats,
                      Discharges from the WWTS can harm downstream aquatic ecosystems if effluent standards are not met, causing
                      nutrient enrichment and oxygen depletion, introducing pathogens and toxic substances, degrading habitats, and
                      reducing biodiversity and fisheries. Regular compliance monitoring and contingency measures are essential to
                      manage these risks. Construction of the Ruot Lon Bridge will require converting 0.76 ha of planted protection forest
                      dominated by Sonneratia caseolaris, although actual vegetation clearance is limited to only 0.20–0.30 ha within the
                      five pier footprints—representing about 0.5% of the 165 ha mangrove belt. The forest is planted and provides wave
                      attenuation and bank stabilization, and the affected area supports only common aquatic and waterbird species with
                      no conservation significant taxa. Vegetation removal will result in localized loss of mangroves and temporary
                      reductions in ecological functions at the pier locations, while surrounding forest areas will continue to maintain
                      overall protective capacity. Minor, reversible disturbances—such as soil compaction, rootzone effects, or limited
                      siltation—may also occur along the immediate forest edge but will not result in additional forest loss. During
                      operation, only around 500 m² beneath fixed bridge structures will remain unavailable for regrowth, with the rest
                      expected to regenerate naturally or be replanted, restoring stabilization functions within 5–7 years. Overall, due to
                      the permanent conversion of a small portion of planted protection forest, the impact is assessed as Moderate. The
                      ESMP includes a comprehensive set of measures to effectively minimize ESS6-related impacts. In river works will be
                      managed using enclosed cofferdams, sequenced drilling and excavation, localized turbidity controls (e.g., silt
                      curtains), and peripheral drainage, silt fences, and sediment traps, together with treatment of all dewatering effluent
                      and strict spill prevention measures. For the Ruot Lon planted protection forest, vegetation removal will be confined
                      to the approved footprint, with clear boundaries, controlled machinery movement, runoff and covered soil stockpile
                      containment, restoration of any accidental disturbance, and compensatory planting. For sluicegate structures, the




Public Disclosure
                      ESMP requires hydraulic design verification, defined gate operation envelopes with gradual opening/closing, and
                      preventive maintenance to avoid blockage or uncontrolled discharge that could affect downstream habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The social assessment determined that there are no ethnic minorities present in the area affected by the project. As a
                      result, this standard does not apply.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                      Relevant

                      The project is not expected to have material impacts on tangible or intangible cultural heritage. However, the Project
                      will require the relocation of about 348 graves, which will be planned and implemented with sensitivity and care. This
                      activity will be managed under ESS5 through the development of a Grave Relocation Plan embedded in the
                      resettlement plan. A total of six pagodas and one church are located in very close proximity (0–10 m) to construction
                      areas, resulting in potential temporary impacts such as restricted access, dust, noise, and vibration. Of the six
                      pagodas, three (03/06) under Component 2 will also be affected by minor acquisition of garden land, while the
                      remaining facilities experience proximityrelated impacts only. The ESMP includes measures to manage these risks,
                      including dust, noise, and waste control; maintained and signposted access routes, especially during festivals or peak
                      visitation; and reinstatement and cleaning of affected surroundings. Chance find procedures, set out in the ESMP and
                      incorporated into all Contractor ESMPs (CESMPs), ensure that any unexpected discovery of cultural heritage is




                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      immediately reported, work is safely halted, and the find is managed and protected in accordance with applicable
                      regulations and the approved protocol.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant, as the project does not involve any financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        In Part
                       Following a review of the Borrower’s Environmental and Social (E&S) Framework, the project has concluded that it will
                       in part apply it for land acquisition and resettlement, labor and working conditions, and grievance redress as part of
                       ESS2 and ESS 10, supplemented by gap-filling measures to ensure full alignment with the objectives of the World Bank
                       Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs). Viet Nam’s legal and institutional framework offer a robust foundation for
                       managing land acquisition, compensation, labor regulation, and grievance resolution. Nonetheless, certain gaps
                       remain in meeting ESS requirements. Regarding ESS5 (Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary



Public Disclosure
                       Resettlement), national legislation alignes on compensation and resettlement principles but does not fully address the
                       eligibility of informal land users, livelihood restoration, or ongoing monitoring. To bridge these gaps, the project has
                       developed and will implement a Resettlement Plan (RP) with appropriate livelihood restoration measures that clearly
                       outline the Borrower’s obligations to fill these requirements. For ESS2 (Labor and Working Conditions), while national
                       labor laws broadly align with ESS2, a project-specific Labor Management Procedures (LMP) has been developed to
                       ensure that occupational health and safety (OHS) risks and risks related to sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual
                       harassment (SEA/SH) are addressed adequately. Moreover, while the worker grievance redress mechanism will build
                       on the existing national grievance redress mechanism system, the LMP will include a section on grievance redress to
                       ensure it is sensitive to SEA/SH and addresses anonymous complaints. For ESS10 (Stakeholder Engagement and
                       Information Disclosure), an assessment of the national grievance process was undertaken and the project will
                       establish a project-wide Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that will be publicized, building on the operational
                       practices of the national grievance redress system and complemented by project-specific procedures as needed, for
                       example for anonymous complaints. This will help ensure that concerns are effectively captured and addressed by the
                       authorities and the PMU.

                       Gap-filling measures will be detailed in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), including preparation
                       and implementation of the RP consistent with ESS5, development of the LMP and a worker grievance mechanism in
                       accordance with ESS2, strengthening of the grievance redress mechanism and implementation of the SEP to satisfy
                       ESS10 requirements. The PMU under the Hai Phong City People’s Committee (CPC) will oversee E&S risk management,
                       supported by dedicated social and environmental specialists. While the PMU has experience with national systems, its
                       capacity to meet ESS requirements is currently limited. To address this, the project will provide targeted capacity-



                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                       building activities, such as training on ESS compliance, SEA/SH risk management, and monitoring. The PMU has
                       engaged and will continue to engage qualified consultants to prepare and implement E&S instruments and ensure E&S
                       requirements are integrated into bidding documents and contracts. The World Bank has delivered hands-on
                       preparation support and will continue to provide implementation support and monitor compliance through regular
                       supervision missions. The World Bank has reviewed all E&S instruments prior to appraisal, conducted a gap analysis,
                       and assessed institutional capacity through field visits and stakeholder consultations. Compliance will be tracked
                       throughout implementation via regular supervision missions and reporting, aiming to effectively manage the risks and
                       achieve full alignment with ESS objectives.



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       No

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     To assess and manage E&S risks, the Borrower will prepare and publicly disclose the draft and final E&S instruments in a
                     form and language appropriate to stakeholders to meaningfully reflect feedback into project design and for appropriate
                     adaptive mitigation measures.




Public Disclosure
                     Prior to Appraisal:
                     (1) Draft ESIA/ESMP
                     (2) Draft SEP disclosed
                     (3) Draft LMP disclosed
                     (4) Draft Resettlement Plan (RP)
                     (5) Appraisal version ESCP disclosed

                     Prior to Negotiations/Board (agreement and disclosure):
                     (1) Final ESIA/ESMP updated to reflect appraisal feedback and re‑disclosed, as needed
                     (2) SEP, RP and LMP updated and re‑disclosed, as needed
                     (3) ESCP finalized and agreed at Negotiations; disclosable prior to Board

                     One month after the Effectiveness Date, the Borrower is expected to complete adoption:
                     (1) Final Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     (2) Final Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                     (3) Final Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     (4) Final Resettlement Plan (RP)
                     (5) Final Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

                     Areas to be addressed in the ESCP:



                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     (1) Commitment to prepare and implement the E&S instruments as per the requirements of relevant ESSs, i.e., ESCP,
                     ESIA, LMP, RP, and SEP
                     (2) Adequate allocation of resources for implementation of the ESF, ESSs and E&S instruments
                     (3) Commitment to prepare and implement a capacity building plan with strong focus on implementation of ESF, ESSs
                     and E&S instruments
                     (4) Update RP, based on DMS and RCS results
                     (5) Maintain and publicize the Project Grievance Redress Mechanism
                     (6) Use in part of Borrower Framework

                     The timeframe for these instruments during implementation will be specified in the ESCP, and are expected to be prior
                     to the project effectiveness date. The timeframe for RP will have to ensure that RP's actions are implemented prior to
                     the commencement of physical works. A robust monitoring system will be required to set up and included in the
                     project ESMP.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Pratap Tvgssshrk                     Title:          Senior Transport Specialist




Public Disclosure
                      Email:                  tpratap@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Cuong Duc Dang                       Job Title:      Sr Urban Spec.

                      Email:                  Cdang@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Phyrum Kov                           Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  pkov@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                            Pratap Tvgssshrk, Cuong Duc Dang, Phyrum Kov


                    Feb 04, 2026                                                                                                 Page 15 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     V. APPROVAL

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Thuy Cam Duong

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Thong Trung Le




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 04, 2026                                                        Page 16 of 16
