Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Program Information Document (PID)

                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Jan-2026 | Report No: PIDDA00198




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                             Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience
Zambia                         P507962
                                                             Programmatic DPF
Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                         Macroeconomics, Trade         Development Policy
                               12-Mar-2026
AFRICA                                                       and Investment                Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Ministry of Finance and
Republic of Zambia
                               National Planning

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The program development objective is to: (i) enhance fiscal management and resilience, (ii) promote private-sector
investment and resilience in enabling sectors, and (iii) strengthen disaster risk management and climate resilience.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                                 25.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                25.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                          25.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                                                                                                                       Page 1



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)



Explanation
The team confirms that overall, the reform program supported by this DPF-Cat DDO series remains on track, and the
macroeconomic policy framework is adequate as we advance the operation. The program development objectives
remain the same as those approved by the IDA Board ofGovernors on December 18, 2024, as part of the first
operation (P507116) in the series, which is to support government reforms to: (i) enhance fiscal management and
resilience, (ii) promote private-sector investment and resilience in enabling sectors, and (iii) strengthen disaster risk
management and climate resilience. The analysis of risks remains unchanged from DPF1, but macroeconomic was
downgraded soon to subtantial given strong economic performance.




B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
  1. Zambia’s economy is recovering after the severe drought of 2024; however, high vulnerability to climate
     shocks and large structural constraints remain a challenge to the country’s growth and job prospects.
     Improved rainfall in 2025 has supported a rebound in agriculture, with maize output reaching 3.5 million metric
     tons during the last agricultural season, compared to 1.5 million MT harvested in 2023/2024. Mining
     production, driven by copper, grew by 8.8 percent in 2024 and 13.4 percent in the first half of 2025 (2025H1)
     year-on-year (y/y), supported by higher international prices and investment in brownfield expansion. Real GDP
     growth is projected at 5.8 percent in 2025, up from 3.8 percent in 2024 and closer to the 5.7 percent average
     achieved between 2021 and 2023. Inflation fell from over 16 percent by the end of 2024 to 10.9 percent in
     November 2025, while the kwacha has started to appreciate after years of sharp weakening. While the
     immediate drought-induced humanitarian pressures have eased, Zambia’s high vulnerability to climate shocks
     remains. Despite these positive trends, poverty remains widespread, with an estimated 59 percent of the
     population still below the national poverty line, and food insecurity lingers in areas hardest hit by last year’s
     drought. Variable rainfall continues to threaten agricultural output, water security, and hydropower
     generation, which still supplies over 80 percent of electricity. Moreover, Zambia's private sector is hampered
     by major infrastructure deficits in energy, water, and transport, as well as regulatory hurdles and favoritism
     toward state-owned enterprises, which collectively undermine competitiveness and limit job creation.
  2. The country has nearly completed its debt restructuring and restored fiscal policy credibility, but pressures
     remain elevated. Agreements with bilateral creditors, bondholders, and major private lenders have resolved
     over 94 percent of eligible external debt under the Common Framework (CF) for debt treatments. Fiscal
     consolidation has led to primary budget surpluses. However, the debt-to-GDP ratio remains just below 100
     percent, and debt service will average around 24.5 percent of domestic revenues over the medium term.
     Domestic arrears to suppliers continue accumulating, estimated at over 7.9 percent of GDP in 2025H1, while
     public investment remains subdued. Financing needs are met largely through concessional support, as Zambia
     remains locked out of international markets. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) pose significant fiscal risks due
     to weak financial performance, high dependence on government support, and inconsistent enforcement of
     financial reporting.
  3. The proposed Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation of US$25 million provides targeted support to
     Zambia’s ongoing reform program. It is the second of two operations in a programmatic series, the previous
     one with US$100 million comprising two instruments, US$25 million as a regular DPF and US$75 million as a

                                                                                                                        Page 2



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


      Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat-DDO). The operation is part of the World Bank’s continuous
      multi-sectoral support to help Zambia emerge from the debt crisis and shift to a more resilient, sustainable,
      and inclusive economic growth path.

Relationship to CPF
  4. The proposed operation supports the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Zambia for FY25-29, WB’s
     Corporate Priorities, and complements recent projects and analytics. The DPF series contributes to achieving
     Zambia’s CPF objective 1 (business environment for private investment), objective 2 (connectivity and increase
     energy access), objective 4 (targeting and effectiveness of social protection), objective 5 (natural resources
     management and climate-smart agriculture), and objective 6 (climate risk management systems and
     financing). The operation aligns with the institution's corporate priorities, including gender, climate, and
     enabling private capital. Moreover, it advances the reforms supported through the first operation and
     complements recent and ongoing projects, technical assistance, and analytics. Knowledge from implementing
     the last DPF operation has been included, while conducting close consultations with stakeholders and
     development partners

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

The program development objective is to: (i) enhance fiscal management and resilience, (ii) promote private-sector
investment and resilience in enabling sectors, and (iii) strengthen disaster risk management and climate resilience.

Key Results
  5. On completion of the DPF series, the reform outcomes will lay the foundations for increased resilience to
     economic and climate shocks, while supporting private sector-led growth and providing financing for its
     immediate and potential liquidity needs in the aftermath of disasters. It will increase fiscal transparency and
     improve management of mineral revenues, helping Zambia achieve a more sustainable debt-to-GDP ratio,
     enhance budget credibility, reduce fiscal risks, and promote fair competition with the private sector. It
     strengthens Zambia’s DRM systems and boosts household and private-sector resilience to climate shocks,
     filling critical gaps in the current institutional framework. It also aligns with the international commitment to
     help the country restore macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability under the G20 Common Framework.

D. Project Description

  6. The proposed Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation of US$25 million provides targeted support to
     Zambia’s ongoing reform program. It is the second of two operations in a programmatic series, the previous
     one with US$100 million comprising two instruments, US$25 million as a regular DPF and US$75 million as a
     Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat-DDO). The operation is part of the World Bank’s ongoing, multi-
     sectoral support to help Zambia emerge from its debt crisis and transition to a more resilient, sustainable, and
     inclusive economic growth path. The program is structured around three pillars and nine prior actions, fully
     anchored in the GRZ priorities. Pillar A enhances fiscal management and resilience, focusing on resource
     revenue management, creating buffers against economic and climate shocks, and improving sovereign credit
     and investment conditions, including SOEs. Pillar B promotes private-sector investment and resilience in
     enabling sectors, bolstering private-sector participation in the transport, energy, and water sectors through
     PPPs, and reducing the financial impacts of future natural disasters in these sectors. Pillar C strengthens


                                                                                                                      Page 3



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


      disaster risk management and climate resilience, improving the GRZ's coordination and effectiveness in
      disaster management, enhancing household resilience to climate shocks, and making water resource
      management more climate-resilient. This operation aligns with Zambia’s Eighth National Development Plan
      for 2022–2026 (8NDP) and IDA21’s policy commitments on private investment, jobs, crisis preparedness,
      climate action, and gender. Finally, it also supports Zambia in its efforts to obtain debt restructuring under the
      CF.
  7. The operation prioritizes the World Bank’s value-added and is part of its ongoing partnership with the GRZ,
     assisting the country in responding to various shocks since 2020. The World Bank’s cumulative net positive
     flows have totaled US$1.8 billion since 2022. From July 2023 onward, all new World Bank funding to Zambia
     has been issued as grants, providing additional support amid debt distress and multiple external shocks. This
     operation primarily aims to enhance climate resilience and improve energy and water connectivity, in line with
     the World Bank Group’s new Country Partnership Framework for Zambia and regional priorities in Eastern and
     Southern Africa. It selectively advances fiscal resilience and management reforms, complementing parallel
     budget support interventions from the African Development Bank and the European Union, as well as public
     financial management (PFM) reforms under the IMF program.
  8. Furthermore, it is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement. First, the economic reform program
     supported by the proposed DPF is consistent with Zambia’s climate commitments, including the revised (2021)
     NDC, the National Health Adaptation Plan (2017), and the climate objectives articulated in the 8NDP. Second,
     no prior actions for the proposed DPF will cause a significant increase in GHG emissions to impede Zambia’s
     planned low-carbon development path. Third, all prior actions for the proposed DPF program are aligned with
     the mitigation, adaptation, and resilience goals of the Paris Agreement.
  9. The World Bank and IMF continue to work closely to coordinate policy dialogue, analysis, and technical
     assistance. The joint work between the institutions includes supporting the authorities in complying with
     concessional borrowing under the Sustainable Development Financing Policy and the IMF Debt Limit Policy.
     The IMF approved a 38-month program under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) in the amount of SDR 978.2
     million (US$1.3 billion) on August 31, 2022. The IMF completed its fifth program review in August 2025,
     approving an augmentation of the ECF, which has cumulatively disbursed $1.55 billion since its approval. In
     September 2025, the Fund’s Executive Board approved the Zambian authorities’ request for a three-month
     extension of the ECF until January 30, 2026, to allow sufficient time to complete the sixth review and lay the
     groundwork for future program engagement. Meanwhile, Zambia is requesting a 12-month extension of its
     US$1.7 billion ECF, with hopes for additional funding by year-end.

E. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
  10. MOFNP will coordinate monitoring and evaluation for this proposed DPF. The institutional and policy reforms
      supported by the programmatic DPF series fall under the purview of MOFNP, Office of the Vice President
      (Disaster Management and Mitigation Unit), the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Community Development
      and Social Services, the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Green Economy and Environment, and the Ministry
      of Water Development and Sanitation. MOFNP chairs the multi-sector coordinating committee established to
      oversee the preparation of budget support operations. This committee will remain in place during the
      program's implementation and monitor the result indicators and evaluation activities. The administration of
      the grant will also be the responsibility of MOFNP. The use of the Zambian Kwacha equivalent of the grant
      proceeds to support budgetary expenditures will be subject to audit. The audit will be undertaken by the Office


                                                                                                                        Page 4



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)


         of the Auditor General, the supreme audit institution. IDA will have access to the audit reports and the
         management letter from the audit.

 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
 Poverty and Social Impacts
    11. This operation aims to reduce poverty vulnerability in Zambia, worsened by climate and economic shocks
        that harm food security, services, human capital, and assets. Pillars A and C enhance the government's crisis
        response by improving preparedness (PA#7) and safeguarding pro-poor spending (PA#1, PA#2, PA#3, P#4).
        The SCT program more than doubled its caseload since 2020 and reached 1.3 million households in 2023,
        crucial for distributing emergency cash assistance during the 2024 drought. This expansion provides lifesaving
        support and helps prevent the adoption of harmful coping strategies that result in long-term human capital
        losses.1 Updating the DRM and National Social Protection Policies will bolster future shock responses,
        supported by a resilient fiscal system under Pillar A. Granting regulatory autonomy and implementing cost-
        reflective tariffs in the water sector (PA#9), will support the sustainability and expansion of water and
        sanitation services, with limited adverse effects on low-income urban households and minimal impact in rural
        areas. Moreover, Pillar B is critical to unlocking private sector growth, which is expected to deliver medium-
        term positive poverty and social impacts through higher earnings and employment opportunities.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
    12. The prior actions do not present significant environmental risks; however, mitigation measures might be
        needed. Reforms in Pillar A aim to increase the economic and fiscal resilience of public finances. They reduce
        budget volatility and mitigate environmental risks posed by shocks, given the GRZ's increased fiscal capacity
        to respond. Moreover, reforms in Pillar C will reduce Zambia's climate vulnerabilities by strengthening the
        DRM framework, supporting households in the event of climate shocks, and enhancing water supply. Negative
        impacts may arise during the construction, operation, and decommissioning of water projects, including
        vegetation loss, ecosystem disruption, land degradation, and occupational health risks (PA#9). However,
        measures under the Water Supply and Sanitation Amendment Bill will help mitigate potential negative
        environmental impacts.
 G. Risks and Mitigation

    13. The overall residual risk rating for the operation is substantial. The operation faces a substantial overall
        residual risk, with major challenges stemming from macroeconomic, governance, technical design, and
        institutional capacity risks. Political and governance risks remain significant due to uncertainty surrounding
        the 2026 elections, weak public-sector management, and limited institutional capacity, with persistent issues
        of transparency and corruption, especially in public procurement and the judiciary. Macroeconomic risks are
        also considerable, as Zambia is vulnerable to external shocks, including commodity price fluctuations and
        adverse climatic events, despite recent fiscal and monetary improvements. A potential gap between IMF
        Extended Credit Facility arrangements adds to the risks. The technical complexity of reforms, including fiscal
        rule design, carbon trading, and disaster risk management systems, adds to the risk, though ongoing technical
        assistance provides partial mitigation. Institutional capacity risks are substantial but are being addressed
        through focused policy actions and continued support from the World Bank and other partners.



1 Supported under the Second Additional Financing for Scaling-up Shock Responsive Social Protection Project (P181711)



                                                                                                                                Page 5



                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Second Zambia Climate and Economic Resilience Programmatic DPF (P507962)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Albert Pijuan Sala
 Senior Economist

 Ignacio Urrutia
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Jorge Tudela Pye
 Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Zambia

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Finance and National Planning

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Albert Pijuan Sala, Ignacio Urrutia, Jorge Tudela Pye

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Abha Prasad                              03-Jan-2026

Country Director:                       Achim Fock                               20-Jan-2026




                                                                                                        Page 6



                                                                                                Official Use Only
