Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDPC00158




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                            Philippines Sustainable
Philippines                    EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC         P507504
                                                                                            Agriculture Transformation
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               24-Mar-2025                   05-Jun-2025                    Agriculture and Food
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Department of Finance          Department of Agriculture

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To promote climate resilient agrifood systems for increased productivity, enhanced diversification and efficient use of
public resources in the Philippines.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                    20,000.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                       12,897.50
    Total Program Cost                                                                                       12,895.00
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                               2.50
  Total Financing                                                                                            12,895.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                    2.50

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                            1,000.00



                                                                                                                    Page 1
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


      World Bank Lending                                                                                        1,000.00
    Total Government Contribution                                                                              11,895.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

 1.       Over the past decade, the Philippines has been among the most dynamic economies in the East Asia and
 Pacific (EAP) region, with structural reforms leading to significant economic growth. The country’s growth rate
 increased by an average of 6.4 percent per year between 2010 and 2019, driven mainly by services and industry,
 surpassing that of its peers in the region, including Vietnam (6.3 percent), Indonesia and Malaysia (5.4 percent), and
 Thailand (3.6 percent). However, in 2020, the Philippines’ economy saw its worst contraction, shrinking by 9.5 percent
 due to the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The country has since rebounded strongly, growing by 5.7
 percent in 2021, 7.6 percent in 2022 and 5.6 percent in 2023. This momentum has been sustained, with the economy
 growing 6.0 percent in the first half of 2024, placing it among the top growth performers in the region.

 2.       While poverty levels have been dropping over the years, they remain relatively high with about 17.5 million
 Filipinos currently living below the poverty line. Poverty levels fell from 23.3 percent in 2015 to 16.6 percent in 2018.
 However, this trend was reversed by the effects of the pandemic, with poverty levels rising to 23.7 percent in 2021.
 The poverty rate has since declined, and by 2023 stood at 15.5 percent (Philippines Statistics Authority [PSA]). Despite
 the country’s overall robust growth trajectory, income disparities persist. The top one percent of earners have
 benefitted the most, capturing 17 percent of the national income, while only 14 percent of national income is obtained
 by the lowest-earning 50 percent of the population (ADB). The urban-rural divide in the country is significant: while the
 incidence of poverty in the urban areas stands at 10.2 percent, it is more than double in rural areas at 21.9 percent.
 Farmers remain the poorest segment of society: poverty rate among farmers is estimated at 30 percent.1

 3.      Food and nutrition security are of significant concern, especially among the poor and vulnerable households.
 According to the Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) State of Food and Nutrition Security World Report, 2023,
 between 2021–2023, about 51 million Filipinos (44.7 percent of the population) experienced moderate or severe
 food insecurity, the highest in Southeast Asia, with 29 percent of children affected by stunted growth. Persistent
 levels of poverty and high food prices have contributed to the existing threats to food and nutrition security (FNS).
 Food inflation has, however, eased from 8.2 percent in August 2023, to 6.7 percent in July, and down to 4.2 percent in
 August 2024. The inflation rate of rice, however, remains high at 14.7 percent in August 2024, although down from 20.9
 percent during the previous month.2


1 Philippines Institute of Development Studies
2 Philippine Statistics Report- Summary Inflation Report Consumer Price Index (2018=100): August 2024



                                                                                                                       Page 2
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)



 4.       The Philippines is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change from rising temperatures, stronger
 typhoons, sea-level rise and more extreme rainfall patterns. The country is affected by some 20-25 typhoons each
 year, of which at least five are usually highly destructive. Climate shocks, whether in the form of extreme weather
 events or slow-onset trends, will hamper economic activities, damage infrastructure, and induce deep social
 disruptions. Current annual losses from typhoons are estimated to reach 1.2 percent of the Gross Domestic Product
 (GDP), which could be significantly higher in case of Super Typhoons. Climate change will impose substantial economic
 and human costs, affecting the poorest households the most. It is estimated that total economic damage from climate
 change in the Philippines could reach up to 7.6 percent of GDP by 2030 and 13.6 percent of GDP by 2040. All sectors
 will be affected, with capital-intensive sectors likely to suffer most from extreme events, and agriculture suffering the
 most from slow-onset trends. (World Bank Philippine Country Climate and Development Report 2022).

 5.       The Government of the Philippines is committed to building on the current growth momentum and
 supporting a program of economic and social transformation to steer the country on an inclusive high-growth path.
 Towards this, it is implementing the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2023-2028 with the view to reinvigorating job
 creation and accelerating poverty reduction. The Plan aims, inter alia, to maintain robust macroeconomic fundamentals
 to foster consumer and investor confidence, fast-track investments in effective resilience-building strategies, promote
 technology and innovation, particularly digital technology, and enhance partnerships with the private sector. It
 emphasizes the transformation of production sectors, including agriculture, industry and services, to generate more
 quality jobs and competitive products.

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program


6.       The agricultural sector in the Philippines has high potential for contributing to the country’s socio-economic
development agenda. The country’s fertile land, strategic location, large workforce (of the 48.7 million employed
Filipinos, some 22 percent are in agriculture), including the relatively young population (64 percent aged between 15 and
64)3 and high adult literacy rate (97 percent in 2020) offer strong opportunities for transforming the sector. While rice
cultivation dominates the sector (PhilRice 2022) there is good potential for growing high-value crops such as bananas,
pineapples, mangoes, coconuts, and coffee, as well as developing the livestock and aquaculture subsectors, and benefiting
from the associated economic opportunity for value addition. Women are heavily involved in the value-added segment of
these value chains. Sustainable growth in these subsectors could enhance import substitution (in 2022-2023, growth rate
of imports of fruits and vegetables exceeded growth rate of exports by roughly 7.4%, PSA), while boosting exports;
enhancing national food and nutrition security; generating employment in rural areas given the labor-intensive nature of
these subsectors, particularly horticulture; creating economic opportunities for women in agricultural production and
especially value-added processing activities.

7.       However, the country has not been able to develop its full agricultural potential. Agricultural policy has focused
on food security, mainly through pursuit of self-sufficiency in rice production and stable supplies of other key staples.
While the level of agricultural support provided by the government is high in international terms (2.3 percent of GDP in
2020-22), its growth impact is blunted by the production- and trade-distorting effects of the policy instruments used:
market price support (mainly through tariff protection) and budgetary support (direct payments to producers for various
inputs and investments). This has led to sluggish agricultural growth which is input-driven rather than productivity-based.
Overall, agricultural production in the Philippines increased by only 0.5 percent p.a. on average from 2011-20, well below

3 Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA 2022-322)



                                                                                                                       Page 3
       The World Bank
       Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


the world average of nearly 2 percent p.a. A large part of this was due to low total factor productivity growth (+0.4 percent
p.a.) against global average of 1.12 percent p.a. Support for the rice sector vividly illustrates the issue: although half of
Department of Agriculture’s (DA) annual budget is allocated for rice production, rice yields have risen only marginally,
from an average of 3.4 ton/ha in 2003 to 4.7 ton/ha in 2023. This is well below average yields in Vietnam (6.1 ton/ha)4
and well below the 8 to 10ton/ha demonstrated to be achievable. Policy distortions and productivity constraints (small,
fragmented land holdings; low levels of mechanization; limited access to modern technologies; ineffective extension
system, among others) have also contributed to the slow pace of diversification to higher-value products. The share of
high-value crops in terms of overall value added has risen only slightly, from 19.6 to 22.9 percent in 2000 and 2019
respectively (World Bank 2020). Low returns from agriculture have also discouraged private sector investments which are
critical for growth and job creation in the sector.

8.      Ineffective and inefficient sector policies and spending decisions have hindered agricultural growth. The pace
of sector growth has not materialized despite the substantial budget allocated to the agriculture sector: PhP 213.08 billion
(US$3.8 billion equiv.) in 2024 or 3.5 percent of the national budget. Public spending is heavily skewed towards input
subsidies; over the period 2015-19, subsidies consumed 32 percent of the DA’s commodity “Banner” Program budgets,
with another 28 percent going to subsidize machinery. Only 15 percent was allocated for technology transfer (extension)
and 15 percent for other interventions, of which research and development was 8.6 percent and market development 0.8
percent. The over-sized allocation of budget resources to subsidies severely limits public investments in growth and job
creating agricultural programs, i.e., adaptive agricultural research and technology development, effective advisory
services and skills development, rural institutions, and productive rural infrastructure. Scaling up support in these critical
areas is key to harnessing the potential of Philippines’ agriculture towards broad-based rural job creation and income
growth.

9.       The Rice Tariffication Law (RTL) which took effect in March 2019 and the Rice Competitiveness Enhancement
Fund (RCEF) ushered in a number of consequential changes for the rice sector. These included the replacement of
Quantitative Restrictions (QR) on rice imports with tariffs (fulfilling an obligation under the World Trade Organization
WTO) and the repeal of National Food Authority (NFA)’s rice price stabilization function and regulatory controls over the
marketing and distribution of rice. Equally importantly, it established the RCEF, sourced from tariff revenues, to assist rice
farmers in improving their productivity and competitiveness. The RCEF was provided a fund of at least 10 billion pesos per
year, to be allocated to machinery (50 percent), certified inbred seeds (30 percent), credit (10 percent) and training (10
percent). Going forward, the RCEF can play two critical roles in enabling agri-food system transformation to achieve the
societal goal of availability and affordability of rice for all Filipinos through: (i) increased competitiveness; (ii) enhanced
resiliency to disasters and climate risks; and (iii) ensured access to safe and nutritious rice. to support their transition to
more modern, resource-efficient agriculture that exploits the potential of digital technologies.

10.     A complex, fragmented institutional and regulatory system has further stymied sector development and
disincentivized private sector investments in the country’s agrifood systems. The organizational structure of the DA (8
bureaus, 10 attached agencies, 7 attached corporations, 15 regional field offices, many of which are commodity specific)
has resulted in competing strategic objectives and limited budget allocations that are spread thinly across the various
department entities. This has often resulted in duplicative efforts as well as prevented the achievement of impactful
programs on the ground. Inefficiency issues also stem from the lack of integration between data and information systems
including those within the DA where multiple data sources exist. Significant opportunities exist for enhancing efficiency
through digitalization given there are some 204 government and privately operated digital platforms serving the
agriculture sectors encompassing mapping, farmer registries, decision tools, learning and development, farm

4 https://ipad.fas.usda.gov/countrysummary/Default.aspx?id=VM&crop=Rice



                                                                                                                          Page 4
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


management, advisory and support services, and general information. On the regulatory side, logistical costs for shipping
companies, traders, and importers arise from informal fees collected by Local Government Units (LGUs), complex road
and ship transport licensing requirements, and historical caps on foreign equity investment (OECD 2020). Coordination
failures, such as the non-standardization of produce, also hinder investment in large-scale processing and pricing based
on quality. As a result, farmers and traders have little incentive to improve product quality due to the small premium paid
for higher-quality products, especially in traditional markets. Such coordination failures account for the high numbers of
market players and multiple layers in trading, processing, and distribution which translates into lower profit margins.

11.     The sector suffers high levels of farm and post-harvest losses that have significant implications for food and
nutrition security and incomes. Agrifood losses average 30 – 60 percent when all losses from poor harvesting, handling,
storage and transportation are taken into account. Post-harvest losses range from 9 to 37 percent for cereals, 27 to 42
percent for fruits and vegetables and 15 percent for rice.5 Such post-harvest losses are more than twice those recorded
in Vietnam for rice at 6.2 percent and for vegetables at 8.7 percent.6 Annual rice losses amount to some 343,000 mt,
which is equivalent to around 10 percent of the volume of imported rice (3. 8 million MT in 2023; 3.6 million MT in 2023).
Some 151,000 mt of corn is lost each year. There is a need for intensifying the use of location-specific technologies and
higher investment for agri-processing facilities. For example, country has low milling efficiency of 50-57 percent compared
to 62.5 percent in Vietnam. The country also lacks adequate cold storage facilities, which is critical for diversification into
high value crops. Currently there is only 37 cu m/1000 residents of cold storage, or total capacity of 400,000 tons,
compared with cold storage capacity of 116 cu m/1000 residents in Vietnam.

12.    Climate change poses considerable challenges to the development of the Philippines’ agriculture. From 2010 to
2019, damage from natural extreme events and disasters in the Philippines amounted to PhP463 billion (US$8 billion), of
which 62.7 percent or PhP290 billion (US$5 billion) was in the agriculture sector (PSA 2020). Estimates suggest that climate
change will decrease agricultural productivity in the Philippines by 9 to 21 percent by 2050 (Gevaña et al. 2019).

13.      While the agrifood sector is vulnerable to climate-induced weather shocks, it is also a potential contributor to
the effects of climate change. In the Philippines, agriculture and land use change (which is largely driven by extensive
agriculture) contributes around 24 percent of the country’s total GHG emissions. Of this, the rice sector contributes some
63 percent (mainly from methane emissions, poor water management, misuse of fertilizers and burning of straw) followed
by the livestock sector.7 While the Philippines Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) proposed ambitious goals, the
greening opportunities in agriculture may not materialize due to the highly decentralized institutional framework, a lack
of capacity and financing, limited access to technology or skills, and restrictive business regulations.

14.      Recognizing the critical role of the agriculture sector in the country’s socio-economic development agenda, the
Government of the Philippines has emphasized the modernization of sector in the PDP-2023-2028. The PDP strategy for
agrifood sectoral transformation consists of four pillars: (i) changes in farm scales; (ii) modernization; (iii) industrialization;
and (iv) professionalization. More specifically, the National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization and Industrialization
Plan (NAFMIP) 2021-2030 calls for transformative shifts to: (i) diversifying incomes and employment of smallholder
farmers and fisherfolk; (ii) defining the role of urban and peri-urban areas in agriculture growth; (iii) optimizing synergistic
impacts using a spatial framework to geographically focussed investments; and (iv) matching the supply and demand for
food. The strategy calls for transformative changes in the foci and organization of primary agricultural production, as well

5 Mopera, Lotis E. (2016) Journal of Developments in Sustainable Agriculture: Food Loss in the Food Value Chain: The Philippine Agriculture

Scenario. Last accessed September 23, 2024, Food loss and waste Study.pdf
6 Hien, et.al. (2016) Conference Paper: Overview of Rice Post Harvest Situation in Vietnam. Last accessed September 23, 2024, PHarvest_Vietnam-

FText-_PHHienNTNghi.pdf
7 Climate Resilient Agriculture in the Philippines. Last accessed September 23, 2024 CRA_Profile_Philippines.pdf (worldbank.org)



                                                                                                                                              Page 5
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


as in the linkages between primary production and rest of the food systems, spurred by increased investment in agrifood
clusters, logistics, processing, and trade.

15.      The government has sought to reinvigorate the agriculture sector transformation through the PARA SA
MASAGANANG BAGONG PILIPINAS 2024-2027 (MBP)8 - DA’s 4-year plan. The program focuses on the specific actions
needed to achieve the food and nutritional needs of the country, and to develop the sectors as profitable industries for
farmers, fisherfolk and all stakeholders involved in the value chains. The program spans the duration of the current
administration and has been designed to address the policy, regulatory, service and investment gaps that have constrained
the agrifood sectoral modernization efforts.


 Relationship to CAS/CPF

16.       The proposed program is closely aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2025-2028)9 and three
High Level Objectives (HLOs), i.e., inclusive growth and jobs (HLO1); resilient communities (HLO3) and Environmental
Sustainability (HLO4). The CPF’s HLO I: Inclusive Growth and Jobs is expected to be achieved through three interrelated
objectives: (i) increased firm’s and farm’s productivity; (ii) competitive business environment for more and better jobs;
and (iii) inclusive finance. The proposed Program would support these interrelated objectives by improving productivity
through innovations and digital transformation, thereby increasing income opportunities in agriculture. It would foster
partnerships in productive investments between farmer groups and commercial buyers along agricultural supply chains,
thereby contributing to improved market access and higher income opportunities for all stakeholders across the value
chain. The proposed Program would also contribute to HLO 3: Resilient Communities by supporting farmers in adopting
climate-smart agriculture (CSA) technologies as well as HLO 4: Environmental Sustainability, specifically on the objective
to transition to a green, climate-resilient economy by promoting CSA to reduce GHG emissions in the agriculture sector.

17.     The proposed Program is aligned with the World Bank Group’s Global Challenge Program (GCP) on Food and
Nutrition Security, Action Area 3: Supporting more productive, low-emissions and climate-resilient food systems as it will
contribute to improving longer-term agriculture productivity and inclusive income earning opportunities; increasing
adoption of high-impact climate-resilience technologies; and enhancing capacity to reduce GHG emissions, while
increasing climate resilience of food systems. It is also aligned with the WBG’s Gender Strategy (2024–2030), which aims
to accelerate gender equality to end poverty on a livable planet. The proposed Program is aligned with Strategic Objective
2: Expand and enable economic opportunities through providing more and better jobs to women along the agriculture
value chains, while increasing their representation in decision-making processes in the Program-supported value chains.

18.      The project aligns with the Paris Agreement (2015) and the Philippine’s Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs) (2021). The focus on raising productivity, strengthening diversification and reducing post-harvest losses,
particularly of rice based cropping systems, would generate substantial climate co-benefits. The proposed DLIs and actions
encompass a range of climate smart technologies, coupled with improved policy, regulatory, planning and input use
efficiencies. The PforR therefore presents a significant opportunity for advancing the country’s NDC goals, given that the
agriculture sector contributes some 17.7 percent of the country’s total GHG emissions, of which rice-based farming
account for some 67.9 percent. Result Area 1 (RA1) focuses specifically on rice-based farming systems and includes a
range of actions to reduce GHG emissions and strengthen climate resilience e.g., though use of improved, drought tolerant

8 Para sa Masaganang Bagong Pilipinas or for a prosperous new Philippines
9 Philippine Country Partnership Framework 2025-2028 is awaiting approval. Details on the CPF pending for approval are based on the presentation

during stakeholders consultation. Last accessed September 24, 2024,
https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/bd52c8474d079136bfcd55bd56af4556-0070012024/original/WBG-PH-CPF-25-28-Consultations.pdf

                                                                                                                                           Page 6
       The World Bank
       Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


rice varieties, mechanization enabling improved water use efficiency, direct seeding, without continuous flooding,
reduced burning of rice straw and diversification. RA 2 would reduce agrifood wastage and spoilage through more efficient
post-harvest facilities and equipment, economies of scale and climate smart on-farm agrifood handling and storage. RA3
would inter alia mainstream more spatial planning for commodity and infrastructural support to improve alignment with
climate vulnerability and suitability assessments, based on instruments developed under PRDP.


  Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

19.      The proposed PforR instrument for Bank engagement is a natural progression to elevate Bank support to the
next level of sectoral transformation in the Philippines by strengthening the government’s own programs and
institutional delivery mechanisms. Unlocking agricultural growth, job creation and income generation potential requires
broader policy and institutional enhancements, which go beyond the narrow scope of the Investment Project Financing
IPFs. The country has an ambitious sectoral program (MBP) with significant budget resources which provides opportunities
to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of its program implementation support towards actions that will contribute
to the transition towards a more competitive and resilient agri-food systems transformation, and create the enabling
environment for leveraging private sector investments for driving modernization and industrialization. While the IPF
approach through past and ongoing operations has been effective in supporting specific investments related to rural
infrastructure and enterprise development as well as enhancing institutional capacity of the DA, including the robustness
of the fiduciary, safeguard and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems, the transformation of agriculture sector as
envisioned in the MBP requires a concerted and comprehensive programmatic approach.

 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

  Program Development Objective(s)

20.      To promote modern and resource-efficient agrifood systems for increased productivity, diversification and
resilience in the Philippines.


 PDO Level Results Indicators

21.    Preliminary PDO indicators are as follows:
       • Increased productivity
       • Crop diversification index
       • Increased number of farmers adopting climate-smart technologies and practices
       •   Increased volume of agricultural production sold at farm gate (proxy for incomes)
       •   Increased volume of selected perishable commodities benefiting from improved post-harvest storage and
           handling

 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary




                                                                                                                     Page 7
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


22.     The proposed Program for Results (PforR) boundary would be nested within the DA’s plan: PARA SA
MASAGANANG BAGONG PILIPINAS 2024-2027 (MBP). Proposed Result Areas (RAs) would be limited to those where
implementation is within the institutional mandate of the DA, with some exclusions, and would be national in scope. The
MBP has been designed to address those pervasive transformative issues that have constrained sectoral modernization,
and where verifiable results could be achieved within the span of the current DA administration. The strategic objectives
of the MBP are to; (a) accelerate agrifood sector growth and competitiveness as envisaged in both the PDP 2023-2028,
and the DA’s longer-term plan for sectoral transformation- the NAFMIP 2021-2030, (b) strengthen food security and
agrifood system climate resilience, and (c) increase farm income, expand rural growth and provide livelihood
opportunities. These strategic interventions are consistent with the goals for sectoral modernization as defined in the
Republic Act No. 8435 or Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act (AFMA) of 1997.

23.      The proposed PforR, would support nine of the ten key Result Areas (RAs) of the MBP (Annex 1). These RAs
collectively aim to deliver outcomes that seek to: (i) achieve higher incomes for farmers through enhanced productivity
growth and more efficient and resilient natural resource and input use; (ii) attract a new generation of agri-entrepreneurs
to invest into post-harvest agri-logistic activities; (iii) Increase and diversify agri-food production across value chains. The
PforR would specifically address issues related to the efficiency and effectiveness of DA budget utilization, and enhance
institutional delivery mechanisms for the sector transformation.

24.      Several areas would be excluded from support through the proposed PforR. The MBP’s RA No. 9 which aims to
increase access to credit and insurance is being addressed under a separate operation, while the MBP RA of achieving
“better delineation through devolution of roles and strengthened functions, nationally and sub-nationally” has multi-
institutional dimensions beyond the “DA-Institutional” boundary of the PforR. The functions of the National Irrigation
Authority (NIA) are not included in the Program as this agency has been transferred to the Office of the President
(Executive Order No. 69 series 2024)10 and the DA no longer has control over NIA’s budget and investment decisions. The
development of fish ports is also excluded as World Bank support for this is planned through potential subsequent
operations. Investments being supported through ongoing World Bank loans and grants, including the Philippine Rural
Development Project (PRDP), PRDP-Scale Up and FishCore, will also be excluded.

25.      Program Result Areas. The PforR would particularly focus on the country’s rice-based cropping systems. This
encompasses 1.9 million ha and some 3 million farmers, which represent 37 percent of the country’s farmers and
fisherfolk. The RAs were selected considering that they: (i) have the potential to make a strong contribution to achieving
the government’s own targets; (ii) are linked to specific measurable results; and (iii) allow for quick results and
disbursements in early years of the PforR. The RAs are expected to contribute to the Government's efforts of establishing
a competitive, resilient and sustainable agricultural sector that would enhance food and nutrition security in all its
dimensions of accessibility, availability, utilization and stability, create jobs, especially for women and the youth, and
improve household incomes.

26.      Result Area 1: Enhanced production and incomes in diversified rice-based farming systems. The goal of this RA
is to increase the productivity and efficiency of rice-based farming systems through the implementation of a suite of
affordable, proven, and innovative technologies for improved rice productivity and diversification to high value crops for
enhanced resilience and incomes. Possible activities under RA 1 could include, inter alia: (i) providing agro-ecologically
suitable seed of high-yielding rice varieties to farmers and scaling up direct seeding programs; (ii) strengthening
collaboration between the Rice Program and other DA programs and agencies to promote diversification of rice-based


10 Entitled “Reorganizing the NIA and transferring its attachment from the DA to the Office of the President.”



                                                                                                                           Page 8
       The World Bank
       Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


farms; (iii) replacing the paper voucher system for providing input support to farmers with an Intervention Monitoring
Card or eVoucher system to improve program efficiency; (iv) increasing training in climate-smart technologies, including
innovative, digital technologies and environmentally-friendly agricultural practices (use of relevant digital applications for
integrated weather and market information, delivery of early warning and response actions, etc.); and (v) increasing farm
mechanization.

27.      Result Area 2: Enhanced efficiency and resilience of food value chains. The goal of the RA is to support post-
harvest infrastructure and management and improve logistics that would reduce food losses, translating to increase in
marketable products among producers and agro-processors and improved incomes. Possible activities under RA 2 could
include, inter alia: (i) providing Farmer Cooperative and Associations (FCAs) with access to modern National Food Authority
(NFA) drying, milling and storage facilities with “buy-back” arrangements; (ii) institutional enhancements to enhance
efficiency and availability of warehouse and storage facilities; (iii) joint planning between relevant agencies in the design,
installation and operation of modernized post-harvest grain facilities and equipment; (iv) establishing and operationalizing
a digital platform linking producers with agri-businesses and markets; (v) increasing training in on-farm, post-harvest loss
reduction; and (vi) promoting Farm Clustering to achieve economies of scale and efficiency together with support for
farmer cooperatives and associations.

28.      Result Area 3: Enhanced institutional and policy environment. The goal is to accelerate agricultural growth
through increased productivity and all-round competitiveness through improvements in policy environment and
institutional arrangements that better align budget allocations with the stated program priorities, streamlining functioning
of the DA and the LGU and promote investments into competitiveness (rather than simple expansion) of rice production.
Possible activities under RA 3 could include, inter alia: (i) strengthening DA planning and budgeting processes towards
more programmatic and results-based; (ii) institutionalizing a harmonized DA-LGU planning and support process; (iii)
strengthening the RCEF through secure long-term funding and operational modalities that incentivize private sector
investments; and (iv) enhancing institutional arrangements to attract capital and enterprise into digital transition and
other agricultural innovations.

  Table 1. The Government program: Para Sa Masaganang Bagong Pilipinas (MBP) and PforR Boundary Comparison


                        Government program                        Program supported by the         Reasons for non-alignment
                                                                  PforR (PforR Program)


 Objective              Masaganang Bagong Pilipinas (MBP)         To promote modern and
                        4-year Plan                               resource-efficient agrifood
                        Achieve food security for the Filipino    systems for increased
                        people through boosting agricultural      productivity, diversification
                        production to ensure accessibility to     resilience in the Philippines.
                        affordable and nutritious food
                        Develop Agri-Fishery sector as a
                        profitable industry for farmers,
                        fisherfolk, and all stakeholders in the
                        value chain
 Duration               2024 to 2027 – MBP                        2025 to 2029
                        2021 to 2030 – NAFMIP



                                                                                                                         Page 9
       The World Bank
       Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


 Geographic             Nationwide                              Nationwide
 coverage


 Results areas         1.  Expand and improve available         •   All MBP actions except item
                           agri-fishery areas for increased         no. 9, which were translated
                           production                               into 3 RAs
                       2. Mechanize and modernize agri-
                           fishery production systems           •   RA 1: Enhanced Production
                       3. Develop and improve postharvest           (Government programs 1, 2,
                           systems and infrastructure               8, 10)
                       4. Develop efficient logistics systems
                           for input and production output      •   RA 2: Enhanced Resilience of
                       5. Improve and expand local and              value chains (Government
                           international market access              program 3, 4, 5,8)
                       6. Proper balancing of both the
                           developmental; and regular roles     •   RA 3: Improved enabling
                           of the DA                                environment (Government
                       7. Science and information driven
                                                                    program 6, 7)
                           decision making through
                           digitalization
                       8. Strong partnership with farmers,       Exclusions:
                           fisherfolk, private sector and       • outside the institutional
                           other stakeholders                        mandate of DA
                       9. Available and accessible financing    • ongoing / future World Bank
                           that encourage investment and             financed projects
                           Minimize Risks                       • support for credit and
                       10. Research for Development and              insurance
                           Extension (R4D) to optimize          • development of fish ports
                           sector potential                           NIA related activities
 Overall Financing      USD 12.89 billion                        USD 1 Billion




29.      The specific Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) and Program Action Plans (PAP) will be determined based
on the technical assessments of the activities included in the PforR boundary. It is expected that there will be about 12-
15 DLIs across the three RAs. The guiding principles for choosing the DLIs are: (i) have the potential to make a strong
contribution to achieving the PforR objectives which are related to the government’s own targets; (ii) generate measurable
results and have direct control of the DA; (iii) address critical institutional development issues; and (iv) ensure continuous
disbursements through the combination of fast institutional actions and medium--term results on the ground.
Modifications to these DLIs including their values and verification protocols will be determined based on the Technical
Assessment.




                                                                                                                        Page 10
   The World Bank
   Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


                        Table 2. Initial Disbursement Linked results areas under consideration


                                                Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI)
  Result Area                                                                                                        Scalability
                                                       (Initial tentative list)
                    •    DLI 1: Strengthening of the rice seed distribution program. DLI1.1: Administrative Order       Yes
RA1: Enhanced            issued directing the National Rice Program (NRP) and PhilRice to limit the number of
production and           improved varieties being promoted in RCEF supported provinces based on Regional/
incomes in               spatial suitability. DLI 1.2: No. of RCEF supported Provinces where seed distribution is
diversified rice-        in compliance with the Administrative Order.
based farming       •    DLI 2: Increased incomes and resilience of rice-based farming through diversification.:        Yes
systems                  Administrative Order issued directing the Rice Program to collaborate with other DA
                         programs and agencies, to promote and support diversification of rice -based farms
                         where appropriate. DLI 2.2: Hectares of diversified, rice-based farms in RCEF supported
                         Provinces                                                                                      Yes
                    •    DLI 3: Number of hectares of rice-based farm area (% of wet and dry season) receiving
                         support through the RCEF that is being cultivated with high yielding rice varieties
                    •    DLI 4: Replace the paper voucher system for fertilizer support with the more versatile         Yes
                         and transparent Intervention Monitoring Card (IMC or eVouchers) for farmer
                         subsidized fertilizer distribution.
                    •    DLI 5: Adoption of the CSA technologies and techniques. DLI 5.1: Supplemental Special
                                                                                                                        Yes
                         Order issued directing Agricultural Training Institute to provide oversight and
                         coordination with other DA agencies and offices for the delivery of CSA technologies
                         and approaches to farmers that includes direct seeding and diversification of rice-
                         based farming where appropriate.
                         DLI 5.2: Number of farmers trained in CSA technologies and approaches
                    •    DLI 6: Increased mechanization levels by FCAs supported through the RCEF with
                                                                                                                        Yes
                         collective farm areas >50ha. FCAs provided with mechanization support through the
                         RCEF receive training in machinery Operation and Maintenance.
                    •    DLI 7: FCAs provided with access to NFA drying, milling and storage facilities with “buy-      Yes
                         back” arrangements. Metric Tons of FCA palay being processed through NFA facilities.
RA 2: Enhanced      •    DLI 8: Enhancing efficiency and availability of warehouses and storage facilities.             Yes
efficiency and      •    DLI 8.1: Special Order issued requiring joint planning between concerned agencies in
resilience of            the design installation and operation of post-harvest grain facilities and equipment.          Yes
food value               DLI 8.2: Annual joint-agency planning related to design installation and operation of
chains                   post-harvest grain facilities and equipment.                                                   Yes
                    •    DLI 9: Establish and operationalize a digital platform linking producers with buyers,
                         agri- business, processers etc., with provision for promoting Good Agricultural
                         Practices (GAP) certified products and export opportunities                                    Yes
                    •    DLI 10: Reduction of on-farm post-harvest losses. DLI 10.1: Supplemental Special Order
                         issued directing ATI to provide oversight and coordination with other DA agencies and
                         offices for the delivery climate-smart technologies and approaches to farmers that             Yes
                         reduce on-farm post-harvest losses. DLI 10.2: Number of farmers trained in climate-
                         smart, post-harvest loss reduction




                                                                                                                               Page 11
      The World Bank
      Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)



                                                Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI)
     Result Area                                                                                                Scalability
                                                       (Initial tentative list)
   RA 3:               Efficacy                                                                                    Yes
   Enhanced
                       •  DLI 11: Improved Planning and Budgeting: Administrative Order issued on DA-Planning
   institutional and
                          and Budgeting processes, instituting multi-year, programmatic and results-based
   policy                                                                                                          Yes
   environment            approach. DLI 11.1. Revised Budgetary process phased in across the DA
                       • DLI 12: Improved local implementation: Administrative Order issued instituting            Yes
                          harmonized DA-LGU planning and implementation support process across all DA
                          agencies and programs. DLI 12.1. Harmonized DA-LGU planning processes phased in
                          across the DA
                       • DLI 13: Integrated DA Database established and operationalized providing a
                          harmonized DA-wide platform for data storage, analysis, and enhanced evidence -
                          based decision making                                                                    Yes
                       • DLI 14: Adoption and dissemination of updated procurement rules and guidelines
                       Competitiveness

                       •   RCEF modalities: shift from 100% grant financing to matching grants and de-risking
                                                                                                                   Yes
                           arrangements (e.g., credit guarantees) to incentivize private sector investments



E. Role of Development Partners

30.      Several development partners are currently supporting the Government’s agricultural development
program. There is strong potential for developing complementarities and partnerships with ongoing activities of other
developmental partners, including: (i) the Rural Agro-enterprise Partnerships for Inclusive Development and Growth
Project (RAPID), financed by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and implemented by the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI); (ii) the Development Partnership Project (AGRI-DPP) financed by the German
Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ) and supporting partnerships with leading firms in export value chains; (iii)
Advancing Philippine Competitiveness (COMPETE), a project funded by United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) that promotes public-private partnerships and improved credit access in the agriculture sector;
and (iv) the Philippines Partnership for Sustainable Agriculture, a multi-stakeholder partnership platform initiated by
Grow Asia and the DA. Other partners in the sector include the EU that is co-financing the PRDP as well as: (i) ADB -
solar-powered irrigation; (ii) FAO - livelihood recovery of disaster-affected areas; (iii) JICA - post-harvest mechanization
on rice; and (iv) GIZ- climate resiliency of various commodities production. In addition, the governments of France,
China, Korea and the US are providing support towards capacity building, aquaculture, agri-business and farm-to-market
bridges.

PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENTS

F. Theory of Change

31.     Problem Statement. Transforming Philippines’ agriculture for enhanced food and nutrition security, job
creation, improved incomes, and increased agricultural exports requires a program of investments and institutional
enhancements to address the critical challenges of low levels of productivity, commercialization and diversification;
high post-harvest losses across key commodities; mis-aligned government spending that has focused primarily on rice


                                                                                                                          Page 12
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


vis-à-vis high value crops and growth-enhancing areas such as extension and applied research and technology; and a
weak enabling environment, with overregulation and cumbersome permits processes to name a few, that has
discouraged private sector investments in the sector. At the farm level, there is a significant need for supporting the
government’s program of Farm Clustering to promote economies of scale, increase farm mechanization, use of high-
quality appropriate inputs (seeds), training in climate resilient, innovative technologies, including the use of digital
technologies and linking farmers to markets. High losses due to limited and inefficient post-harvest infrastructure and
management will require support for cold chains, state-of-the-art warehouses and storage facilities and improved
logistics. It is crucial that the government repurpose agricultural expenditures to harness the potential of remunerative
value chains (e.g., fruits and vegetables) and create the enabling environment for leveraging private investments in the
sector to put Philippines’ agricultural sector on a high-growth, inclusive and resilient path.



                                                                                 Figure 1. Theory of Change




  RA . nhanced Produc on and ncomes in diversi ed rice based farming                Administra ve Order issued direc ng the NRP and PhilRice to limit
  systems                                                                           the number of improved varie es being promoted in RCEF                           Medium term
   Providing agro ecologically suitable seed of high yielding rice varie es to      supported provinces based on Regional spa al suitability
   farmers                                                                          Increased rice based farm area ( of wet and dry season) being       Increased produc vity, diversi ca on, and
    trengthening collabora on between the Rice Program and other DA                 planted with high yielding rice varie es                            resilience of the agrifood sector
   programs and agencies to promote and support diversi ca on of rice based         Increased area where diversi ca on is being prac ced in rice
   farms                                                                            based systems
                                                                                                                                                        Reduced food loss
   Replacing the ine cient paper voucher system providing input support to          Interven on IMC ore oucher system opera onalized
   farmers with an Interven on Monitoring Card (IMC) or e oucher system             Increased number of farmers adop ng diversi ca on and climate
   Increasing training in climate smart technologies, including direct seeding      smart technologies prac ces                                         Increased jobs in the agri food sector
   of rice and diversi ca on                                                        Increased levels of mechaniza on (percentage) for land
   Increasing farm mechaniza on                                                     prepara on and harves ng threshing of rice                          Improved farmer incomes


 RA . nhanced e ciency and resilience of food value chains                          Increased volume of FCA palay being processed through               Increased e ciency in DA resource
                                                                                    modernized e cient NFA facili es                                    alloca on
  Providing FCAs with access to modern NFA drying, milling and storage
                                                                                    Regulatory reform of warehouse and storage facili es being
  facili es with buy back arrangements
                                                                                    implemented                                                         Improved country safeguard and duciary
  Reforms to enhance e ciency and availability of warehouse and storage
                                                                                     pecial Order issued and joint planning work programming being      systems
  facili es.
                                                                                    implemented between relevant agencies in the design installa on
  Joint planning between relevant agencies in the design, installa on and
                                                                                    and opera on of postharvest grain facili es and e uipment
  opera on of modernized postharvest grain facili es and e uipment.
                                                                                    Digital pla orm linking farmers with agribusinesses and markets
  Establishing and opera onalizing a digital pla orm linking producers with                                                                                            Long term
                                                                                    opera onalized
  agri businesses and markets
                                                                                    Increased number of farmers trained in onfarm, post harvest
  Increasing training in onfarm, post harvest loss reduc on
                                                                                    management                                                          Increased private sector investment in the
  Promo ng Farm Clustering to achieve economies of scale and e ciency
                                                                                    Increased number of farm clusters with opera ng farmer              agrifood sector
  together with support forfarmer coopera ves and associa ons
                                                                                    coopera ves and associa ons
                                                                                                                                                        Improved food and nutri on security
 RA . nhanced ins tu onal and policyenvironment                                      ey Regula ons updated and revised
                                                                                    Programma c, results based budgetbeing implemented
    pda ng and streamlining relevant DA regula ons impac ng domes c                                                                                     Increased agrifood systems resilience to
                                                                                    Mainstreamed DA LG planning and support processes
  produc on, exports and compe veness                                                                                                                   climate and economic shocks
                                                                                    Integrated DA database established and opera onalized
  Reforming DA planning and budge ng processes to be programma c and
                                                                                    Adop on of updated procurement rules and guidelines
  results based
                                                                                    RECF modali es: shi from 1       grant nancing to matching          Inclusive economic growth
  Ins tu onalizing a harmonized DALG planning and support process
                                                                                    grants and de risking arrangements (e.g., credit guarantees) to
  Revising the Procurement processes for improved value for money
                                                                                    incen vize private sector investment
  Enhancing sustainability and e ec veness of RCEF




Critical Assumptions:
     (i) All actions proposed are within the mandate of the DA and implementable during the period of the current
          administration.
     (ii) The DA will work with relevant agencies / departments on improving the policy and enabling environment.




                                                                                                                                                                                            Page 13
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


 G. Technical Aspects

 32.      The proposed PforR support for the MBP is highly relevant in the context of the Government’s goals of raising
 economic opportunities, food security and achievement of higher incomes for farmers and fisherfolk. The MBP
 specifically identifies those key investment “gaps” and policies that have constrained transformation of agrifood
 systems in the Philippines. The strategic interventions defined by the MBP are key to improving agriculture economic
 opportunities and the profitability of farming, while also addressing resiliency in an environment of increasing
 vulnerability to effects of severe weather and climate change. The strategic relevance is further enhanced through the
 opportunity it provides for achieving efficiency of institutional delivery mechanisms for enabling public expenditures to
 be more strategically allocated through a more programmatic and coordinated approach, across DAs many units,
 programs, bureaus and attached agencies.

 33.      The DA has the Institutional and technical capacity to undertake the required actions to be supported through
 the PforR. It has benefited from some 20 years of implementing PRDP-SU, PRDP and its predecessors Mindanao Rural
 Development Projects (MRDPs) I and II. The DA has well established mechanisms for collaborative DA-LGU planning
 and investment; a platform that also has proven to be effective for leveraging convergence with other government
 programs and the private sector. The DA’s strong in-house capacity for developing and utilizing digital approaches to all
 aspects of its work is integral to the proposed PforR actions and verification. This includes geo-spatial planning and
 monitoring along with use of drones, geo-tagging linked monitoring of all procurement, and electronic processing and
 service standards monitoring of document flow. The M&E system developed under the PRDP would enable close
 monitoring, robust and timely feedback and verification of PforR results. The PforR would also be subject to oversight
 of the DA’s Internal Auditor whose independent functions and reporting has been strengthened along with an
 Institutional Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP) agreed with DA management to strengthen governance and integrity
 across the DA, and in particular for all World Bank supported projects.

 34.     A substantial body of analytical studies also exist to underpin the strategies and approaches of the MBP and
 proposed PforR support. These include several comprehensive studies supported by the World Bank,11 as well as an
 extensive research, which is supported by “Commodity Road Maps” and “Masterplans”.12 Collectively these have
 consistently called for shifting the overall strategic approach from protecting specific products, to improving resilience,
 competitiveness, and sustainability, while also moving from supply-oriented, to demand-driven approaches. But the
 misalignment of public spending with the strategic modernization goals has persisted, as highlighted by the Agricultural
 Public Expenditure Review conducted with World Bank assistance in 2022. Public spending has continued to rely heavily
 on inefficient instruments such as input subsidies. Over the period 2015-19, subsidies consumed 32 percent of
 commodity (Banner) Program budgets, with another 28 percent going to subsidize machinery. Only 15 percent was
 allocated for extension and 15 percent for other interventions of which research and development was 8.6 percent and
 market development 0.8 percent.

 Program Expenditure Analysis

 34.     The PfoR Program financing is expected to amount to US$12.89 billion over FY2025/26 – FY2029/30. This is
 financed at 92.3 percent by the government and at 7.7 percent by IBRD. Aggregate public spending on agriculture

11 Recent World Bank studies: (a) Realizing Scale in Smallholder-Based Agriculture: Policy Options for the Philippines. World Bank 2021; (b) Bridging

the Gap: Options for Operationalizing National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization and Industrialization Plan (NAFMIP): The “Whole of alue
Chain Approach Technical Paper 2023, World Bank; and (c) Philippines: Transforming Agriculture for Food and Nutrition Security Political Transition
Engagement Note, 2022, World Bank
12 The Philippine Food Chain Logistics Masterplan 2023–2033 is currently under review/revision by the DA



                                                                                                                                               Page 14
        The World Bank
        Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


 implemented through the DA13 over the calendar years 2020 to 2023 averaged around US$ 1 billion per annum while
 average annual budget over the same period amounted to US$1.6 billion. In CY2024 and 2025, agriculture budget
 provided to the DA increased to US$2 billion and US$2.3 billion, respectively. Reflecting the selected program
 boundaries, the expenditures related to (i) construction, restoration, and/or rehabilitation of irrigation systems outside
 of DA, and (ii) access to credit and insurance and delineation and devolution of roles and functions, nationally and sub-
 nationally have been excluded. Assuming continuation of the funding levels using CY2025 and considering the program
 boundaries, the total government agriculture expenditures over the PforR implementation period (FY2025/26-
 FY2029/30) are estimated at US$ 12.9 billion equivalent (or average disbursements of US$ 2.6 billion per year) (Table
 2).

 35.      The average level of budget allocation for agriculture vis a vis the national budget was 2.4 percent over
 CY2021 to CY2023. This level increased to 3.6 percent in CY2024 and 3.2 percent in CY2025. The DA budget allocation
 is heavily lodged under the Office of the Secretary (OSEC), which captures 80.6 percent of the DA budget.14 OSEC directly
 supervises the main components of the AFMA. Its attached agencies receive a small share of the remaining 20 percent
 for supervising other commodity-based services, including regulatory and policy formulation. OSEC exercises both staff
 and line functions through the policy and regulatory bureaus while the regional offices deliver the front-line services,
 including coordination with the LG s. The DA’s attached agencies exercise regulatory functions over commodities such
 as machinery, fiber, coconut, meat, and carabao. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) exercises both
 staff and line functions parallel with the functions of OSEC.

                                              Table 3: Program Financing: FY2025/26-2028/29

                                                                   Amount               Percent of Total
                   Source
                                                                 (US$ billion)
                                                                     11.9                     92.3
                   Government
                                                                      1.0                      7.7
                   IBRD
                                                                     12.9                     100.0
                   Total


 36.     The Expenditure Framework Assessment (EFA) is being undertaken in parallel with the technical assessment
 and will be finalized by appraisal.

 Economic Justification of the Program

 37.     There is an immediate need for public financing for improving agri-food system efficiency, to alleviate the
 rising cost of food. Public financing is also critical for leveraging the transformative changes and private sector
 investment needed in the agriculture sectors, a key priority of NAFMIP 2021–2030 and MBP. Public sector investments
 under the project include producer clustering, establishing enterprises providing common service facilities, and
 enhancing service provision. These investments are all designed to incentivize further private-sector investment and
 technological innovation.

 38.       The Bank’s history of support for agri-food system development in the Philippines and globally provides a


13 Excluding government owned and controlled corporations
14 Philippines Agriculture Public Expenditure Review, February 16, 2023



                                                                                                                       Page 15
      The World Bank
      Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


wealth of experience to support the PSAT through Program for Results. IBRD lending for agriculture and rural
development in the Philippines has amounted to over US$1 billion and spans 23 years. This lending began in 2000 with
the MRDP I and II, and since 2014, has been followed by the ongoing PRDP. The Bank’s value- added also builds on a
considerable platform of analytical work on Philippine sectoral transformation policies and options. This long-term
operational and analytical partnership with the DA is particularly relevant as the government seeks to bring about
substantial transformative actions in accordance with the NAFMIP 2021–2030.

H. Fiduciary Aspects

39.      A detailed Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) will be carried out and completed by the appraisal. The objective
of the FSA is to determine the adequacy of the Program fiduciary systems that they provide reasonable assurance that
the Program proceeds will be used for the intended purposes, with due attention to the principles of economy,
efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability. The FSA will be built off and tied to the Program expenditure
framework. Data collection, review and analysis are needed to produce a good quality FSA. The material weaknesses
identified in the FSA are translated to risks to the Program which will lead to formulation of appropriate mitigations
measures. The task team will assess whether the program has fiduciary arrangements (in procurement, financial
management, and anti-fraud and corruption) designed to facilitate and promote effectiveness, efficiency, economy,
transparency and accountability. In addition, the assessment screens for excluded activities – i.e., high-value contracts.
As soon as the Program expenditure framework is in reasonable shape with supported activities and budget
expenditures, and implementing units identified, the FSA will be carried out making use of relevant available resources
such as but not limited to (i) government fiduciary systems from sector analytic works; (ii) past performance of
investment projects in the program sector (e.g., PRDP’s, DFIMP) ; (iii) recent or on-going analytical works (i.e., PEFA,
MAPS report, APCPI, AARs, PPRs).

I. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

40.      The Program's Environmental and Social (E&S) risk is substantial. Overall, implementation of the program will
have significant and broadly positive environmental and social outcomes in the Program regions. An initial E&S
screening was conducted based on the proposed Program boundaries and activities. High-risk activities will be excluded.
The program design is not expected to cause the conversion, modification, disruption of critical habitats nor will it
compromise the location’s natural landscape, biodiversity, habitats or ecosystem services. Potential E&S adverse effects
during construction include dust, noise, water, and soil pollution; worker and community health and safety risks; labor
influx; poor working conditions for vulnerable workers; child labor and forced labor; resistance to behavioral changes
in farming practices; and potential exclusion of marginalized groups. Land requirements are minimal, with expansions
expected within government properties, although due diligence will still be conducted on land acquisition and/or
donations that may cause significant E&S risks and impacts. Due diligence is necessary for any changes that might
require land acquisition or affect livelihoods. During operation, risks include health hazards from pesticide use,
occupational health and safety issues, pollution, and greenhouse gas emissions. Social inequalities may worsen without
culturally sensitive approaches and effective grievance mechanisms. These adverse E&S effects can be well identified
and readily avoided, minimized, and mitigated through meaningful consultations, enhanced designs and the
implementation of mature technologies and good management practices. The contextual risk is preliminarily deemed
substantial because the Program will be implemented nationwide, including in conflict-affected areas with sensitive
social settings. Being the first PforR in the country to be implemented by the DA, the institutional risk is regarded as
substantial. The political and reputational risk is deemed low as the agricultural sector in the Philippines is not known
to be controversial, and the Program aligns well with government strategies and programs.


                                                                                                                      Page 16
       The World Bank
       Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)



 41.      An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) will be conducted during program preparation. The
 ESSA will ensure consistency with the six core principles outlined in the World Bank’s Operational Policy on the PforR
 Financing and include: (1) detailed assessment of the nature and significance of the E&S risks and effects; (2) review of
 the national E&S legislative framework and the borrower’s capacity to manage those risks; and (3) if necessary,
 formulating measures for inclusion in the overall PAP and/or considered for potential DLIs to enhance both the E&S
 management systems and the E&S outcomes during implementation. During the ESSA process, the task team will
 actively and meaningfully engage with both internal and external stakeholders to inform ESSA preparation and solicit
 inputs to strengthen E&S risk management throughout the lifecycle of the operation. The draft ESSA will be disclosed
 to the public and consulted with key stakeholders prior to appraisal.

 J. Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool System (SORT)

42.      Potential risks are summarized in SORT. The overall risk is rated Substantial. The overall risk is rated Substantial.
The political, governance and macroeconomic risk is rated Moderate. The Macroeconomic risk is rated Moderate as the
Philippines’ economy is on a robust growth path, and current macroeconomic trends are likely to help with reducing
poverty, income inequality and unemployment. The proposed Program will contribute to these upward trends by boosting
agriculture sector growth, competitiveness and sustainability. Sector Strategies and Policies is rated Substantial due to
the legacy of a singular focus on food security through self-sufficiency in rice production and mis-aligned public
expenditures in the sector biased towards high subsidies for inputs and investments, as well as distortionary trade
practices. The proposed PforR seeks to mitigate this risk by effecting institutional and regulatory enhancements that would
repurpose public expenditures for increased support to growth-enhancing and job creating subsectors, including
diversification to high value agriculture, and creating the enabling environment for leveraging private sector investments
in the sector. The Technical Design of the Program is rated Substantial as the PforR is a new instrument for the
Government of the Philippines and internalizing its processes and procedures would take time and may result in delays
with Program implementation. To mitigate this, the Bank team will work closely with the government all through
implementation, guiding and advising as necessary, both during regular supervision missions as well as on an ongoing
basis as necessary. The Institutional Capacity for Implementation is rated Moderate as the DA is well-staffed with qualified
personnel and resources to undertake the program activities under each of the three RAs. Any critical gaps identified
during preparation will be addressed through a capacity building action plan. The Fiduciary aspects is rated Substantial.
Although fiduciary capacity of the DA has been built through several ongoing World Bank-funded projects, the full
assessment of the country systems in procurement, financial management, and anti-fraud and corruption will be
undertaken during PforR preparation. There is an ongoing INT case related to ineligible expenditures under the ongoing
PRDP project. The Environmental and Social risk is rated Substantial after the initial screening owing to the national scope
of the program, including its implementation in conflict-affected areas with sensitive social settings as well as the fact that
the detailed Program activities are yet to be determined. All high-risk activities will be excluded under the PforR. The ESSA
will sharpen its focus on core activities identified in the PforR boundaries and activities which may have environmental
and social risks which will be assessed further during the preparation. The Stakeholder risk is Moderate as the project
supports the on-going Government program.




                                                                                                                         Page 17
     The World Bank
     Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


                                            Table 4. Summary of SORT


    Risk Category                                                         Rating (H, S, M, L)

        1. Political and Governance                                           Moderate

        2. Macroeconomic                                                      Moderate

        3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                    Substantial

        4. Technical Design of Project or Program                            Substantial

        5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability       Moderate

        6. Fiduciary                                                         Substantial

        7. Environment and Social                                            Substantial

        8. Stakeholders                                                       Moderate

    OVERALL                                                                  Substantial




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Mio Takada
 Senior Agriculture Economist

 Meeta Sehgal
 Senior Agriculture Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient



                                                                                                Page 18
     The World Bank
     Philippines Sustainable Agriculture Transformation(P507504)


 Department of Finance
 Ralph Recto
 Secretary
 osec@dof.gov.ph

Implementing Agencies
 Department of Agriculture
 Francisco Tiu Laurel
 Secretary
 osec.official@da.gov.ph

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
finalizing the document.




                                                                                                            Page 19
