Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 05/20/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04922




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 21, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507207                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       BWSSAP                       2026

                     Operation Name            Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Burundi                   Burundi                                  EASTERN AND                  Water
                                                                                        SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Burundi -     Ministry of Water, Energy and Mines      30-Sep-2025                  15-Dec-2025
                     Ministry of Finance
                     and Economic
                     Planning




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     08-Apr-2025               95,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To increase access to drinking water supply and sanitation services in selected urban and rural areas of Burundi and to
                     strengthen institutional capacity for service delivery


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Burundi Water Supply and Sanitation Access Project aims to increase access to drinking water supply and sanitation
                     (WSS) services in targeted areas of Burundi and strengthen institutional capacity for service delivery. For urban and peri-
                     urban areas (in Bujumbura), the project intends to leverage financing from IDA, as well as mobilize private capital for
                     water supply production. The aim is to provide safely managed drinking water services to previously unserved
                     populations and to improve the quality of services from basic to safely managed drinking water services Bujumbura

                    May 21, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     through safe and reliable water access through household connections. For rural areas, the project will improve access
                     to at least basic water supply and sanitation services in selected communes prioritized by the government. Moreover,
                     the project will improve access to water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) facilities in selected schools and health centers
                     within these rural communes. Aligned with the regional Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (MPA) design, the
                     proposed components are the following: Component 1: Strengthening National WASH Platforms, Governance and
                     Reforms (US$ 4 million IDA). Subcomponent 1.1. on National WASH platforms finances technical assistance, training and
                     equipment to develop and implement sector-wide monitoring platforms for WASH access, medium term investment
                     plans, joint sector reviews and future investment preparation studies. Subcomponent 1.2 on Governance and Reforms
                     finances technical assistance, training and equipment to address governance bottlenecks and support the
                     implementation of reform measures including for the mobilization of private capital for WASH. This includes the
                     development of regulatory instruments and policies, tariff studies, transaction advisory services, capacity development
                     for sector ministries, the national water and sanitation regulatory entity, the national PPP center, as well as selected
                     communes benefiting from investments. Component 2: Service Providers Performance Improvement (US$ 12.5 million
                     IDA): This component, mapped to pillar 3 of the MPA, finances works, equipment, technical assistance, training for the
                     national water utility REGIDESO as well as for rural water supply providers and the rural water agency. Subcomponent
                     2.1 finances the implementation of REGIDESO's Performance Improvement Action Plan, including Non Revenue Water,
                     digitalization, and water quality management improvements and social connection subsidies. Subcomponent 2.2.
                     finances the preparation of delegation contracts between communes and private water operators, capacity
                     development for professionalization of domestic private sector and subsidies for connection programs, as well as
                     vocational and professional development programs for job creation in the WASH sector. Component 3: Leveraging
                     Financing for Resilient Investments to Expand WASH Access (US$ 58.5 million IDA and US$ 15 million PCM).




Public Disclosure
                     Subcomponent 3.1 finances infrastructure investments in climate -resilient urban water supply distribution and
                     production systems for Bujumbura, including viability gap financing for the bulk water production plant. A Build-
                     Operate-Transfer (BOT) arrangement is proposed for the bulk water production plant, blending public and private
                     funding to ensure an affordable tariff for REGIDESO as off-taker, and to the households as end-consumers. IDA financing
                     would support viability gap financing and REGIDESO’s network expansion to maximize impact on the population. MIGA
                     de-risking instruments will be brought as appropriate. IFC role would be to bringing debt and mobilizing other lenders
                     (either through co-development with value-for-money assurances or through a competitive process). Subcomponent
                     3.2 finances rehabilitation and construction of solar-based climate-resilient rural water systems in selected communes,
                     behavior change and market-enabling household subsidies for durable sanitation facilities, and construction of WASH
                     facilities in schools and health centers including programs for girls on menstrual hygiene management. Component 4:
                     Project Management and Coordination (US$ 5.2 million IDA). This component finances the overall project management,
                     monitoring and coordination costs, including operating costs. It also finances costs related to land acquisition and
                     resettlement related to the project. The total project cost estimation is US$ 95 million of which US$ 80 million in IDA
                     and US$ 15 million in private capital mobilization (note: the preliminary IDA allocation for the project is US$ 60 million).
                     Depending on the possibility to mobilize parallel co-financing from other partners, and on performance of the project,
                     additional finance and project restructuring may be processed to expand the Project to include water supply
                     investments in Gitega and scale-up WASH services in selected rural communes.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Burundi is an FCV context, and it is one of the seven member states of the East African Community (EAC). Repeated
                     episodes of conflict and fragility have created an uncertain and risky environment which has constrained investment,

                    May 21, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     leading to low performing and volatile economy. The proposed Project is part of a regional Multi-phase Programmatic
                     Approach (MPA) on Accelerating WASH Access in AFE region (P506439). The proposed Project will include
                     infrastructure investment in water supply systems in urban and rural areas, WASH facilities in schools and health
                     centers and household latrine construction in rural areas and technical assistance to support technical studies, capacity
                     building, reforms and policies. The project will be implemented in Bujumbura and in four rural communes (as per the
                     communes boundaries that take effect in June 2025) that include Bituhinda, Muyinga, Rwibaga and Mugere (limited to
                     the area of Kanyosha). The focus of the project is on i) water supply investments in the city of Bujumbura and measures
                     (provision of equipment, technical assistance) to improvement performance of REGIDESO water operations (and ii)
                     rehabilitation/expansion of existing and construction of new water systems in the four rural communes. The
                     implementation of the rural water supply works will exclude remote or highly isolated areas, thereby restricting the
                     potential risks, benefits and impact on communities residing in isolated regions. The feasibility studies an and the APS
                     for the selected systems are expected by December 2025. The APD and the ESIAs will be completed by March 2026.
                     Based on feasibility studies, specific rural sites will be defined and assessed accordingly.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will be managed through a new Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Water, Energy and
                     Mines (MINHEM-PMU), with activities implemented by a second Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within REGIDESO.
                     The MINHEM-PMU will oversee fiduciary, environmental, social, coordination, and reporting responsibilities,
                     implementing activities under component 1 nationally, subcomponents 2.2 and 3.2 in rural areas, and capital subsidies
                     (VGF grants) under subcomponent 3.1 for the Bujumbura water treatment plant. The REGIDESO-Water PIU will carry
                     out activities related to REGIDESO’s mandate, such as performance improvement under subcomponent 2.1 and water




Public Disclosure
                     infrastructure under subcomponent 3.1 (except the treatment plant).
                     MINHEM-PMU and REGIDESO have limited capacities in managing project E&S risks, particularly under ESF. The
                     MINHEM-PMU will hire qualified E&S specialists to manage project risks and impacts, including environmental and
                     social development specialists. The REGIDESO-Water PIU will include REGIDESO’s E&S staff, strengthened by an external
                     consultant in charge of building their capacity in E&S risk management under ESF for 18 months. Capacity-building plans
                     are part of the Project.
                     Various ministries and public entities will be involved at national, provincial, and communal levels, along with the
                     private sector under a proposed Hybrid PPP for the Bujumbura bulk water treatment plant. A capacity assessment for
                     E&S risk management will be conducted by Appraisal as part of the Environmental and Social Management Framework
                     (ESMF). Based on the results, a capacity-building action plan will be proposed to enhance public entities' capability,
                     which will be reflected in the Project's Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).
                     The Burundian Office for the Protection of Environment (OBPE) regulates Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                     (ESIA) and issues Environmental Compliance Certificates under the Ministry of Agriculture and Environment.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is currently assessed as Substantial. The primary environmental risks and impacts are
                     anticipated from activities under components 2 and 3. These include infrastructure investments in urban water supply


                    May 21, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     distribution and production systems for Bujumbura and Gitega, subsidies for a private developer of a bulk water
                     treatment plant, investments in urban drinking water systems managed by REGIDESO, rehabilitation and construction
                     of rural water systems in selected communes, and investments in WASH facilities in schools and healthcare facilities.
                     Key anticipated direct, indirect, and cumulative risks and impacts include temporary disruption of utility services in
                     the project areas, traffic disruption due to excavation of trenches and pipeline laying along main roads and streets,
                     increased turbidity and sedimentation downstream affecting aquatic habitats, pollution and oil spill risks, chemical
                     management, waste generation, occupational health and safety risks for workers, and health and safety risks for local
                     communities due to active construction sites and activities within the community. The project will also support
                     technical assistance (TA) activities of Types 1, 2, and 3 under components 1 and 2, which include the preparation of
                     investment plans, investment preparation studies, transaction advisory services, capacity building, and the
                     development of national legal and regulatory texts and policies. TA activities may have potential downstream
                     environmental risks due to potential new investments that need to be assessed and managed. This classification also
                     considers the capacity of the Borrower and all stakeholders involved in this project, including public and private
                     sector companies, to manage potential risks.
                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is considered to be Substantial, given the nature of the activities and their implementation in
                     densely populated urban areas of Bujumbura, and in the four selected rural communes, and also considering the
                     downstream impacts of the planned TA activities. The key social risks associated with the Project include (i) potential
                     exclusion of women and members of vulnerable groups from project benefits, along with potential elite capture,
                     especially from activities such as training and capacity building and the equitable household connections under




Public Disclosure
                     component 3 and 4; (ii) community health and safety risks, including those associated with the labor influx associated
                     with the civil works, which may increase the transmission of communicable diseases, and the level of SEA/SH risk; (iii)
                     potential for land acquisition and economic displacement, temporary and permanently, particularly in relation to the
                     activities planned to be supported under components 3.1 and 3.2; (iv) risks associated with the downstream impacts
                     of the TA activities to be supported, including those related to the policy reforms to be supported, some of which may
                     potentially experience stakeholder opposition to some of the proposed policy reforms; (v) potentially adverse
                     economic impacts on vulnerable groups during the transition from unpaid to paid access to drinking water,
                     particularly if differentiated approach for them, like social tariffs, are not adequately considered during the reform
                     process.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      The project will finance investments in water systems/production and sanitation that may have potential
                      environmental and social (E&S) risks/impacts. To manage these risks/impacts, including those related to ancillary
                      works, E&S assessment will be conducted through several instruments. The Borrower will develop an ESMF and two
                      (02) ESIAs/ESMPs for infrastructure investments in urban water supply distribution and production systems for
                      Bujumbura and Gitega, for which feasibility studies are already under preparation. These instruments will include
                      measures to address SEA/SH risks as well. For other investments for which specific locations are not yet know at this


                    May 21, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      stage, an ESMF will be prepared. ToRs and advice or other documents for TA activities will need to be reviewed and
                      cleared for consistency with ESSs 1-10. An environmental specialist and a social development specialist will be
                      recruited for the new MINHEM-PMU.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      To ensure stakeholder involvement throughout the project cycle, the Project preparation Team has organized site
                      visits and consultative meetings with institutional stakeholders. Once technical studies are finalized and detailed
                      information on project sites is available, the team will continue engaging with communities through meaningful
                      interactions, ensuring timely, understandable and accessible information. The engagement must be free of
                      manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, and intimidation. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) shall
                      outline the characteristics and interests of relevant stakeholder groups, including commune administrations, local
                      water committees, beneficiaries (with a special focus on women), and directly impacted project-affected persons and
                      vulnerable groups including Batwa and refugees. The SEP will be disclosed prior to Appraisal, and will include a record
                      of stakeholder engagement activities carried out during preparation and implementation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      The implementation entities will prepare labor management procedures (LMP) to address key worker issues, such as
                      working conditions, worker relationships, workforce protection, non-discrimination, child and forced labor
                      prevention, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) requirements, and guidance for employing youth and women
                      (except minors). The LMP will feature a labor-specific grievance mechanism sensitive to SEA/SH, based on national




Public Disclosure
                      laws, ESS2 provisions, and labor issue management. It will also include a code of conduct prohibiting SEA/SH and
                      sanctions for misconduct. OHS risks will be managed through LMP for direct workers and contractors' workers via
                      specific ESIAs/ESMPs. Contractors will develop Specific Health and Safety Management Plans in line with WBG
                      Environment, Health, and Safety Guidelines (ESHGs) for construction/rehabilitation works, for water and sanitation
                      and other relevant instruments. OHS requirements will be incorporated in the bidding documents and contracts.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      Investments under this project will entail risks/impacts relevant to ESS3 requirements, which include raw material
                      and resource use, energy use, generation of hazardous/non-hazardous waste, handling and use of hazardous
                      materials, increased water demand, noise and air pollution. All these risks/impacts will be assessed through ESA
                      instruments (ESIAs/ESMPs and ESMF) to be prepared by the Borrower and relevant measures and plans will be
                      developed accordingly. These instruments will include standard operating procedures and good construction
                      management practices, including those proposed in WBG EHSGs. Since the project supports investments to increase
                      access to drinking water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in targeted areas of Burundi, a water balance will be
                      assessed as part of site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs and adequate measures will be proposed to minimize the depletion of
                      water resources. An analysis of GHG emissions will be conducted during preparation. No pesticide use is expected.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. Project activities may have negative risks and impacts on the health and safety of the communities
                      surrounding the work sites. Anticipated risks and impacts include community health and safety risks associated with
                      construction and rehabilitation work, traffic safety, community exposure to labor influx, exposure to diseases, noise,


                    May 21, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      hazardous materials, emergency preparedness, and transmission of communicable diseases. There are also risks
                      associated with SEA/SH. All these risks and impacts will be assessed and mitigate through E&S risk management
                      instruments in line with ESS4 and will include standard operating procedures and good construction management
                      practices, include those proposed in WB EHSGs and the SEA/SH Action Plan. A traffic management plan will be
                      developed as part of site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs to manage and minimize traffic disruption due to excavation of
                      trenches and pipeline laying along main roads and streets.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant because project activities excepted under components 3 and 4 may require some land acquisition for
                      water supply infrastructure in rural and urban areas, the installation of the water pipes along the right-of-way may
                      affect homes, assets and economic activities of the local populations, as part of the planned works in urban areas and
                      rural communes, may potentially lead to land acquisition and economic activity disruption on a temporary and
                      permanent basis. While technical and the feasibility studies are still ongoing, no specific cases of resettlement have
                      been confirmed yet. Once studies triggered the need of land acquisition and/or created economical displacement,
                      base on the scope, during the implementation, it was agreed in the ESCP, that the social impacts mitigation measures
                      must be handle through the preparation of the ESMPs and/or Resettlement actions plans prepare during
                      implementation prior to the commencement of such activities prior launching civils works.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources




Public Disclosure
                      ESS6 is relevant. The project activities are mainly taking place in inhabited urban and rural areas to meet their water
                      and sanitation needs and are not expected to take place in or near protected areas or critical habitats. However,
                      these activities may lead to increased turbidity and sedimentation downstream affecting aquatic habitats, pollution
                      and oil spill risks. Through ESA instruments, impacts on biodiversity will be assessed and mitigation measures
                      proposed. In addition, a screening process will be put in place to improve project sites selection to avoid selecting
                      areas with high biodiversity values. A negative list will be included in the ESMF to exclude any activity or subprojects
                      that would involve significant conversion or degradation of critical habitat or take take place within protected areas.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                    TBD
                      Local Communities

                      Batwa communities are present in Burundi. Project activities will be carried out in urban and rural areas, integrating
                      Batwa communities into overall Burundian communities, especially in service delivery. The applicability of ESS7 will
                      be confirmed based on technical and feasibility studies outcomes. Project activities will not cause relocation or
                      impact cultural heritage resources of Batwa groups, thus not requiring Free Prior and Informed Consultations (FPIC).
                      Once studies are finalized, assessments will analyze potential adverse impacts on Batwa communities or barriers to
                      their access to project benefits. If triggered, the IPPF sets out a framework for participatory consultation of Batwa and
                      vulnerable populations, considering cultural impacts and engaging them according to their norms and traditions. The
                      SEP includes provisions for consultation with Batwa communities, ensuring independent consultation in safe and
                      confidential conditions.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant



                    May 21, 2025                                                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                      ESS8 is relevant. The project will support civil works activities that will include land excavations works that may have
                      adverse impacts on tangible cultural heritage. Through the environmental and social assessment, the project will
                      confirm the existence of intangible and tangible cultural heritage in the rural areas of the project, including sacred
                      forests, groves, among others. To manage and mitigate the risks related to ESS8, further screening and assessment
                      will be conducted to the identified risks and, screening criteria will be included in the ESMF as well as chance find
                      procedures which also included in the relevant ESMPs and contractor contracts.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      No FI are involved in the project



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                 No
                       N/A




Public Disclosure
                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                    No
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following E&S risk management instruments are expected to be disclosed by Appraisal:
                     - Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)

                     The following instruments are expected during project implementation (or earlier):
                     - SEA/SH Action Plan
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     - ESIAs/ESMPs (one for Bujumbura and one for Gitega) during implementation including grievance management
                     procedure prior to starting bidding processes.
                     - RAPs, if the need for involuntary resettlement is confirmed.

                     Also, ToRs of documents for TA activities will need to be reviewed to ensure consistency with the ESF.



                    May 21, 2025                                                                                                        Page 8 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burundi Water Supply And Sanitation Access Project (P507207)



                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Susanna Smets                       Title:        Senior Water Specialist

                     Email:                   ssmets@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:             Feriha Mukuve Mugisha               Job Title:    Senior Water Specialist

                     Email:                   fmugisha@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL




Public Disclosure
                     Task Team Leader(s):                                Susanna Smets, Feriha Mukuve Mugisha

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                       Christophe Ngongo Muzyumba

                     ADM Social Specialist:                              Abdoul Wahabi Seini




                    May 21, 2025                                                                                          Page 9 of 9
