Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-Mar-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01079




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            1
     The World Bank
     Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Burkina Faso                   P507256                      Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business
                                                            Enhancement Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            21-Jul-2025                  30-Oct-2025                    Agriculture and Food
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance and      Ministry of Agriculture
Financing (IPF)                Forecasting                  Livestock and Fisheries

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase productivity, competitiveness, and climate resilience of
farmers and businesses along selected value chains in the project areas.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        300.00

  Total Financing                                                                                             300.00
               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              300.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                300.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                              300.00



                                                                                                      2
       The World Bank
       Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                     Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                      The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1. Burkina Faso has experienced a security crisis and significant political instability in recent years. The
   security situation notably worsened since 2019, leading to widespread loss of livelihoods and,
   subsequently, two political changes in 2022. Terrorist attacks caused a major displacement crisis: the
   number of registered internally displaced persons (IDPs) increased exponentially from 50,000 in
   January 2019 to 1.01 million in August 2020 to 2.05 million in December 2023. East, Nord, and Sahel
   regions continue to suffer from chronic underdevelopment and limited provision of public services as
   a result of high level of insecurity and significant investment gaps. In response to these challenges,
   the government of Burkina Faso has adopted the Action Plan for Stabilization and Development for
   2023–2025 with four priority areas: (a) restore territorial integrity; (b) respond to the humanitarian
   crisis; (c) rebuild the State and improve governance; and (d) work toward national reconciliation and
   social cohesion. In May 2024, the political transition was extended by five years to focus on restoring
   security as the primary objective.
2. The current geopolitical context is marked by strengthened ties with Mali and Niger and fractured
   dialogue with regional organizations. In September 2023, Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger formed the
   Alliance of Sahel States (AES), a security and military pact with political and economic aims. In January
   2024, the three countries announced their withdrawal from ECOWAS citing a lack of support
   combatting terrorism.
3. Recent positive developments, however, are noteworthy. State control over territory increased from
   40 percent in 2022 to 70 percent in 2024. IDPs are gradually returning (over a million as of December
   2024). Although weakened, Burkina Faso's institutions serve as an important source of resilience -
   functioning amidst insecurity and political instability with a public administration that navigates
   ethnic, religious, and political divides.
4. Burkina Faso's structural transformation has been slow, with agriculture still the main sector of the
   economy.The primary sector employs over 90 percent of the poor, declined sharply, and now
   accounts for less than 20 percent of GDP. The rapidly growing gold mining sector represents 77
   percent of exports, 16 percent of GDP, and 22 percent of government revenues (2023). The services




                                                                                                          3
       The World Bank
       Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


    sector constitutes almost half of GDP. Services job creation and output formation are driven primarily
    by the public administration and retail sectors.
5. Despite a deepening security and humanitarian crisis, Burkina Faso's economy has shown surprising
   resilience. After particularly weak growth of 1.8 percent in 2022, the economy grew 3.2 percent (0.5
   percent per capita) supported by the services sector which fueled an expansion of the public sector.
   Average inflation subsided to 0.7 percent. Favorable terms of trade with an increase in gold prices
   coupled with a decrease in energy prices helped to narrow the current account deficit to 4.9 percent.
   Expenditure-driven fiscal consolidation in 2023 (capital investment and subsidies scaled back while
   military and humanitarian spending remained high) saw the deficit drop 1 percentage point to 6.5
   percent of GDP. The annual inflation rate of 0.7 percent in 2023 followed monetary tightening of the
   Central Bank of West African States (Banque Centrale des Etats d’Afrique de l’Ouest, BCEAO) and a
   successful agricultural season.
6. Medium-term growth prospects are expected to remain constrained by insecurity and political
   instability. The regime changes of 2022 led to a significant decline in international development
   assistance and private sector investment. The displacement of people has undermined agricultural
   productivity which is already vulnerable to climate risks. The moderately positive economic outlook
   for the next two years is subject to downside risks. Assuming the security situation remains unchanged
   and an orderly withdrawal from ECOWAS, growth could settle at a new potential of about 4.0 percent
   (1.5 percent per capita) in 2025-26. Growth in the agriculture and services sectors is expected to
   remain robust if lower than pre-conflict levels.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context
7. Agriculture is a vital component of Burkina Faso’s economy, accounting for 18.5 percent of GDP and
   about 80 percent of employment. The sector is dominated by subsistence production systems
   characterized by small farms (the land available per agricultural worker is usually less than one
   hectare), low crop and livestock productivity, limited diversification, and limited participation of
   formal private businesses in agricultural and agropastoral value chains. The primary agricultural
   products include cereals (millet, sorghum, maize, rice, and fonio which represent two-thirds of
   cultivated area and constitute the main food staples), cowpea, onion, mangoes, and cash crops such
   as cotton, peanuts, soybean, and sesame. Cotton alone represents 14% of the country's total exports
8. The agriculture sector in Burkina Faso faces several challenges, including climate change, which leads
   to higher probabilities of extreme droughts and floods, prolonged dry spells, and erratic rainfall. These
   climate-related hazards make the agriculture sector very vulnerable, resulting in pest- and disease-
   related production losses. Additionally, the country experiences chronic food and nutrition insecurity
   due to inadequate food consumption and poor infant and young child feeding practices. Agricultural
   productivity is hampered by limited access to agricultural inputs, capital, and mechanical equipment,
   and by limited commercialization of outputs. A key factor behind Burkina Faso’s low agricultural
   productivity lies in the structure of the agricultural sector, which is dominated by small-scale farmers
   with very limited use of mechanized equipment, low levels of fertilizer use, and limited access to
   finance.
9. Low agricultural productivity is also driven by the sector’s heavy dependence on rainfall, which makes
   harvests of major food and cash crops highly exposed to climate variability and change. Climate
   variability, water scarcity, and extreme events such as droughts, excessive rains, floods, and pests are


                                                                                                          4
       The World Bank
       Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


    causing considerable crop losses. This severely affects land and labor productivity and rural household
    incomes. The changing climatic conditions, including increased temperatures, rainfall variability,
    heavier precipitation events, delayed onset of rains, land degradation, desertification, and the more
    frequent recurrence of droughts, are impacting agricultural productivity and making harvests of the
    major food and cash crops highly uncertain.
10. Some farmers are using adaptative strategies to cope with these negative impacts. These include the
    application of organic matter, minimum tillage, crop rotation, agroforestry, the use of furrows, and
    the zaï pit systems. While such sustainable farming strategies conserve soil carbon, reduce losses from
    direct evaporation, and preserve soil nutrients, Burkina Faso’s overall adaptative capacity remains low
    and is not enough to cope with the effects of both climate variability and a changing climate in the
    long term.1
11. Gender gaps place an additional constraint on agricultural productivity. Female-headed households
    face the lowest returns on agricultural labor (i.e., hired male labor), with productivity being 16 percent
    lower on female-owned farms than on male-owned ones for all crops, and 22 percent lower for food
    crops. The most important factors behind this gender gap are smaller household labor forces, less use
    of agricultural inputs (i.e., improved seeds, fertilizer, and pesticide), less crop diversification, and
    limited involvement in growing export crops among female-headed household farms.
12. Agriculture in central to Burkina Faso's Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) for both climate
    mitigation and adaptation aiming at for a low-carbon climate-resilient development path. Burkina
    Faso aims to reduce GHG emissions by about 20.67% unconditionally and 30.76% conditionally below
    business-as-usual (BAU) levels by 2030. The primary sectors targeted for emission reductions include
    agriculture, forestry, and energy. The NDC specifically targets the rehabilitation of 75,000 hectares of
    degraded land each year for forestry and pastoral uses, with a cumulative total of 1.12 million hectares
    for the period 2015-2030.

13. Limited access to credit for smallholder famers and low level of private investment severely
    constrains value addition and downstream industry development in Burkina Faso’s agriculture
    sector, particularly for rice, maize, and soybean. The sector suffers from inadequate access to
    finance, a noncompetitive business environment, and insufficient private investment. Only 4% of total
    credit goes to the agricultural sector, with the majority of this financing directed towards cotton.
    Maize processing and the poultry feed sector face high production costs and competition from
    imports, limiting their annual output to just over 10, 000 tons. Rice processing equipment installed in
    rural areas remains insufficient to absorb national output, and the quality of processed rice has not
    significantly improved. Addressing these constraints through targeted reforms and investments in
    infrastructure, access to finance, and private sector engagement is crucial for enhancing productivity,
    value addition, and job creation in the agriculture sector in Burkina Faso.

14. To revitalize its agricultural sector, the Burkina Faso Government has set ambitious goals in its
    agricultural policies and initiative (Lijeeguoli Initiative) until 2032. The government’s 2023-2025
    Agropastoral Offensive aims to boost productivity, food security, agricultural processing, and financial
    and market access. The Lijeeguoli Initiative is made of (03) interdependent components including (i)

1
 World Bank (2022b). G5 Sahel Region: Country Climate and Development Report. Washington, DC: World Bank
Group.

                                                                                                            5
        The World Bank
        Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


      Productivity and production in the agropastoral and fisheries sectors, (ii) Competitiveness of the
      agropastoral and fisheries sectors and (iii) Coordination and management of the Initiative.


 Relationship to CPF
15. The proposed project supports the Burkina Faso Country Partnership Framework (CPF- Report N
    123712) for FY18-FY23, which was adjusted up to FY25 during the Performance Learning Review (PLR,
    Report number 166080), to respond to the dramatic changes in country circumstances. The operation
    will contribute to the CPF’s Focus Area 1 “accelerate sustainable private sector led growth for job
    creation” specifically Objective 1.1 “improve agriculture productivity and agribusiness value chains in
    targeted areas. The support also aligns with the WBG Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV) Strategy
    (2020-2025). Specifically, it supports the fourth pillar on “mitigating the spillovers of FCV to support
    countries and the most vulnerable and marginalized communities.
16. The Project is also consistent with the government’s second National Social and Economic
    Development Plan (Plan National de Developpement Economique et Social, PNDES II) 2021-2025 and
    the Agro-Sylvo-Pastoral National Investment Plan (Plan National d'Investissement Agro-Sylvo-
    Pastoral, PNIASP) 2021-2025. Both strategic documents prioritize resilience building to climate change
    and strengthening the Government response to food and nutrition insecurity. It also aligns with the
    agro-sylvo-pastoral production policy (Politique Sectorielle de Production Agro-Sylvo-Pastorale,
    PSPASP) 2018-2027 especially the focus area 1: “food and nutritional security and the resilience of
    vulnerable populations”.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase productivity, competitiveness, and climate
 resilience of selected agricultural value chains in the project areas.


  Key Results (From PCN)
17. The theory of change in Figure 1 below illustrates that the PDO objective will be achieved through:
    (i) adoption of modern technologies (including mechanization and CSA technologies) and
    development of irrigated land; (ii) support to diversification; (iii) strengthening producer organizations
    (POs) and facilitation of access to markets and infrastructure; (iv) agro-processing enterprise
    development and improved access to finance; (v) institutional strengthening of both public and
    private organizations to facilitate service delivery, and private sector financing. Key results include:
    (i) increased resilience to climate shocks; (ii) increased agriculture productivity; (iii) improved food
    and nutrition security; (iv) improved market linkages and increased agro-processing and value
    addition; In the medium and long term, the project will build Burkina Faso’s capacity for food
    production and supply and its resilience against climate and other shocks.

18.      Proposed key outcome level performance indicators include the following:
   i.    Yields of targeted agriculture products in project areas (%)
  ii.    Volumes of sales of beneficiary farmers and value chain actors in project areas (%) (disaggregated
         by gender and youth)
 iii.    Number of people with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Corporate Scorecard indicator)
 iv.     Number of people with strengthened food and nutrition security (Corporate Scorecard indicator)

                                                                                                            6
      The World Bank
      Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


The Results Chain is presented below. The theory of change in figure 1 is based on the result chain and
outlines the logical link between activities and expected outcomes. It summarizes the activities, the
outputs and intermediate outcomes that will lead to the achievement of the PDO. The Results Chain, and
achievement of the project’s objectives, depend on the following assumptions:
   i.   Increased preparedness and better coordination of response to crisis at initial stages (drought
        /flood/plants and animal pest & diseases) Producers are willing to adopt yield enhancing and
        processing technologies and climate-smart practices,
  ii.   Extension services have adequate capacity to provide technical advice and services in
        agricultural sector,
 iii.   Market conditions are favorable for local private sector SMEs and large enterprises to establish
        sustainable commercial linkages with farmer organizations,
 iv.    Enabling business environment for the agricultural modernization and to attract private
        investments,
  v.    Stable macro-economic environment and political stability.




                                                                                                      7
      The World Bank
      Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


Figure 1: Theory of change




                                                                                    8
        The World Bank
        Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)



 D. Concept Description

19. Agricultural production system improvements (e.g., improving productivity, system resilience to climate change,
    and diversification) and market development are known to reinforce each other and are therefore better pursued
    and accomplished together. The proposed project primarily seeks to improve agricultural productivity and diversify
    production, build resilience to climate change risks, and improve market access for farmers who can generate a
    competitive marketable surplus or substitute agricultural imports. The conceptual approach underlying the proposed
    design hinges on market demand as the trigger of a supply response (both increased volume and diversity of products)
    which is itself made possible through improvements in incentives for technology adoption - including access to
    finance.
20.     The project will build on and complement the following projects:

   i.   Investments in irrigation and water access: The project will build on lessons learned from the experience gained
        to expand and improve water use for irrigation through the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Support Project (PARIIS,
        P154482), the Burkina Faso Emergency Local Development and Resilience Project - (PUDTR, P175382), and the
        Burkina Faso Resilience and Competitiveness Project (PReCA, P167945). It will also build synergy and
        complementarity with Burkina Faso Water Security Project (PSE, P177094);
  ii.   Food Systems Resilience Program: The project will build on the FSRP (P172769) and seek to improve the resilience
        of Burkina Faso’s agriculture and food systems, thereby shifting focus and investments from a short-term crisis
        response to long term risk management and towards investments in building resilience against climate change.
 iii.   Access to finance: The project will seek synergy and complementarity with the Burkina Faso Entrepreneurship,
        Skills and Technology Project (ECOTEC, P177005);
 iv.    Access to Market: The project will seek synergy and complementarity with the Burkina Faso Emergency Local
        Development and Resilience Project - (PUDTR, P175382) and Sikasso- Korhogo-Bobo-Dioulasso (SKBo) Basin of
        Integration - Burkina Faso - (P181499).

PROJECT COMPONENTS:

21. The project is designed with four components: (i) Improving agricultural productivity and resilience to climate change,
    (ii) Improving storage, agro-processing and access to Markets, (iii) Promoting Access to Finance and private sector
    investment, and (iv) Institutional Strengthening and Project Coordination. The project includes a zero funded
    Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC).

Component 1: Improving agricultural productivity and resilience to climate change (Indicative Financing US$150 million)

22. The objective of this component is to increase crop productivity, strengthen farmers resilience to climatic shocks, and
    diversify crop production in response to effective market demand. Expected outcomes from this component include
    improved farm-level productivity, increased volume and quality of marketable produce, diversification of production,
    and improved nutrition. The component will focus on promotion and delivery of technologies and services that
    enhance resilience. Activities to be financed under this component include (i) strengthening of existing input (seeds,
    fertilizers) supply systems for improved availability and timely access to high quality inputs. More specifically, this will
    include assessment of existing systems, strengthening quality control mechanisms, expanding production and
    dissemination of improved planting material, certified seeds, fertilizers, and agrochemicals, among others; (ii)
    strengthening the delivery of advisory services (including support to capacity strengthening and outreach to farmers);
    and (iii) improving access to appropriate mechanization. The project will support irrigation scheme and lowland
    development with special focus on integrated soil fertility, organizational support regarding water management,

                                                                                                                           Page 9
       The World Bank
       Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


    including financing rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones and land tenure to
    ensure rights to cultivate for farmers benefiting of irrigated and low land allocation under the project. This will be
    done in close coordination with the Bank-financed Water security project (P177094) to enhance synergies with this
    project. The project will support and finance demand-driven applied agronomic research and strengthen advisory
    services to selected priority value-chains. The focus would be on testing and adapting a basket of climate smart
    technologies, innovation, and expertise to optimize the productivity of targeted crops as well as the profitability of
    investments. The project will also support the improvement of the competitiveness and climate resilience of the
    priority value chains.

Component 2: Improving storage, agro-processing and access to Markets (Indicative Financing US$70 million)

23. The objective of this component is to improve producers and actors along the value chains (aggregators/off-takers,
    processors, marketers, etc.) connection to domestic and export markets, as a way to generate jobs and economic
    opportunities for youths and women. Indeed, better connection to markets would increase farm profitability and
    incomes, incentivize continued adoption of productivity and resilience enhancing practices, and increase the range
    and quantity of locally produced agricultural commodities in both rural and urban markets. The component would
    support (i) the construction/rehabilitation of marketing infrastructures (including aggregation/storage facilities and
    drying areas) to facilitate market access, including investments needed for postharvest management to reduce food
    waste and loss and (ii) development of quality norms and standards, technical support, support to market knowledge
    and capacity-building for structures in charge of sanitary and phyto-sanitary control. Supported investment would be
    screened through climate lenses to ensure resilience to climate related shocks and use the best pathways to ensure
    sustainability and mitigation (ex. using solar powered technology for storage and processing).

Component 3: Promoting Access to Finance and private sector investment (Indicative financing US$55 million)

24. The objective of this component is to enhance access to finance for agri-entrepreneurs and farmers across production,
    processing, and marketing stages by improving financial education, supporting financial institutions in designing
    customized financial products, and developing adequate mechanisms to de-risk investments using the partial portfolio
    credit guarantee scheme established under the Bank funded financial inclusion support project which include a
    dedicated agri window. It promotes the alignment of financial services with commercial value chain needs,
    encouraging the adoption of innovative practices and technologies that integrate small farmers into these value
    chains, and developing risk management tools to address climate risks and reduce information asymmetry between
    lenders and borrowers. The component will fund a Matching Grants (MGs) mechanism to provide partial support to
    agriculture and agri-business operators to finance their investment Sub-Projects (SPs). The MG mechanism will target
    (i) smallholder producers, Producer Groups (PGs), cooperatives, and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)
    that need financing to create, upgrade and/ or modernize their existing production, storage and processing facilities,
    as well as (ii) all other private sector players and entrepreneurs involved in the agriculture value chain selected (e.g.,
    traders, transporters, equipment manufacturers, service providers) with similar needs. The project will assist value
    chain operators to (i) identify potential investment activities, and prepare viable business plans to secure access to
    funding. This activity cluster will support the creation and/or expansion of Business Development Services (BDSs ) to
    help investors develop viable business plans and coach them to ensure the success of their projects and provide
    technical assistance and capacity building to the service providers so that they can in turn strengthen the technical,
    entrepreneurial and management skills of their client investors; and (ii) identifying and mobilizing tools, technique
    and partners to de-risk investment across the supply chain segments, including support for the development of
    agricultural insurance instruments building on and expanding private sector led initiatives to protect farmers and
    agrobusinesses against insurable risk.


                                                                                                                        Page 10
       The World Bank
       Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project Coordination (Indicative Financing US$25 million)

25. This component will focus on all aspects of overall project management, including fiduciary and safeguards aspects,
    Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), knowledge management, and communication. It will also address critical cross-
    cutting institutional strengthening and training needs identified. Activities to be financed under this component
    include: (i) strengthening extension and the technical backstopping capacity of Government staff at all levels, filling
    the identified human resource gaps by financing higher technical qualifications of appropriate staff; (ii) establishing a
    rigorous M&E and Management Information Systems (MIS) and in their coordination with other essential line
    ministries; and (iii) support the capacity of the ministries to establish an effective fiduciary system for program funds
    management. The project will also support government ability for live monitoring of food and nutrition security crisis,
    leveraging on the Food Security Crisis Preparedness Plan. This would include early warning on plants and animal
    disease, pest, (locus, fall army worms, etc. in addition to other climate, market risks-drought, flood inflation etc.

26. Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0): This component will enable the
    government to quickly mobilize funds in the event of an emergency that requires immediate response.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Idriss Serme
   Senior Agriculture Economist

   Erick Herman Abiassi
   Senior Agriculture Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance and Forecasting

 Implementing Agencies


                                                                                                                        Page 11
     The World Bank
     Lijeeguoli - Burkina Faso Agriculture Business Enhancement Project(P507256)


 Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries
 Gaoussou Sanou
 General Secretary
 gsanou5@yahoo.fr

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Idriss Serme, Erick Herman Abiassi

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Elhadji Adama Toure                   15-Feb-2025

Country Director:                        Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil             11-Mar-2025




                                                                                             Page 12
