Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05364




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 22, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507658                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      HPRDP                       2026

                     Operation Name            Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Viet Nam                  Viet Nam                                EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC       Transport


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Socialist Republic of     Hai Phong City Project People's         04-Feb-2026                 27-May-2026
                     Viet Nam                  Committee

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     09-Dec-2025               408,812,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objectives (PDO) are to improve Hai Phong’s connectivity within the Northwest-Southeast
                     economic corridor, enhance Re River water quality, reduce flood risk in Hai Phong’s historical city center area, and
                     upgrade capacity for urban resilience management in selected areas of Hai Phong city.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project aims to improve the resilience of Hai Phong city through multisectoral investments in transport
                     connectivity, sanitation improvement, urban inundation reduction, and urban resilience capacity. The project will have
                     four components. Component 1 will support development of a new greenfield 18 km-long Ring Road 3 from the
                     intersection with the Bui Vien Road in Hai An area in the South to the intersection with National Highway 10 in the
                     Northwest. It will act as an extension of the Hanoi-Hai Phong Expressway to create better connections from the north to
                     the Lach Huyen port, Cat Bi airport and Hai Phong’s industrial parks/economic zones, resulting in lower net GHG


                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     emissions due to reduced truck traffic through the city center. Component 2 would help improve environmental
                     sanitation in the catchment area of Re River. It would include support for Re River infrastructure upgrades, Re River
                     basin environmental sanitation improvement including construction of the An Duong 1 Waste Water Treatment Plant
                     (WWTP) with a capacity of 10,000 m3 and construction of tertiary sewer network. Component 3 will help reduce flood
                     risk in the historical city center through an urban resilience strategy of delay, store and discharge and includes
                     construction of two new sluice gates at the joints of existing Tam Bac River with Thuong Ly river and Cam River, thus
                     transforming it into a regulation lake of 10.1 ha for meeting the increasing storm water regulation demand. Component
                     4 will help enhance capacity.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Hai Phong, located in the Red River Delta, is Vietnam’s third-largest city by economic scale and a leading industrial and
                     maritime hub. Its deep-water port positions Hai Phong as the Northern region’s primary gateway for transport and a
                     center for economic, cultural, and technological advancement. Just 106 km from Hanoi, Hai Phong anchors the Northern
                     Key Economic Zone, promoting regional collaboration and growth. The project spans urban and rapidly developing peri-
                     urban areas, focusing on flood-prone districts in the city center and expanding zones such as Thuy Nguyen.
                     Interventions follow major transport corridors and river basins. There are no IP or significant ethnic minority
                     communities, as defined by ESS7; the population is predominantly Kinh. Social risks are mainly associated with land
                     acquisition resettlement.

                     Key interventions include WWTPs, pumping stations, sluice gates, and large-scale transport infrastructure such as Ring



Public Disclosure
                     Road 3 and bridges crossing the Cam and Ruot Lon rivers. While activities occur in modified urban landscapes, Hai
                     Phong’s extensive 125 km coastline and river systems render it highly susceptible to climate challenges like typhoons,
                     saline intrusion, and coastal erosion. The project does not affect high-biodiversity or protected habitats and does not
                     involve critical tangible or intangible cultural heritage. Environmental risks are largely confined to water quality and
                     disturbances from construction. This initiative offers substantial opportunities to strengthen climate resilience, improve
                     water security, and enhance urban environmental conditions. It incorporates nature-based solutions for flood
                     management, advanced wastewater treatment technologies, and real-time systems for monitoring water and air
                     quality. Institutional capacity-building and strengthening components will help Hai Phong integrate disaster risk
                     management and environmental monitoring, supporting the long-term sustainability of these investments.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Hai Phong City People’s Committee (CPC) is the legitimate authority responsible for making project investment
                     decisions, overall project management, and providing strategic guidance and oversight, reporting directly to the
                     Government. Under CPC’s leadership, the Hai Phong Project Management Unit (PMU) functions as the designated
                     implementing agency, managing the project through all stages. The PMU brings relevant experience from previous
                     World Bank-funded operations, and its departments, including those with E&S staff, are knowledgeable about WB
                     safeguard protocols. However, they have limited experience in preparing and implementing a project under the ESF This
                     highlights the need for targeted training and capacity-building to ensure familiarity with ESF principles such as
                     proportionality, adaptive management, and new requirements related to labor and working conditions, community and
                     occupational health and safety (OHS), modified natural habitats, and robust stakeholder engagement. Additionally, the
                     responsibility for LAR implementation and grievance redress primarily falls to commune-level agencies, which currently
                     face staffing shortages and capacity limitations, which may hinder the timely execution of land-related tasks.

                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     Consequently, the Bank team anticipates a heightened need for ongoing, hands-on support in E&S risk management
                     during both project preparation and execution. Compared to previous safeguard frameworks, this project will require
                     additional resources and staff time to ensure effective compliance with ESF requirements.

                     To address these challenges, proposed mitigation measures include ESF implementation training and comprehensive
                     capacity assessments provided by the WB team during project preparation and rollout. Capacity building efforts will also
                     involve recruiting additional qualified staff, delivering extended hands-on implementation support (HEIS), and
                     mobilizing supervision and monitoring consultants to strengthen overall E&S management.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The Project’s environmental risk rating is Substantial. The project will be implemented in the urban setting and is
                     unlikely to impact any critical habitats. The proposed infrastructure includes urban roads and bridges, river
                     embankments, storm water drainage, wastewater collection and treatment systems, and sluice gates. The key
                     environmental risks and impacts during the construction include: (i) increased levels of dust, emission, and
                     construction waste; (ii) partial loss of river protection forest to accommodate bridge supports, leading to river
                     erosion; (iii) impact on water quality and aquatic habitats from river embankment and bridge works, including
                     flooding risks due from drainage disruption and related construction activities; (iv) occupational and community



Public Disclosure
                     health and safety on and off site; (v) land degradation from the extraction of large quantities of construction
                     materials; (vi) Risks from unexploded ordnance; (vii) cracking and subsidence risks to nearby houses and
                     infrastructures during river embankment and bridge piling; (viii) potential water and soil pollution from disposal of a
                     moderate amount of excavated materials from acquired aquaculture ponds. OHS and community risks during
                     construction include heavy machine operations, working over water environment and at height, traffic safety risks,
                     especially at intersections with the national highway. The construction-phase risks and impacts are short-term,
                     moderate to substantial, and reversible. Operational risks and impacts include accidents and injury due to road traffic
                     in some densely populated areas or near sensitive establishments, as well as environmental impacts such as odor and
                     sludge management and OHS concerns at wastewater treatment system (WWTS), pollution risk of WWTS failure.
                     These impacts are long-term but reversible and can be mitigated through sound design, construction practices, and
                     operational controls. The environmental risk rating will be reassessed during project preparation.
                                                                                                                                           High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project’s social risk rating is High, driven by significant land acquisition and resettlement (LAR) that will
                     permanently affect approximately 203 hectares and around 2,675 households, with about 870 requiring relocations.
                     This will cause disruptions on urban livelihoods and business activities, particularly during sewer and road works. Risks
                     extend beyond LAR, including challenges in acquiring land for resettlement sites, potential delays in site development,
                     and disproportionate impacts on households squatting or encroaching for residence or income. The relocation of
                     graves may affect cultural practices and sentiments. Construction and operational phases pose further risks to
                     community health and safety, including increased traffic accidents and exposure to hazards. Labor influx could raise
                     concerns about risks of sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA-SH), as well as the spread of diseases.


                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                     Disadvantaged households may face difficulties accessing project benefits, such as connecting to the sewage system.
                     The PMU comprises experienced staff familiar with WB-financed projects and E&S policies. However, stakeholders
                     must familiarize with the new ESF, especially in labor conditions, non-discrimination, community health and safety,
                     cultural heritage, and stakeholder engagement. Commune-level administrative units, responsible for LAR, may face
                     capacity constraints and heavy workloads, potentially affecting the efficiency of resettlement activities. Mitigation of
                     these impacts will require early planning and targeted interventions, including the Resettlement Plan (RP)/Livelihood
                     Restoration Program (LRP), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP), which will
                     be developed by appraisal and adaptively implemented during execution.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The project involves infrastructure construction and upgrades in the relatively dense urban setting, with potential
                      impacts on residential areas, transport corridors, and sensitive receptors. Screening has been informed by site visits
                      and the pre-feasibility study, indicating substantial environmental risk due to the scale of works such as roads,
                      bridges, and wastewater systems. Key construction risks and impacts include dust and emissions, water quality
                      impacts from river embankment and bridge works, and OHS and CHS concerns. Operational risks encompass traffic
                      hazards and odor and sludge management at WWTS, requiring robust mitigation through good design and
                      management measures. Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments will be prepared in line with the WB’s ESF and



Public Disclosure
                      national regulations, including an ESIA for the entire project and an ESMP with site-specific mitigation measures for
                      each component to address and manage direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts before appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      Key stakeholders are project-affected parties and other interested parties, including all-level city’s agencies and
                      departments, the PMU, local communities, marginalized groups, resettlement units, and mass organizations. The
                      stakeholder engagement process ensures transparent, informed, and meaningful consultations throughout the
                      project lifecycle. The PMU is preparing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), proportionate to the project’s nature,
                      scale, and associated risks/impacts. The SEP will incorporate an operational national Grievance Redress Mechanism
                      (GRM), which will be maintained to facilitate resolution in a transparent, culturally respectful manner, ensuring full
                      accessibility for all parties. Ongoing assessment will inform the extent to which national mechanism can be relied
                      upon and gap-filling needed. All draft E&S instruments will be available and disclosed prior to appraisal, informing
                      stakeholders of proposed activities, potential risks/impacts, and mitigation measures.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      Viet Nam’s labor laws and international commitments, including the Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining
                      Convention, align broadly with ESS2. A Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared to cover direct workers
                      (PMU staff and consultants), contracted workers, and primary supply workers. The LMP will define terms and
                      conditions of employment in alignment with national law and ESS2, and include measures for OHS to prevent
                      accidents and injuries; functional worker Grievance Mechanism for accessible, confidential channels for complaints,


                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      including SEA/SH-sensitive procedures; Codes of Conduct for all workers to prevent SEA/SH and promote respectful
                      workplace behavior. Worker safety risks include accidents from heavy machinery, working at height, water
                      environments, and traffic hazards near busy intersections. The ESIA/ESMP will detail mitigation measures. The ESCP
                      will set out LMP implementation and compliance monitoring throughout the project lifecycle.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      Risks and impacts under ESS3 have been identified, including pollutant release, waste management, and resource
                      efficiency. The project will consume substantial raw materials, requiring careful planning to avoid land degradation
                      from poorly managed extraction. Construction waste could contaminate soil and water if not properly disposed of.
                      Excavated material includes a small volume from bridge pier foundations and about 150,000 m³ of wet, degraded soil
                      from 30 ha of acquired aquaculture ponds, which may have high salinity. These materials pose contamination risks if
                      mishandled. Removal of some flood protection plants may cause river embankment erosion. Mitigation measures
                      include an Excavation & Materials Management Plan, legal disposal areas, and ensuring all aggregate sources have
                      required environmental licenses and permits, as outlined in the ESMP.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Construction poses risks to nearby communities from noise, vibration, dust, emissions, and traffic hazards, especially
                      at highway intersections. Other concerns include UXO hazards, cracking and subsidence near homes, and soil and
                      water contamination from waste and excavated materials from aquaculture ponds. Operational risks include traffic
                      accidents in dense areas and odor and sludge issues at wastewater treatment sites. Mitigation measures, including




Public Disclosure
                      UXO clearance, strict site and traffic management, waste control, SEA/SH monitoring, and climate-resilient design,
                      will be included in the ESMP.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      A total of 2,675 HHs will be affected, resulting in the physical relocation of 870 HHs to multi-purpose resettlement
                      sites developed in accordance with city’s planning, due to the acquisition of about 203 ha of land. The primary
                      impacts include: (i) loss of various types of land; (ii) loss of assets, businesses, graves, crops, and trees and (iii)
                      disruption to livelihoods and business activities during construction. Both formal landowners and informal users -
                      including roadside vendors and tenants occupying the existing ROW - will be affected. Comprehensive resettlement
                      planning is underway, with detailed mitigation measures being developed. Technical alternatives to avoid or minimize
                      land take are also being considered. A Resettlement Plan (RP), including a robust Grievance Redress Mechanism, is
                      being prepared to ensure adaptive mitigation and restoration of affected people’s living conditions. The RP also
                      includes a detailed and well-tailored livelihood restoration program (LRP).

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                 Relevant
                      Resources

                      Project activities will take place near and on rivers, including construction of bridges, sluice gates, embankments,
                      WWTS, and road works. These activities may affect water quality and aquatic life by increasing turbidity and altering
                      natural conditions. Limited removal of approximately 1.2 ha of planted protection forest (not a protected forest)
                      along riverbanks could increase erosion and sedimentation risks. While the project area is not expected to impact on
                      critical habitats, poorly managed dredging and disposal of excavated material could lead to habitat degradation.


                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      Discharge from WWTS could pose a risk to downstream aquatic ecosystems if effluent standards are not met. The
                      ESIA will assess biodiversity values and aquatic ecosystems, and the ESMP will include proportionate measures such
                      as erosion control, proper siting of disposal areas, restoration of vegetation, and forest offset measures. A standalone
                      Biodiversity Management Plan is unlikely to be required.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The screening determined that there are no ethnic minorities present in the area affected by the project. As a result,
                      this standard does not apply.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      The project is not expected to have material impact to tangible or intangible cultural heritage which will be confirmed
                      through E&S instrument preparation. Tangible cultural sites are at a distance from the proposed sites and should not
                      be adversely affected by land acquisition or construction impacts (e.g. vibrations, waste disposal or congestion). The
                      ESIA will conduct further screening to identify tangible and intangible cultural heritage and provide any mitigation
                      measures. The ESMP will include a chance find procedure to manage any events where tangible cultural heritage is
                      discovered.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant, as the project does not involve any financial intermediaries.



Public Disclosure    B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        TBD
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        In Part
                       The project will apply the Borrower’s E&S Framework in part, supplemented by gap-filling measures to ensure full
                       alignment with the objectives of the WB ESSs. Viet Nam’s legal and institutional framework provides a solid
                       foundation for land acquisition, compensation, labor regulation, and grievance handling. Regarding ESS5, national
                       laws address compensation and resettlement, but do not fully cover eligibility for informal land users, livelihood
                       restoration, and monitoring. To bridge these gaps and achieve alignment with ESS5 and national laws, a RP and
                       tailored livelihood restoration measures will be prepared and implemented. For ESS2, national labor laws broadly
                       align with ESS2. An LMP will be developed to address labor issues, OHS risks and SEA/SH concerns. The Borrower’s
                       operational GRM, including the GRM for project workers will be maintained and operated to ensure accessibility,
                       responsiveness, and SEA/SH risk management.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No


                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                       No

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     To assess and manage E&S risks, the Borrower will prepare and publicly disclose the draft E&S instruments in a form
                     and language appropriate to stakeholders to meaningfully reflect feedback into project design and for appropriate
                     adaptive mitigation measures.

                     Prior to Appraisal:
                     (1) Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     (2) Draft Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                     (3) Draft Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     (4) Draft Resettlement Plan (RP), and
                     (5) Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

                     Areas to be addressed in the ESCP:
                     (1)     Commitment to prepare and implement the E&S instruments as per the requirements of relevant ESSs, i.e.,
                     ESCP, ESIA, LMP, RP, and SEP
                     (2)     Adequate allocation of resources for implementation of the ESF, ESSs and E&S instruments




Public Disclosure
                     (3)     Commitment to prepare and implement a capacity building plan with strong focus on implementation of ESF,
                     ESSs and E&S instruments
                     (4)     Update RP, based on DMS and RCS results
                     (5)     Maintain and publicize the Project Grievance Redress Mechanism

                     The timeframe for these instruments during implementation will be specified in the ESCP, and are expected to be prior
                     to the project effective date. The timeframe for RP will have to ensure that RP's actions are implemented prior to the
                     commencement of physical works.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Pratap Tvgssshrk                     Title:          Senior Transport Specialist

                      Email:                  tpratap@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Cuong Duc Dang                       Job Title:      Sr Urban Spec.

                      Email:                  Cdang@worldbank.org




                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                                   Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project (P507658)



                      TTL Contact:            Phyrum Kov                          Job Title:    Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                Specialist

                      Email:                  pkov@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                            Pratap Tvgssshrk, Cuong Duc Dang, Phyrum Kov

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                   Thuy Cam Duong

                     ADM Social Specialist:                          Thong Trung Le




Public Disclosure




                    Dec 22, 2025                                                                                               Page 9 of 9
