Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   First Zambia Recovery and Resilience Programmatic DPF with CAT-DDO (P507116)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Sep-2024 | Report No: PIDIC00171




Public Disclosure Authorized
      The World Bank
      First Zambia Recovery and Resilience Programmatic DPF with CAT-DDO (P507116)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID              Operation Name
                                                          First Zambia Recovery and Resilience Programmatic DPF
 Zambia                         P507116
                                                          with CAT-DDO
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)         Financing Instrument
 EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                     Macroeconomics, Trade        Development Policy
                                12-Dec-2024
 AFRICA                                                   and Investment               Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 Ministry of Finance and        Ministry of Finance and
 National Planning              National Planning

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The program development objectives are to make Zambia's economy more resilient to shocks and underpin a private-
 sector-led recovery in enabling sectors

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                To be decided
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?          To be decided

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                        100.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                       100.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                   100.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                                                                                                              Page 1
        The World Bank
        First Zambia Recovery and Resilience Programmatic DPF with CAT-DDO (P507116)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
    1. Zambia faces significant climate change impacts and fiscal constraints, calling for a concerted focus on
    disaster risk management (DRM) and resilience to support an inclusive recovery and fiscal sustainability. Poverty
    increased from 57 percent in 2010 to 60 percent in 2022 (national poverty line). The current drought, the driest in
    40 years, has affected 9.8 million people, with 6.6 million facing severe food insecurity. Only 31 percent of the 2.2
    million hectares of planted maize was harvested. Real GDP growth is projected to drop from an average of 5.6
    percent between 2021-2023 to 2.3 percent in 2024, worsening poverty. Public spending pressures from the
    drought response will turn last year's primary surplus into a deficit. At the same time, Zambia is in debt distress
    and remains committed to concluding debt restructuring through the G20 Common Framework and fiscal
    consolidation under an IMF program. This context calls for strengthening DRM to build resilience to poverty-
    increasing shocks and preserve hard-won progress toward sustainable public finances.
    2. Zambia’s markets and physical infrastructure in enabling sectors are deficient and not climate-resilient,
    discouraging private sector participation and exacerbating vulnerabilities to shocks. Zambia relies on
    hydropower for electricity generation, and under the ongoing drought, it is facing a power generation deficit
    surpassing 1,000MW, with load-shedding exceeding 20 hours per day. Drying water sources, decreasing
    groundwater availability, and power outages are severely impacting the supply and access to safe water for firms
    and households in affected areas. Huge infrastructure gaps discourage private sector development and constrain
    economic growth. At the same time, public capital expenditure is expected to remain low in the medium term,
    hovering around 3-4 percent of GDP due to fiscal constraints. Private investment showed a strong correlation with
    economic growth in the past decade,1 and it will be essential to narrow infrastructure gaps that also enhance
    climate resilience.
 Relationship to CPF
    3. The proposed operation supports the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Zambia for FY19–24 and the
    upcoming CPF FY25-29. Under the former, Pillar A and Pillar B reforms contribute to achieving CPF objectives 1.2
    (rural communities more resilient to climate and environmental shocks), 2.1 (access to social protection, with
    attention to rural girls and women), and 3.1 (fiscal and financial fitness). Pillar C contributes to objective 1.3 (access
    to and quality of resilient infrastructure services in rural areas and small towns). Moreover, the DPF series
    contributes to achieving Zambia’s CPF FY25-29 objective 1 (business environment for private investment),
    objective 2 (connectivity and increase energy access), objective 4 (targeting and effectiveness of social protection),
    objective 5 (natural resources management and climate-smart agriculture), and objective 6 (climate risk
    management systems and financing).
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

    4. The program development objectives are to make Zambia's economy more resilient to shocks and underpin a
    private-sector-led recovery in enabling sectors




1 Zambia Selected Issues Paper (IMF, 2023).



                                                                                                                             Page 2
     The World Bank
     First Zambia Recovery and Resilience Programmatic DPF with CAT-DDO (P507116)


Key Results
  5. The DPF series expects to increase the number of people with enhanced resilience to climate risks through
  better disaster preparedness and shock-responsive social protection programs. It also expects to increase fiscal
  resilience to shocks, including climate, through a stabilization fund and carbon revenues. Finally, the programmatic
  series expects to enable and mobilize private capital through PPPs in the energy, water, and transport sectors,
  increasing resilient water and electricity access.
D. Concept Description
  6. Pillar A improves the coordination and effectiveness of the GRZ in managing disasters and enhances household
  resilience to climate shocks. Pillar B strengthens Zambia’s public finances, creating buffers against natural
  disasters, improving the debt management framework, and making the budget more resilient to climate shocks.
  Pillar C bolsters private sector participation in critical enabling sectors while making them more climate-resilient,
  reducing the financial impacts of future natural disasters.
E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Poverty and Social Impacts
  7. This operation aims to reduce vulnerability to poverty, which is high and exacerbated by weather and
  health-related shocks. Zambia's exposure to such shocks negatively impacts food security, access to services,
  human capital, and assets. In 2022, 25 percent of the poor and 11.4 percent of the non-poor were affected by
  drought, while 11 percent and 5 percent, respectively, were affected by floods. PAs #1, #2, #3, #4, and #5 aim to
  enhance the government's shock response capabilities, crucial for protecting the poor and marginalized. The
  response to the 2024 drought highlighted both the limitations and potential of the social protection system.
  Structural vulnerabilities are largely due to poor access to services. Improving infrastructure and access through
  private sector involvement (PAs #6, #7, #8) and enhanced resilience (PAs #7 and #8) will help close these gaps
  sustainably, though benefits will materialize in the medium term. Additional analysis would be required to assess
  the potential impacts of water tariff changes (PA#8).
Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
  8. Most prior actions do not present significant environmental risks, thanks to national legislation that
  mandates environmental assessments for infrastructure projects. However, PA7 may lead to increased electronic
  waste from small-scale renewable energy sources like solar equipment. To mitigate this, electronic waste
  regulations and hazardous waste regulations ensure proper management and disposal, preventing environmental
  pollution. An individual assessment of the environmental effects of each prior action will be provided at the ROC
  stage.




                                                                                                                      Page 3
     The World Bank
     First Zambia Recovery and Resilience Programmatic DPF with CAT-DDO (P507116)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Albert Pijuan Sala
 Senior Economist

 Jorge Fernando Tudela Pye
 Economist

 Ignacio M. Urrutia Duarte
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance and National Planning
 Joseph Chanda
 Assistant Director
 joseph.chanda@mofnp.gov.zm
 Mulele Maketo Mulele
 Director Economic Management
 Mulele.Maketo@mofnp.gov.zm

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Finance and National Planning
 Mulele Maketo Mulele
 Director Economic Management
 Mulele.Maketo@mofnp.gov.zm

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Albert Pijuan Sala, Jorge Fernando Tudela Pye, Ignacio M. Urrutia Duarte


                                                                                                                   Page 4
     The World Bank
     First Zambia Recovery and Resilience Programmatic DPF with CAT-DDO (P507116)



Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Abha Prasad                          16-Sep-2024

Country Director:                      Achim Fock                           27-Sep-2024




                                                                                          Page 5
