Public Disclosure Authorized
                                             The World Bank
                                             Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                                 Appraisal Stage
                                                                           (ESRS Appraisal Stage)

Public Disclosure Authorized




                 Public Disclosure
                                                             Date Prepared/Updated: 05/21/2026 | Report No: ESRSA05045




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                     May 22, 2026                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507944                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      PRODUIRE                   2027

                     Operation Name            Integrated Urban Development and Resilience Project for Jobs

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Madagascar                Madagascar                              EASTERN AND                Urban, Subnational
                                                                                       SOUTHERN AFRICA            Finance, Disaster
                                                                                                                  Management, Tourism

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Economy       Ministry of Planning and Land           19-May-2026                01-Jul-2026
                     and Finance               Management

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     08-Jul-2025               225,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the climate resilience of urban communities, improve land
                     administration, and support jobs in selected cities .


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Integrated Urban Development and Resilience Project for Jobs (PRODUIRE) is the second operation of a
                     programmatic approach initiated with PRODUIR (P159756, FY17), which demonstrated the viability of an integrated
                     urban resilience model in Greater Antananarivo (GA). PRODUIRE scales the model geographically to Greater Toamasina
                     (GA) while deepening interventions in GA, with the overarching objective of reducing flood risk, housing vulnerability,
                     and land administration deficits to enable job creation. The project comprises four components totaling US$225 million.
                     Component 1 – Foundational Urban Infrastructure and Climate Resilience (US$202.5 million) finances integrated urban

                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                  Page 2 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                     resilience investments across GA and GT through three subcomponents. In GA, subcomponent 1.1 finances the
                     rehabilitation and upgrading of urban infrastructure such as - but not limited to - drainage canals, retention basins,
                     pumping stations, and river dikes along the Ikopa, Mamba, and Sisaony rivers in GA in line with the Drainage Master
                     Plan, including capacity strengthening for APIPA ; (b) neighborhood-level urban upgrading including elevated pedestrian
                     pathways, climate-adapted public spaces, and improvements in designated economic development zones ; (c) solid
                     waste management optimization along drainage corridors covering improved waste collection, sorting, transfer
                     infrastructure, landfill operations, and institutional reform support ; and (d) technical studies and designs for resilient
                     urban infrastructure to identify investment-ready projects for future operations. In GT, subcomponent 1.2 supports risk-
                     informed, housing reconstruction for approximately 20,000 households in GT affected by Cyclone Gezani, using
                     government-approved resilient housing typologies; Housing Reconstruction Centers providing technical assistance,
                     construction supervision, and resilient construction skills training; strengthening of the Housing Department's
                     institutional capacity for risk-informed urban planning; and rehabilitation and reconstruction of drainage canals and
                     socio-economic infrastructure. Subcomponent 1.3 strengthens disaster preparedness and response through the design
                     of multipurpose emergency shelters in targeted municipalities built to climate-resilient standards, modernization of the
                     national early warning system including pilots for location-based messaging and cell broadcast technology, and
                     reinforcement of the National Contingency Fund as a scalable disaster risk financing mechanism for municipalities.
                     Component 2 – Improving Land Administration and Urban Governance for Job Creation (US$16.5 million) addresses the
                     institutional and fiscal barriers to private investment and job creation through two subcomponents. Subcomponent 2.1
                     finances systematic land regularization in GA and GT using a participatory community-based approach with explicit
                     attention to women's land rights, the establishment of a national Land Information System integrating property data
                     across cadastral, registry, and local land offices, the upgrading of geodetic networks and ICT infrastructure, and




Public Disclosure
                     renovation of land offices. Subcomponent 2.2 supports the updating of land use plans, digitization of municipal asset
                     management linking building permits, flood data, and property tax records with the LIS, and advancement of property
                     tax (IFPB) reform in Greater Antananarivo to broaden the tax base and generate own-source revenues for infrastructure
                     operations and maintenance. Component 3 – Project Management and Coordination (US$6 million) finances
                     incremental operating costs, procurement, financial management, environmental and social standards management,
                     monitoring and evaluation, and communications to ensure effective implementation and coordination across all
                     components, including capacity building for the PMU and support to the National Environmental Office. Component 4 –
                     Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$0 million) is a zero-cost component enabling rapid reallocation of
                     uncommitted funds from other components in the event of a natural disaster or emergency declared during project
                     implementation, governed by an Emergency Action Plan agreed with the World Bank.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project targets Greater Antananarivo (GA) and Greater Toamasina (GT), a rapidly expanding urban center in
                     Madagascar, facing significant infrastructure gaps, unplanned urbanization, and high vulnerability to flooding. The
                     context is urban, characterized by high-density informal settlements and complex land tenure challenges. Solid Waste
                     Management (SWM) remains inadequate, with poor waste collection and disposal, and institutional fragmentation that
                     exacerbates flooding and public health risks.
                     The project areas are densely populated, with several vulnerable urban populations (urban poor, migrants, informal
                     settlers) and in modified habitats of low ecological value.
                     About 77 percent of settlements in Antananarivo are informal and lack basic infrastructure and services. Only 53
                     percent of the land is titled of which only 25 percent of the parcels are registered in the name of the current owners;

                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                     and only 12 percent of the occupants of a titled property have undertaken the measures necessary to officially register a
                     sale or inheritance. Many parcels have subdivided and transferred informally with unclear and at times contested land
                     ownership, leaving the boundaries of legally registered parcels no longer corresponding to the current parcel
                     boundaries.
                     Toamasina is the second-largest city in Madagascar and the country’s main operational seaport infrastructure,
                     managing a significant share of international trade. It is a major economic hub driven by port activities, commerce,
                     services, fishing, cash-crop agriculture, and processing industries. The city is characterized by high urban density, rapid
                     and unplanned population growth, and significant social vulnerability, (mainly individuals in extreme poverty,
                     wastepickers, female-headed households), with much of the urban areas located in highly modified and
                     environmentally degraded habitats of low ecological value. Urban infrastructure remains insufficient, particularly in
                     terms of sanitation, waste management, housing, and access to public services. Exposed to tropical cyclones, heavy
                     rainfall, coastal flooding, and storm surges, Toamasina faces high climate vulnerability. The intense tropical cyclone
                     Cyclone Gezani recently struck the city with winds reaching 250 km/h, causing severe flooding and worsening socio-
                     economic impacts. Cyclone Gezani triggered a significant human and housing crisis in Greater Toamasina. The impact of
                     Cyclone Gezani on the housing stock in GT underscores how non‑risk‑informed urbanization amplifies flood exposure
                     and long‑term vulnerability.
                     The PRODUIR 1 (P159756) successfully carried out the desludging operations and the management of dredging sludge
                     into dedicated facilities, including the establishment and operation of a pretreatment site and a containment site, with
                     monitoring of leachate quality before its discharge into the natural watercourse.




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     MATSF is the leading implementing agency for the project. MATSF will be responsible for overall project coordination,
                     strategic oversight, and alignment with national urban resilience and land governance policies through the Project
                     management Unit (PMU) for all coordination activities and based in Antananativo, a Project management Unit for
                     Toamasina (TMU), and with support of AGETIPA as a Delegated Implementing Agency for subcomponent 1.1 in
                     Antananarivo. An additionnal Delegated Implementing Agency will be hired lately for Toamasina. A steering committee
                     and sectoral working groups will guide and provide technical contributions. The PMU as well as the TMU (for
                     Toamasina), established under MATSF, will be responsible for day-to-day project management, procurement,
                     environmental and social risks management financial management for all project’s components, monitoring and
                     evaluation, and reporting. A Project Steering Committee will be established to provide strategic guidance, ensure
                     inter‑ministerial coordination, and align the project with the national urban resilience and land reform agendas. The
                     Committee will include representatives from MATSF, BNGRC, the MEAH, the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
                     Development (MEDD), the Ministry of Industrialization and Private Sector Development (MID), municipalities, and other
                     relevant stakeholders, and will operate on a quarterly decision‑making cycle, supported by a Technical Secretariat to
                     facilitate coordination, track actions, and address implementation bottlenecks. The DGSF from MATSF will coordinate
                     activities related to land regularization, legal reforms, and the development of the national LIS. The municipalities of
                     Grand Antananarivo and Grand Toamasina will play a strategic and operational role in citizen engagement, community
                     participation, municipal governance reforms, service delivery improvements, and fiscal modernization. It will also
                     oversee the rehabilitation of the multi-use emergency shelter. The MEAH and MEDD will provide strategical and
                     technical leadership on drainage and SWM, ensuring alignment with national sectoral strategies and E&S risk
                     management. The BNGRC under the Ministry of Interior and Decentralization will support the implementation of EWS,
                     contingency planning, and emergency preparedness under the CERC component. Coordination with APIPA and the


                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                     Directorate of Meteorology will be essential to operationalize multi-hazard early warning protocols and ensure rapid
                     response capacity. The HD under MATSF will provide guidance and support to implement the housing recovery activity.
                     MATSF PMU, as well as AGETIPA has built solid capacity in procurement, financial management, contract management,
                     and application of E&S Standards during nine years of implementing PRODUIR (P159756). The current MATSF E&S as
                     well as AGETIPA E&S specialists (an environmental specialist and a social specialist) have already benefitted from several
                     ESF trainings as well as SEA/SH training conducted by the World Bank team. The current E&S performance of the PMU
                     as well as the AGETIPA is rated as moderately satisfactory.
                     To ensure the management of the environmental and social aspects of this operation, the PMU shall, at all times during
                     project implementation, retain the following positions, inter alia, each with terms of reference, qualifications, and
                     experience satisfactory to the Association: an environmental specialist, a social specialist, and a GBV specialist. The TMU
                     shall be equiped by one Environmental and Social Specialist (with more qualification on social), on GBV specialist and
                     AGETIPA shall also, at all times during project implementation, retain the following staff, inter alia, each with terms of
                     reference, qualifications, and experience satisfactory to the Association: an environmental specialist, a social specialist.
                     The PMU’s as well as TMU’S environmental, social, and GBV specialists will work collaboratively with the National Office
                     of Environment (ONE), the national authority responsible for environmental and social management and also ensure
                     compliance with national E&S frameworks and regulations all developed E&S documents. They shall also ensure to
                     apply standards, procedures, and monitoring requirements; ensure the systematic integration of E&S provisions into
                     procurement documents and contracts; prepare and implement E&S instruments with adequate budgetary provisions;
                     ensure OHS/ESH provisions on civil works during project implementation. An environmental and social capacity
                     assessment was conducted during the preparation of this operation. Therefore an E&S capacity-building program and
                     plan should be developed, adapted and implemented during project implementation. These commitments are reflected




Public Disclosure
                     in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).




                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                    High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                      Substantial
                     The project’s anticipated activities, particularly large-scale urban drainage and flood protection works (embankments,
                     Floodwalls, drainage systems, retention and detention basins), solid waste management improvements, urban
                     upgrading, and resilient housing reconstruction, present substantial environmental risks typical of complex urban
                     infrastructure investments in dense and environmentally stressed settings. The project may generate environmental
                     risks and impacts associated with urban infrastructure development, flood protection works, housing reconstruction,
                     and emergency shelter construction. These interventions include several environmental risks, including: (i) challenges
                     in leachate management and stormwater control; (ii) increa`sed turbidity and sedimentation downstream, affecting
                     aquatic habitats; (iii) elevated levels of dust, noise, and odors, contributing to air pollution and pest proliferation; (iv)
                     occupational health and safety (OHS) risks for workers; (v) fire hazards; (vi) road safety risks associated with
                     construction activities; (vii) community health and safety concerns; and (viii) disruption of socio-economic activities
                     along the Ikopa River, the Mamba River, and the Sisaony River. These waterways are highly anthropized, with riverine
                     ecosystems and wetlands characterized by degraded aquatic habitats and low ecological value. These risks are


                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                          Page 5 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                     heightened by climate variability, recurrent flooding, and the cumulative nature of interventions across Greater
                     Antananarivo and Greater Toamasina. All environmental risks will be addressed through application of the mitigation
                     hierarchy and managed in accordance with ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS6, and ESS8, using site specific ESIAs/ESMPs,
                     strict waste and hazardous materials management procedures, climate informed engineering designs, and
                     strengthened institutional capacity for environmental oversight and monitoring. However, these risks and impacts can
                     be mitigated to acceptable levels through the implementation of specific ESMP and health and safety protocols;
                     effective community engagement and consultation; robust monitoring systems for air, water, and leachate quality;
                     and the continuation of best practices developed under PRODUIR 1, such as the use of liners, gas capture systems,
                     leachate treatment, and proper drainage infrastructure. The rehabilitation of dikes and drainage improvements will
                     be subject to an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and the Environmental and Social Management
                     Plans (ESMPs), to be finalized at Appraisal. Additionally, the project's Technical Assistance (TA) may catalyze future
                     investments in the proposed new landfill and resource recovery facility, which could generate downstream and
                     cumulative environmental impacts requiring further assessment and mitigation.
                                                                                                                                            High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk for the project is rated as High due to the nature of the planned interventions, particularly the
                     challenges related to land tenure and informal settlements in thecomplex urban contexts of Antananarivo and
                     Greater Toamasina. Key social risks and impacts identified include: (i) involuntary resettlement risks, including
                     physical and economic displacement, resulting from the land acquisition expected to be carried out for the project’s
                     infrastructure works, and business interruption associated to a difficulty on the achievment of compensation process
                     (due to complex procedures, limited institutional commitment) ; significant adverse impacts on informal livelihoods,




Public Disclosure
                     including of those dependent on informal recycling (waste pickers, which may include highly vulnerable individuals in
                     extreme poverty), as a result of the expected changes to the existing landfill operations, as well as of those involved in
                     informal commerce in areas targeted for infrastructure development. To date around 2600 parcells, 4000 households
                     could be permanently or temporary impacted by land acquisition as well as by physical or economical displacement,
                     many of which are socioeconomically vulnerable; (ii) risk of local tensions, particularly as part of the land tenure
                     certification process, which may involve a significant proportion of contested land ownership due to the high
                     proportion of informal settlements (77%) and a complex and often contested land tenure system with discrepancies
                     between official records and actual occupancy but also for the provision of housing reconstruction grants to affected
                     households in urban and rural areas of Grand Toamasina, fair and inclusive selection process in order to prevent any
                     disputes from communities and authorities, tension, exclusion of vulnerable groups, and elite capture; (iii) community
                     health and safety risks, including those associated with the expected interactions between contractors’ workers and
                     the local population, construction accidents for the population in areas surrounding civil works, traffic accident
                     increases, and potentially increased levels of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harrassment (SH), and
                     transmission of communicable diseases as well; (iv) downstream social impacts of the TA activities, especially the new
                     landfill whose studies will be supported by the Project; (v) and potential impacts on cultural heritage. The project's
                     multi-sectoral nature and the involvement of several implementing agencies will add to the complexity of managing
                     social impacts.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards



                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      ESS1 applies to this project given the scale and complexity of activities across Greater Antananarivo and Greater
                      Toamasina. These activities span urban drainage, flood protection, solid waste management, urban upgrading, land
                      regularization, and housing reconstruction. They present varied risks depending on location, type of works, and
                      implementation approach, including cumulative impacts in dense urban areas and heightened exposure to climate
                      and disaster risks. The key risk categories are as follows: Environmental risks include alteration of water resources,
                      leachate and runoff, soil and groundwater contamination, hazardous waste from solid waste management, air
                      pollution, noise, dust, and fire risk. Social risks include traffic disruption and community safety concerns, livelihood
                      impacts on informal recyclers and vendors, conflicts arising from land tenure regularization, physical and/or economic
                      displacement due to land acquisition, contestation over housing reconstruction support in Greater Toamasina,
                      impacts on cultural heritage, labor influx, and impacts on vulnerable groups. Cross-cutting risks include cumulative
                      effects in urban settings, traffic accidents linked to sludge transportation, and groundwater pollution from
                      contaminated sludge. The mitigation hierarchy will be applied in the following order: avoidance, minimization,
                      mitigation, and compensation as a last resort. Detailed mitigation measures for all identified risks will be set out in
                      the ESIA/ESMP, with particular attention to contaminated sludge containment to prevent soil and groundwater
                      pollution, consistent with measures being implemented under the ongoing PRODUIR project. ESS1 provides the
                      overarching framework for integrating environmental and social risk management into project planning, design, and
                      implementation. Environmental and Social Instruments. Since detailed technical designs are not yet finalized and the
                      exact locations of certain activities — including quarry sites and worker camps under Components 1.1 and 1.2 — have
                      not yet been determined, a draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for
                      the entire project. The ESMF covers project components, baseline conditions, applicable policies and legislation, and



Public Disclosure
                      potential environmental and social impacts. It also establishes screening procedures to define management and
                      mitigation measures and implementation arrangements for all physical activities to be confirmed during project
                      execution. In parallel with detailed technical designs, site-specific ESMPs, ESIAs, and Resettlement Plans/Livelihood
                      Restoration Plans (RPs/LRPs) will be prepared for the rehabilitation and upgrading of drainage canals, retention
                      basins, pumping stations, and river dikes along the Ikopa, Mamba, and Sisaony rivers in Antananarivo, as well as for
                      the reconstruction of affected households in urban and rural areas in Toamasina. All instruments will be submitted to
                      the Association for approval and publicly disclosed before procurement is launched. Contractors will be required to
                      prepare a standalone Contractor's Environmental and Social Management Plan (C-ESMP), covering a Traffic
                      Management Plan and occupational health and safety (OHS) measures. Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety
                      (ESHS) requirements will also be embedded in bidding documents to ensure that contractors have adequate
                      resources for implementation. As stipulated in the ESCP, all activities designed and executed during project
                      implementation must be accompanied by site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs. Given that the technical assistance related to
                      solid waste management and the new landfill precedes detailed design and site confirmation, the ESMF has been
                      prepared to capture the full range of potential environmental and social risks and impacts associated with these
                      activities. Site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs will be developed once locations and technical scope are confirmed, ensuring
                      full compliance with the applicable Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) prior to the launch of procurement or
                      the initiation of civil works. All such instruments must be consulted with stakeholders, disclosed, and approved by the
                      Bank before procurement or civil works begin. Social Risk Management Instruments. A draft SEA/SH Action Plan has
                      been prepared, including tailored measures to mitigate the risks of sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual
                      harassment (SEA/SH) during project implementation. Draft Labor Management Procedures (LMP) have been
                      developed to address potential labor risks, including OHS measures, child and forced labor, workplace discrimination,


                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                      and sexual harassment. These provisions are reflected across all project documentation, including ESMPs, bidding
                      documents, and civil works contracts. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared, incorporating
                      capacity-building training and independent consultations with women to address SEA/SH risks. A project-level
                      grievance mechanism (GM) has been developed as part of the SEP, and a worker-specific GM has been developed as
                      part of the LMP. Both mechanisms have been designed to ensure the safe and confidential handling of SEA/SH
                      complaints, including referrals to support services. Summary of Instruments Prepared. In line with the Environmental
                      and Social Framework (ESF) requirements, the Borrower has prepared the following instruments: (1)An
                      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which can be updated during project implementation to reflect
                      evolving environmental and social risks; has prepared and disclosed on May 18, 2026 the following instruments (2) A
                      draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a grievance mechanism; (3) A draft Environmental and Social
                      Management Framework (ESMF); (4) A draft Resettlement Framework (RF); (5) Draft Labor Management Procedures
                      (LMP); and (6)A draft SEA/SH Action Plan (as an annex of the ESMF). All instruments must be finalized no later than
                      three months after the project's effective date. The Borrower will also monitor and report on the environmental and
                      social performance of the project against the applicable ESSs throughout implementation.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant. Stakeholder engagement will be undertaken throughout the project lifecycle to ensure that the
                      views and concerns of project-affected parties (PAPs) and other interested parties (OIPs) inform project design and
                      implementation, and to support effective management of environmental and social (E&S) risks. The Project will
                      undertake stakeholder engagement activities throughout its preparation to completion of construction, to inform
                      project design and its E&S risk management instruments. Likely stakeholders include local communities near project



Public Disclosure
                      sites (especially those in flood-prone areas, informal settlements, and areas affected by land regularization, informal
                      recycling, and waste management activities), government agencies (national Ministry in charge of finance, MATSF,
                      MEAH, MEDD, IPAM, Urban commune of Antananarivo (CUA) and Communes around the CUA, Urban commune of
                      Toamasina (CUT) and and its surrounding rural municipalities, civil society organizations (CSOs), private sector
                      entities, and academic institutions. During the preparation the project has already conducted stakeholder
                      consultation, to ensure project ownership and to improve the design of the project. The main concerns of the
                      stakeholders concern the potential risk of lack of transparency and communication on the planned infrastructure and
                      the stages of the Programme, the risk of exclusion of certain stakeholders, the risks of involuntary displacement and
                      insufficiently clarified compensation; the risk of disruption of local economic activities during the works, but there are
                      also fears related to the quality, the durability of the works and the political context that may affect the
                      implementation. The stakeholders raised the need to strengthen communication and awareness raising among local
                      residents before and during the works and closer collaboration with the communes, fokontany and local structures
                      (SLCs, associations) in all stages of the Programme and also the integration of local committees in charge of
                      monitoring the works for more transparency and to prevent possible cases of conflicts. The project will likewise
                      ensure that feedback from vulnerable groups, especially women, will be solicited; as such, the project will organize
                      independent consultations with women in safe and confidential settings, and with female facilitators, in order to
                      encourage their free expression concerning project-related risks as well as safe and accessible entry points to the
                      grievance mechanism (GM). The project has prepared and disclosed on May 18, 2026 a draft Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP), which include a project-level Grievance Mechanism (GM) with appropriate channels for
                      reporting SEA/SH-related incidents. The SEP has included a record of the stakeholder engagement activities carried
                      out during project preparation so far.


                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. The project will involve several categories of workers, including Direct Workers employed by the
                      PMU, Contracted Workers engaged by third parties for civil works, and Civil Servants providing oversight and
                      technical assistance. Given the nature of the urban development activities, Community Workers may also be involved
                      in local initiatives. Significant labor risks, particularly concerning Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) associated
                      with the civil works, have been identified. These risks will be managed through measures outlined in the project's
                      Labor Management Procedures (LMP) and will be a required component of the contractors' Environmental and Social
                      Management Plans (C-ESMPs). Other labor risks include terms and conditions of employment, potential for labor
                      influx, potential child involvement in community works, and the need for effective workers GM. The Republic of
                      Madagascar has the new law 2024-014 of July 01, 2024 which established the Labor Code, governing the right of
                      workers. This code addresses the worker's essential concerns (trade union rights, employment contract, health and
                      safety, as well as protection from intimidation and sexual harassment). Various laws and regulations (decrees, orders,
                      decisions) supplement the Labor Code, mainly the Law 66-003 of July 2nd, 1966 on the General Theory of Obligations.
                      The Borrower will ensure that all project labor is managed in accordance with national labor laws and the
                      requirements of ESS2. The LMP also defines worker grievance mechanisms and clarifies the roles and responsibilities
                      of contractors, the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), and the Technical Implementation Units (TIUs) in managing ESS2
                      requirements. The draft LMP has been prepared and disclosed on May 18, 2026 and must be finalized no later than
                      three months after the project’s effective date. The project will require contractors (both local and international) to
                      develop their own labor management procedure that is acceptable to the project and the World Bank. It will also be
                      the responsibility of the Contractor to ensure that all workers are fully aware on the terms of employment,
                      remuneration, and grievance and other relevant factors as per the ESS2 and relevant national laws. The LMP has



Public Disclosure
                      established the minimum age of 18 for project workers, and has included measures to prevent child labor as well. The
                      signing of codes of conduct (CoC) with SEA/SH provisions will be a condition for employment for all and any worker,
                      temporary or full time. The project will need to ensure that regular trainings in local languages are conducted by the
                      Contractor for the benefit of the workers on labor provisions, codes of conduct, and the grievance mechanism,
                      including those measures related to SEA/SH risk management.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant to the project due to the nature of the planned urban drainage and flood protection works, solid
                      waste management (SWM) improvements, urban upgrading, and housing reconstruction activities, which may give
                      rise to risks related to resource efficiency, waste generation, and pollution prevention and management. Project
                      activities are expected to generate construction and demolition waste, dredged materials, and potentially hazardous
                      waste associated with construction operations, while also posing risks of air emissions (dust and odors), noise,
                      wastewater discharge, and localized soil and water contamination if not adequately managed. In addition, SWM
                      improvements related activities present risks related to leachate, uncontrolled disposal, and methane emissions.
                      Services, infrastructure, and equipment related to solid waste management (SWM) activities and the canal dredging,
                      urban drainage may alter water resources, generate leachate, waste, noise, vibration, dust, air pollution, and other
                      environmental impacts. The impacts and risks will be assessed as part of the corresponding ESIA. The canal sludge
                      should be analyzed through laboratory testing to characterize contamination levels and classify associated pollution
                      risks and impacts, including appropriate treatment, handling, storage, and disposal requirements. In addition, the
                      existing solid waste landfill at Andralanitra Landfill is approaching full capacity, while no long-term alternative
                      treatment and disposal site has yet been identified. Therefore, the project should identify and secure a dedicated

                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                      disposal site for dredged and excavated materials, whose characteristics and contamination levels remain to be fully
                      assessed. A site-specific, stand-alone Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be required for the
                      proposed sludge disposal site. This ESIA should evaluate appropriate sludge treatment technologies to minimize
                      groundwater contamination and reduce environmental and human health risks. It should also provide detailed
                      recommendations for the preparation and implementation of a comprehensive Sludge Management Plan. Robust and
                      coherent Terms of Reference (ToR) for the ESIA covering sludge transportation, treatment, and final disposal
                      management, should be prepared and approved by the World Bank. These studies should be conducted in parallel
                      with the detailed technical design. The resulting ESIA and associated Environmental and Social Management Plans
                      (ESMPs) inncluding with waste management plan and Sludge Management Plan will be submitted for Bank approval.
                      The selected disposal site must be fully operational prior to the commencement of canal sludge removal activities
                      under Sub-component 1.1. The project is expected to contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions from solid waste
                      management; the estimation of avoided GHG emissions will be carried out over the project’s life cycle. The TA
                      planned for future investments in a new landfill and a waste recovery facility in Antananarivo, are expected to have
                      cumulative effects. The Technical Assistance for solid waste management and a new landfill triggers a wide range of
                      environmental and social risks, requiring compliance with ESSs. The ESMF followed by site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs
                      will manage risks like pollution, labor issues, land acquisition, and community health impacts. A comprehensive suite
                      of instruments, including a Labor Management Procedure, Resettlement Policy Framework, and Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan, must be developed, approved, and disclosed before any works begin. All TORs for TA will be
                      reviewed by the Bank to ensure consistency with the ESF and the OESRC Advisory Note Technical Assistance and the
                      Environmental and Social Framework.To manage these risks, ESIAs with ESMPs will be developed specify mitigation
                      measures in line with the World Bank ESS, the WBG Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines and GIIP in the case




Public Disclosure
                      of canal dredging works, in accordance with Terms of Reference to be approved by the Bank.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant to the project. Key potential community health and safety risk areas include construction-related
                      hazards (noise, dust, and vibration from machinery and transport, disruption of local access routes, and safety
                      hazards from construction sites, and from flood risk), increased traffic and road safety concerns, potential for
                      communicable disease transmission, SEA/SH, impacts from hazardous materials during transport, storage, handling,
                      and disposal, to potential new transfer/disposal sites, and risks associated with security personnel. The Project will
                      implement all necessary risk management strategies and measures to protect the community from physical,
                      chemical, or other hazards associated with the Project. The project has developed a draft SEA/SH Action Plan which
                      should be finalized no later than three months after effective date.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant. The project may involve land acquisition leading to potential physical and/or economic
                      displacement. While the full scope and location-specific impacts are not yet defined at this stage, the nature of the
                      interventions -the focus on rrehabilitating and upgrade urban drainage and flood protection infrastructure including
                      drainage canals, retention basins, pumping stations, and river dikes (along the Ikopa, Mamba, and Sisaony rivers)
                      (component 1.1), rehabilitation of resilient public infrastructure to mitigate floods and improve urban functionality
                      (component 1.2), along with infrastructure investments for waste collection, transfer, and disposal facilities (including
                      potential new landfill sites)- typically entail the need for land, possible relocation of informal or formal users, and
                      changes in access to livelihoods and resources. This could impact private land users, informal settlers, and those


                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                      relying on land for livelihoods, potentially leading to loss of residential structures, agricultural land, businesses, or
                      access to resources. Physycal displacement as well as economic displacement (permanent as well as temporary) are
                      expected. Preliminary impacts identified so far include around 2600 parcells, 4000 households to be permanently or
                      temporary impacted, many of which are socioeconomically vulnerable. The project will be implemented in
                      accordance with national land acqusition framework as well as ESS5 principles, aiming to avoid or minimize
                      involuntary resettlement whenever feasible. The project will also complete compensation pending for the
                      implementation of the current PRODUIR I (P159756) project as part of postclosure action plan of this project. Indeed
                      this project (P159756, PRODUIR) will close on June 30, 2026. There are around 430 cases of resettlement
                      compensation (out of 3,428) amounting to approximately US$1,400,000 (including cash compensation related to land
                      acquisition, infrastructures or income loss approved by the RVP on April 11, 2018) that are currently underway.
                      Payment of these compensations involves a lengthy process that cannot be completed by the closing date of
                      PRODUIR. Including these compensations under the proposed PRODUIRE will extend the time for the MATSF to
                      complete the pending compensations payments and the resettlement commitments under PRODUIR. The Land
                      MEMO for the use of International Development Association (IDA) resources to finance compensation measures of up
                      to US$8.7 million has been cleared by the World bank Regional Vice President (RVP). To manage all these riks the
                      project has developed and disclosed on May 18, 2026 an advanced draft of Resettlement Frameowrks which could be
                      finalized no later than three months after effective date. For the whole component 1, site-specific Resettlement Plans
                      (RPs) and/or livelihood restoration plans (LRPs), as needed, must be developed when the technical studies are
                      available, based on the provisions of the RF, which will allow the determination of their impacts and risks. All related
                      RAP must be operational before start of works affecting involuntary resettlement on the civil works commence under
                      Sub-component 1.1. The RAP also should define a global grievance redress mechanism (GRM) which will capture all




Public Disclosure
                      complaints related to the project including those from resettlement issues, including a clear and coherent
                      implementation plan, with an institutional arrangement with the needed implementation total budget. This
                      commitment will be included in the ESCP.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is relevant because the zones of influence and environments likely to be affected by the project’s
                      investments are not yet entirely known at this preparation stage. The potential rehabilitating and constructing dike
                      along Antananarivo river currently identified are mainly characterized by modified, anthropized habitats with low
                      ecological value. However, the principle and provisions of this standard will need to be assessed progressively during
                      the sub-project preparation. Strict site selection criteria will be defined to ensure compliance with the principles and
                      provisions of the applicable ESS. The ESMF, along with site-specific ESIAs and Environmental and ESMPs, will include
                      detailed measures to be implemented by the Borrower and contractors. Furthermore, in the selection criteria for
                      future new landfill sites, any location likely to have negative impacts on critical or natural habitats will be strictly
                      excluded.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities




                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                      ESS7 is not considered relevant. There is no indication of the presence of Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African
                      Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities meeting the criteria of ESS7 within the project's potential
                      area of influence.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      ESS8 is considered relevant for the project. Project activities entail excavations, earth movement, and other physical
                      environmental changes that could impact tangible cultural heritage, such as unknown archaeological resources or
                      built heritage. Furthermore, the project's focus on urban development and land management in a historically
                      significant capital city increases the potential for encountering or affecting cultural heritage. A comprehensive
                      inventory of cultural heritage at project sites will be conducted as part of future ESIAs and/or the Contractor’s
                      Environmental and Social Management Plan (C-ESMP), and the mitigation hierarchy will guide the management of
                      potential risks and impacts. Treatment of physical and cultural resources, including human graves, shrines, sacred
                      trees, or groves encountered during construction, will follow the Chance Finds Procedures outlined in the ESMF. This
                      includes screening for potential impacts on cultural heritage and, if necessary, the preparation of site-specific ESMPs.
                      These requirements will also be incorporated into civil works bidding documents. During preparation of project
                      activities, an assessment of cultural heritage risks and impacts will be conducted, meaningful stakeholder
                      consultations will be held, Chance Finds Procedures will be applied, and, if necessary, a Cultural Heritage
                      Management Plan will be developed.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      ESS9 is not relevant as the project financing does not involve the use of Financial Intermediaries to channel funds to
                      sub-projects.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         In Part
                       The Project will build on the country’s legal framework and complement them with additional measures as required
                       by the applicable ESS. It is outlined that Madagascar's ES Framework for projects is available with the Environmental
                       law through Decree No. 2025-080, which sets the rules and procedures for E&S Assessment, for the Compatibility of
                       Investments with the Environment (MECIE). The Borrower’s Framework related to labor and working condition (ESS2)
                       and Eminent domain process (for ESS5) will be considered as part of the framework to manage social aspect of
                       project, related worker’s condition, and to land acquisition, complemented by additional measures to ensure full
                       consistency with the applicable ESF requirements. These considerations, and gap filling measures, will be developed
                       into LMP, E&S instruments such as ESMP, C-ESMP, Resettlement Framework/Plans to be prepared for the project.
                       Applicable aspects of ESS not covered by the local procedures may also require the implementation of additional
                       measures not identified during project preparation to ensure consistency with applicable ESSs.


                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)




                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       n/a

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The following environmental and social (E&S) documents, proportionate to the project’s anticipated risks, have been be
                     prepared and disclosed on May 18, 2026, prior to Appraisal:
                     •        Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP): This document will outline the legally binding E&S
                     commitments of the Borrower, including specific measures and actions to be undertaken to address identified risks and
                     impacts, as well as timelines for their implementation.
                     •        Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): The SEP will detail the strategy for engaging with project-affected
                     parties and other interested stakeholders throughout the project lifecycle, including mechanisms for information
                     disclosure, consultation, and a robust Grievance Mechanism (GM).
                     •        Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): As specific sites for all interventions are not
                     yet fully defined, the ESMF will establish a framework for assessing and managing environmental and social risks and
                     impacts of sub-projects, including procedures for screening, assessment, mitigation, and monitoring. This will include
                     specific guidance for managing potential impacts related to drainage infrastructure, solid waste management facilities,
                     and land regularization activities.



Public Disclosure
                     •        Draft Resettlement Framework (RF): Given the potential for land acquisition and physical or economic
                     displacement associated with infrastructure development (e.g., dikes, drainage canals, waste facilities) and land
                     regularization efforts, the RF will set out the principles and procedures for addressing involuntary resettlement,
                     including compensation, livelihood restoration, and grievance redress.
                     •        Draft SEA/SH Action Plan to address potential risks for SEA/SH and associated mitigation measures. (as an
                     annex of the ESMF)

                     During the implementation of the project, and in parallel with the detailed technical designs site-specific ESMPs, ESIAs,
                     and Resettlement Plan (RPs) and/or Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) will be prepared for the rehabilitation and
                     upgrade drainage canals in GA-GT, retention basins, pumping stations, and river dikes along the Ikopa, Mamba, and
                     Sisaony rivers in Antananarivo, and reconstruction of affected households, rehabilitation and reconstruction of public
                     infrastructure and buildings in urban and rural areas in Toamasina . The ESIA helps identify and evaluate these impacts
                     to define appropriate measures to prevent, mitigate, or compensate for negative effects, while ensuring the project's
                     sustainability, compliance with ESS under ESF. As part of the ESIA / ESMP, a Dredging Management Plan should be
                     prepared to address EHS issues that may arise during dredging works, including the temporary storage and final
                     disposal of dredged material/waste. These instruments will be submitted to the Association for approval and disclosed
                     prior to the launch of procurement processes for the related works and activities. The Contractor will be required to
                     prepare standalone Contractor-ESMP (C-ESMP) must properly addressed issues related to community health and
                     safety, such as construction-related hazards (noise, dust, odors, vibration from machinery and transport, disruption of
                     local access routes, and safety hazards from construction sites etc.), increased traffic and road safety concerns, impacts
                     from hazardous materials during transport, storage, handling and disposal, as well as SEA/SH-related risks. In addition,


                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Integrated Urban Development And Resilience Project For Jobs (P507944)



                     environmental, social, health, and safety (ESHS) requirements, in addition to relevant provisions related to SEA/SH, will
                     be incorporated into the bidding documents to ensure that contractors are adequately resourced to implement them.
                     The Technical Assistance for solid waste management and a new landfill triggers a wide range of environmental and
                     social risks, requiring compliance with ESSs.
                     The ESMF, the Labor Management Procedure (LMP), Resettlement Framework (RF), and Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                     (SEP), must be finalized and disclosed no later than three months after effective date.
                     All ToRs for TA will be reviewed by the Bank to ensure consistency with the ESF and the OESRC Advisory Note Technical
                     Assistance and the Environmental and Social Framework.

                     These commitments are reflected in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Gael Fetraniaina Raserijaona           Title:          Senior Urban Specialist

                     Email:                   graserijaona@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT



Public Disclosure
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                      Gael Fetraniaina Raserijaona

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                             Paul-Jean Feno

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                    Andrianjaka Rado Razafimandimby




                    May 22, 2026                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
