Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01539




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Viet Nam                       P507658                      Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          04-Feb-2026                  27-May-2026                    Transport
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Socialist Republic of Viet   Hai Phong City Project
Financing (IPF)                Nam                          People's Committee

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The project development objectives (PDO) are to improve Hai Phong’s connectivity within the Northwest-Southeast
economic corridor, enhance Re River water quality, reduce flood risk in Hai Phong’s historical city center area, and
upgrade capacity for urban resilience management in selected areas of Hai Phong city.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            408.82

  Total Financing                                                                                                 408.82
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 272.95
  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                272.95
  Non-World Bank Group Financing



                                                                                                                     Page 1



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


        Counterpart Funding                                                                                         135.87
          Borrower/Recipient                                                                                        135.87




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                       Concept Review Decision
High                                                               The review did authorize the preparation to continue



    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context
    1. Hai Phong, Viet Nam’s third largest city and a major port, is pivotal to the country’s economic growth. Ho Chi Minh
       City, Ha Noi, and Hai Phong cities are the country’s economic powerhouses and crucial manufacturing bases for
       electronics, textiles, and automotive components. Situated 106 km southeast of Ha Noi, the capital of Viet Nam, Hai
       Phong is the second largest economic, political, and cultural hub in the Northern Delta region, with a population of
       approximately 4.7 million (as of 2024) after the recent merger of Hai Duong Province with Hai Phong City. It comprises
       Hong Bang, Hai An, An Duong, and Thuy Nguyen areas located along the Cam River, which flows through the city
       center toward the Gulf of Tonkin. It is the only city in the northern Viet Nam with rail, road, air, inland waterways,
       and maritime transportation modes and features a deep-water port. Driven by robust growth in imports and exports,
       Hai Phong has emerged as a pivotal economic engine in Vietnam. In 2024, the city achieved a trade surplus of US$8.2
       billion, with exports reaching US$36.3 billion - a 19.5 percent increase over the previous year, and imports reaching
       US$28.1 billion, an increase of 4.6 percent over 2023.1 Maritime transport contributes approximately 15-20 percent
       of Hai Phong's GDP through port services, logistics, and related activities.

    2. Hai Phong has ambitious plans to expand its urban areas, industrial parks and coastal economic zones, but these
       will need complementary infrastructure improvements. Hai Phong is undergoing significant urban expansion, with
       the development of new urban areas such as Thuy Nguyen new city north of Cam River, which will host the city's new
       administrative center. To accommodate the growing population, Hai Phong has approved 31 housing investment
       plans for 36,600 units and plans to build an additional 33,500 social housing units by 2030 for low-income and
       industrial workers. Hai Phong also aims to become a modern international logistics hub by 2030, focusing on
       multimodal transport development.2 Accordingly, plans are underway to construct 15 new industrial parks covering
       6,700 hectares by 2025 and a 20,000-hectare coastal economic zone, featuring key infrastructure projects like Tien
       Lang Airport and Nam Do Son Port.3 Hai Phong is also developing eco-industrial parks and investing in renewable
       energy projects, including waste-to-energy and offshore wind power, to support its green transition.4 All this will

1
  Hai Phong 2024: https://haiphongnews.gov.vn/news/haiphong-2024-breakthroughs-in-economic-growth-and-sustainable-
ct11027.html.
2
  Vide Resolution No. 45-NQ/TW.
3
  https://theinvestor.vn/hai-phong-city-eyes-20000-hectare-coastal-economic-zone-d6590.html
4
  https://en.vietnamplus.vn/hai-phong-becomes-increasingly-attractive-to-domestic-foreign-investors-post239684.vnp

                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


        need transport infrastructure, interconnectivity, and urban services well aligned with the planned industrial and
        urban development.

    3. With major infrastructure initiatives such as the Hai Phong–Ha Noi–Lao Cai–Kunming/Guangxi Economic Corridor
       and the Hai Phong Free Trade Zone (FTZ), Hai Phong is poised to be a vital growth engine for Vietnam’s economy,
       focusing on high-value, innovation-driven industries. The Hai Phong – Ha Noi–Lao Cai–Kunming/Guangxi Economic
       Corridor is a potentially transformative infrastructure initiative designed to enhance connectivity between Vietnam's
       key northern port and Southwest China. The corridor will significantly increase freight capacity and unlock three
       primary strategic opportunities: optimizing Vietnam's domestic logistics; accelerating bilateral trade between
       Vietnam and China; and providing a new land-sea route for China's bordering provinces, primarily Yunnan and
       Guangxi, to access global markets via Vietnam. Collectively, these improvements can lower logistics costs, boost trade
       throughput, and foster deeper, more localized regional economic integration.

    4. Hai Phong city has achieved notable successes but needs focused investment to holistically address its transport
       and urban challenges for sustained development. The Resolution of the 16th City Party Congress (2020 - 2025)
       outlined three key urban development directions, reflected in the Adjusted Construction Master Plan to 2035 and
       the Master Planning of Dinh Vu - Cat Hai Economic Zone. To sustain its industrial and urban growth and make it an
       attractive investment destination,5 the city’s master plan emphasizes three economic pillars: industry, sea trade and
       tourism. However, improvements are needed in road infrastructure to reduce congestion and road crashes,
       interconnectivity between road, rail and sea modes to enhance freight and logistics movement, drainage systems to
       control flooding along with adequate urban spaces and climate resilience aspects. For instance, the North-South axis,
       linked with Ring Road 3, could be a marine economic corridor connecting North Cam River, Cat Bi Airport, and Lach
       Huyen Port. Strengthening links to the North, especially via National Highway (NH) 10 and the Ben Rung Bridge to
       Quang Ninh, is also critical. Similarly, enhancing the Northwest-Southeast corridor can create an important marine
       economic and public transport link for Hai Phong city, aiding the development of ports, freight traffic, industrial parks,
       and service centers from Dinh Vu - Cat Hai in the South to Vie Nam Singapore Industrial Park (VSIP) and Ben Rung in
       the North.

    5. With a 125 km coastline, Hai Phong is highly vulnerable to extreme climate events. Over the past few years, rising
       temperatures, unpredictable rainfall, and higher tidal levels have intensified urban flooding—especially in low-
       lying historical city center. The city regularly faces typhoons, tropical depressions, rising tides, thunderstorms, and
       increasingly severe issues such as seawater intrusion, saline groundwater, and red tides. Climate change is causing
       the rainy and typhoon seasons now to start earlier, end later, and bring stronger storms, causing extensive damage.
       Hai Phong ranks among the 13 major port cities globally with the highest projected property damage from climate
       change by 2070.6 Rising sea levels are degrading the ecological environment, disrupting livelihoods and socio-
       economic activities and threatening freshwater sources. Coastal erosion and salinity intrusion - reaching up to 45 km
       inland - are particularly severe in areas like Do Son and Cat Hai, impacting rivers such as Re and Hon Ngoc in An Duong
       and Thuy Nguyen.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

    6. Despite its strategic location as an important traffic hub and the main gateway to the sea for Northern provinces,
       Hai Phong faces significant infrastructure challenges that limit the efficiency of its transport systems. Hai Phong’s
       port system comprises three main areas, including: Lach Huyen international port cluster, Cam River port cluster

5
    Hai Phong, Quang Ninh attract 7.82 billion USD in FDI in 2024, January 16, 2025.
6
    Green Growth Study in Hai Phong, Vietnam - OECD 2016.

                                                                                                                             Page 3



                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


        (upstream of the Cam River) and Dinh Vu port cluster (downstream of the Cam River). The Lach Huyen International
        Gateway Port can accommodate large container ships and handled 150 million tons of cargo in 2024. In April 2025,
        Hai Phong also inaugurated the Hateco Hai Phong International Container Terminal, once it is fully operational, Hai
        Phong Port’s market shares in container and non-container cargo in the region are expected to reach 40 percent, and
        60 percent respectively.7 While Lach Huyen and Dinh Vu ports benefit from favorable geographic and maritime
        conditions, their full potential will be realized with availability of a direct Northwest-Southeast regional transport
        corridor, which is also important for the planned conversion of Thuy Nguyen into a new urban center. The city's
        railway system is outdated and lacks interconnectivity to ports. There is one single-track meter gauge rail line from
        Hai Phong to Hanoi which plays vital role in freight movement to and from the Lach Huyen port. However, outdated
        infrastructure and poor integration with Hai Phong’s port facilities limit its effectiveness. There are plans for a new
        standard gauge rail line from Lao Cai-Hanoi-Hai Phong that will connect to China’s Kunming-Hekou railway fostering
        the economic corridor’s development by facilitating trade and enhancing connectivity to Hai Phong Port. A
        groundbreaking ceremony for the greenfield railway line is expected to occur in December 2025, and construction is
        expected to be completed by 2030.

    7. Hai Phong’s transport sector is vital for its economy. While roads are the dominant form of transport, they are
       increasingly congested, lack connectivity, and prone to crashes. In 2022, the total transport revenue of Hai Phong
       reached approximately U$4.42 billion. Road transport accounted for about a third of this revenue. In recent years,
       Hai Phong's logistics services have achieved an annual growth rate of 20 to 23 percent, contributing 13 to 15 percent
       of the city's GRDP.8 The city has a total road length of approximately 300 km, with mostly radial roads carrying heavy
       traffic passing through the city center. The road network lacks regional connectivity, particularly a Northwest –
       Southeast corridor that connects several important industrial zones and urban areas to the seaport clusters.9 At
       present, there is only one national highway (National Highway 10) that acts as the main regional transport corridor
       for the city. Despite investments, the road network is overloaded, especially on routes connecting seaports, leading
       to increased logistics costs, traffic disruptions, and increased air pollution. The National Highway 5 (NH 5), a radial
       route with a large volume of heavy trucks, is a major cause of fatal traffic crashes, environmental pollution, and traffic
       congestion in the historic inner city of Hai Phong, which is located mainly to the south of Cam River, is increasingly
       congested and includes offices, commercial and entertainment centers, markets, schools, hospitals, and traffic hubs
       (bus stations, railway stations, etc.) with a dense population.10 As such, diverting inter-city truck passage by
       developing bypass / ring road and regional transport corridors can help alleviate congestion (alongside the
       development of the Lao Cai-Hanoi-Hai Phong railway), decrease crashes and lessen pollution. To improve efficiency
       of the city’s transport system as well as foster intermodal transportation among road, rail, and maritime transport
       modes, there is a need for a marine economic corridor, connecting the breakthrough directions of urban space
       development with each other, and with the existing gateways (NH 10, Cat Bi airport, Tan Vu - Lach Huyen Port Cluster,
       NH 5, Hanoi - Hai Phong Expressway, etc.).

    8. The Re River is crucial for Hai Phong’s water supply and sustained urban and industrial development, yet it is
       experiencing pollution. The river, located in the west of the city, spans over 10 km from Rang River in Hai Duong to
       Cai Tat tidal dam in Hai Phong and is part of the main water supply axis of the An Kim Hai irrigation system. It is vital
       for irrigation in An Duong and Hong Bang areas, supplying water to an aquaculture lagoon in Hai An area, and

7
  https://en.vietnamplus.vn/first-commercial-ship-docks-at-new-berths-in-hai-phong-post317555.vnp.
8
  https://en.nhandan.vn/hai-phong-strives-to-become-modern-logistics-hub-post140223.html.
9
  The Hai Phong city’s road network hasn’t developed on the Northern and Eastern sides of the Cam River as it requires long bridges
to negotiate the extensive water bodies and construction of the roads in soft soils.
10
   The three areas of Hong Bang, Ngo Quyen, and Le Chan have the highest population density in the city - ten times higher than the
city average.

                                                                                                                                Page 4



                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


     providing raw water to An Duong and Vat Cach plants. The river is expected to supply over 50 percent of Hai Phong
     city's clean water demand, including three industrial zones: Nomura, Trang Due, and An Duong.11 However, the Re
     River is experiencing increasing pollution caused by urbanization and increased economic activities within the
     catchment area. 12 Approximately 9,000 m³ of domestic wastewater is released into the Re River each day, which
     impacts the river's raw water quality and causes it to exceed the permissible limits set by national water quality
     standards. The river is also suffering from residential encroachment along its embankment, further exacerbating the
     pollution in the river through illegal discharge of wastewater from the residents. Being an important landscape axis
     for the development of An Duong urban area, priority infrastructure on both sides of the Re River would be needed
     to collect wastewater from key discharge points along the river, prevent illegal wastewater discharge and to prevent
     further encroachment.

 9. Hai Phong faces frequent flooding due to an inadequate drainage system. The historical city center of Hai Phong
    experiences severe flooding due to rainfall and high tides in the Cam/Tam Bac Rivers. Although Hai Phong has a dense
    drainage system for direct storm water drainage to external rivers, urban development has reduced permeable areas
    and surface water reservoirs, making gravity drainage ineffective during heavy rain and high tides. Rapid urbanization
    and industrial growth also produce significant wastewater, necessitating collection and treatment to protect water
    sources like Re, Hon Ngoc, and Da Do rivers. The outdated drainage system in the historical city center of Hai Phong
    fails to drain water into Tam Bac River during rainfall and high tides, leading to frequent flooding. A comprehensive
    solution involving rehabilitation of the culvert network, increased storage/regulation capacity (e.g., Tam Bac
    Lake/river), and additional forced discharge capacity is needed to address urban drainage challenges, support
    economic development of the most vibrant urban area of the city and improve water standards. Without these
    measures, future urban areas like Thuy Nguyen may also face flooding challenges.

 10. The Hai Phong City People's Committee (HPCPC) oversees municipal infrastructure policy and planning, budget
     allocation and coordination with national government agencies. The Department of Construction (DOC) handles
     planning, implementation, maintenance, and management of the city's road network, besides public transport
     licensing and management, and other municipal infrastructure services including drainage and wastewater
     management. The complex coordination between municipal and national agencies affects the release of funds for
     capital improvements - in 2024, only 56 percent of allocated capital was disbursed by October. The city’s debt
     servicing capacity is limited by high public investment needs and reliance on unstable revenues13- for instance, the
     2025 budget relies heavily on sources like land use fees and import-export taxes. Its 2026–2030 investment plan
     exceeds VND 92.4 trillion (~USD 3.7 billion), mostly from its own budget.

 11. Hai Phong's urban institutional framework has undergone significant reforms to support its rapid development,
     but financial challenges may hinder implementation. Effective July 1, 2025, Hai Duong province merged with Hai
     Phong city, all district administrative units were terminated, and wards were consolidated into about one third in
     number. This was part of a major institutional reform across the country. The city’s governance involves multiple
     layers of both new local and city authorities, leading to potential inefficiencies and overlaps in responsibilities,
     particularly in urban planning and infrastructure management and development. In 2023, Hai Phong showed strong
     fiscal performance, collecting ~$4.3 billion (98 percent of the state target) with domestic revenue exceeding


11
    Hai Phong City Water Supply Master Plan to 2025, with a Vision to 2050.
12
    In An Duong area, 301 out of 430 wastewater discharge points into irrigation works, affect the Re River. In addition, 12 concentrated
sewage discharge points from residential areas and markets, and 720 households along the river, directly discharge wastewater into
it.
13
    Hai Phong: Medium-term public investment plan for the period 2026, Vietnam.vn, 2024.

                                                                                                                                    Page 5



                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


     projections by 36 percent. However, the effective implementation of integrated urban strategies requires strong
     coordination among various governmental bodies, which is challenging given the existing institutional framework.

 Relationship to CPF
 12. The proposed project is well aligned with both the current and upcoming Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
     for Viet Nam. The proposed project directly addresses Focus Area 3 (Ensure Environmental Sustainability and
     Resilience) of the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Viet Nam. It is also well aligned with the latest
     draft14 of the proposed CPF for FY 2023-27, as it would contribute directly to both objective 1 - strengthen climate
     resilience and promote sustainable growth of infrastructure, and objective 2 - accelerate economywide emission
     reduction for green growth.

 13. The proposed project is consistent with The World Bank’s Viet Nam Country Climate and Development Report
     (CCDR). With proposed interventions towards improved urban sustainable development in Hai Phong and
     surrounding areas, it would contribute to the Viet Nam CCDR, 202227 specifically, Priority Package #2, which
     emphasizes the need to upgrade infrastructure assets to climate-resilient design standards, ensure effective land-
     use planning, strengthen and enforce policies and regulations for industry resilience, and invest in digital technologies
     for improving weather-risk management and early warning systems. The proposed project will also support the
     climate mitigation objectives of the Viet Nam CCDR and Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) as it will help
     shift bulk cargo from roads in Hai Phong and surrounding regions, thus mitigating air pollution. This would help
     connect inland economic activities with ports in the coastal provinces and thus facilitate inter-modal connectivity
     and trade.

 14. The proposed project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation.
     Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks: The proposed project interventions for development of Ring Road 3
     under Component 1 will result in reduced GHG emissions as these would: (a) reduce journey lengths and travel times
     along NH 5 and NH 10, (b) ease traffic congestion on city roads and environmental pollution in inner-city areas, and
     (c) facilitate industrial development, connect areas in the north through the new highway and promote integration
     of northern region with ports and economic centers in the south. The wastewater collection and treatment activities
     under Component 2 will contribute to net emission reductions by adopting treatment technologies that reduce GHG
     emissions (e.g., sequencing batch reactor (SBR) technology) and measures to optimize energy efficiency in the
     operation of the treatment plant and pumping stations. Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks: The project
     design will consider Hai Phong’s vulnerability to the risks of extreme climate events (extreme heat, intense rainfall
     and high tide) and urban flooding and incorporate targeted adaptation measures to manage and mitigate them. For
     instance, bridge designs have been informed by the most extreme climate project scenario, Representative
     Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5, ensuring high levels of resilience. Overall. infrastructure improvements on the
     proposed project road will also strengthen transport network redundancy, thereby enhancing the resilience of the
     transport network to climate-related shocks. The proposed project interventions will improve the water quality of
     Re River, lead to reduced flooding in the historical city center, and enhance the water security of communities,
     enhancing their resilience and adaptive capacity to climate impacts. In addition, the proposed institutional
     strengthening activities will enhance the implementation agency’s capacities in urban flood management and
     environment monitoring, thereby helping them mainstream disaster resilience and management. Therefore, the
     residual climate physical risks are moderate.



14
   Draft Country Partnership Framework for Vietnam for the period FY 23-27 (Concept Note), This may undergo significant change
following the review process.

                                                                                                                          Page 6



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


 15. The proposed project is aligned with the Water Security and Climate Adaptation (WSCA) Global Challenge Program
     (GCP). Component 2 contributes to the Pillar 1 - Achieving universal access to safe water supply and sanitation of the
     WSCA GCP by improving wastewater collection and management in the city. Components 2 and 3 of the proposed
     project are in alignment with Pillar 3 - Reducing Impacts of Floods and Droughts and Managing Water Resources
     Sustainably of the WSCA GCP. Component 4 is designed to support the development of systems to guide the future
     development of the city in a climate sensitive manner.

 16. The proposed project is in conformity with national and Hai Phong city master plans. It will support Viet Nam’s
     National Climate Change Strategy by contributing to its objective of modernizing transport networks by 2050. With
     its focus on infrastructure and monitoring systems to address climate resilience, rising sea levels and flooding, and
     ensure the security of water supply resources, it is aligned with Viet Nam’s Climate Change Adaptation National Plan
     (2021-30), Hai Phong’s city master plan15 and major national projects on city development16 and coastal erosion.17

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The project development objectives (PDO) are to improve Hai Phong’s connectivity within the Northwest-Southeast
 economic corridor, enhance Re River water quality, reduce flood risk in Hai Phong’s historical city center area, and
 upgrade capacity for urban resilience management in selected areas of Hai Phong city.


  Key Results (From PCN)
 17. The outcomes of the proposed project will be measured through the following outcome indicators:
           i.   Outcome indicator 1 – People benefiting from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure
                and services (number, sex-and age disaggregated) (Corporate Scorecard Indicator)
          ii.   Outcome indicator 2 – People provided with water, sanitation, and/or hygiene, of which (%) is safely
                managed (number, sex-and age disaggregated) (Corporate Scorecard Indicator)
         iii.   Outcome indicator 3 – Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number, sex-and age
                disaggregated) (Corporate Scorecard Indicator)
         iv.    Outcome indicator 4 - Operationalization of integrated flood risk management system for the historical
                city center of Hai Phong (Yes/No)

 D. Concept Description

 18. The proposed project aims to improve resilience of Hai Phong city through multisectoral investments in transport
     connectivity, sanitation improvement, urban inundation reduction, and urban resilience capacity. These four areas
     of investment are complementary and mutually reinforcing.


15
   Including the adjustment and supplementation of the Master Plan on socio-economic development of Hai Phong City to 2025, with
orientation to 2030, including the goal on construction of Hai Phong, approved by the Prime Minister on July 6, 2018; Decision of the
Prime Minister dated September 15, 2020, approving the planning task of Hai Phong city in the 2021-2030 period, with a vision to
2050; adjusted master construction master plan of Hai Phong city to 2040, with a vision to 2050 which has been submitted for approval,
meeting the goals set out in the Decision of the Prime Minister dated May 15, 2018 approving the task of adjusting the master plan of
Hai Phong city to 2035, with a vision to 2050, among others.
16
   Viet Nam Cities Development Project (2021-30) approved by the Prime Minister on March 25, 2021.
17
   Project on Prevention and control of riverbank and coastal erosion by 2030 approved by the Prime Minister on July 6, 2020.

                                                                                                                                 Page 7



                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


     (a) Enhanced regional connectivity. Development of the Northwest-Southeast marine economic axis is essential: (i)
         for fostering intermodal transportation between road, rail, and maritime transport modes, promoting logistics
         development, and creating new connections between industrial parks and existing gateways; (ii) to reduce truck
         traffic through the city center, reducing urban congestion and crash occurrence; (iii) for removing sub-optimal
         connections with the existing national and provincial road network; and (iv) for embedding elements of safety
         and resilience in design.
     (b) Infrastructure upgrades to ensure environmental sanitation improvements, reduced wastewater discharges
         into key river while improving and protecting public spaces. Properly designed and managed environmental
         sanitation improvement and flood control systems can: (i) enhance resilience to rising tides and other climate
         events, by strengthening stormwater drainage management; (ii) reduce the volume of pollutants discharged to
         Re River, benefiting communities alongside; and (iii) enhance urban public green spaces along the Re River and
         Tam Bac River through integrated infrastructure upgrades.
     (c) Urban resilience capacity enhancement as a foundational element for sustainability. Structural investments in
         urban connectivity, water environment improvement, and urban inundation reduction will not be sustainable
         without stronger systems and institutions that can effectively and efficiently plan, maintain, and operate them.
         This requires the development of systems and capacity that will enable experts and decision makers to better
         predict flood events and undertake real time monitoring of water and air quality.

 19. The proposed project will be undertaken using the Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument. To support the
     achievement of the PDO, the proposed project will comprise the following components:

 20. Component 1: Thuy Nguyen Integrated and Resilience Urban Infrastructure Development (estimated cost:
     US$284.6 million; IBRD loan US$207.4 million). This component will support the development of a new greenfield
     18 km-long Ring Road 3 (RR3) from the intersection with the Bui Vien Road in Hai An area in the South to the
     intersection with National Highway 10 in the Northwest. The RR3 route will intersect Hanoi – Hai Phong Expressway,
     cross the Cam River and Ruot Lon River, pass along the Vietnam Singapore Industrial Park (VSIP), and intersect the
     National Highway 5 and Provincial Road 359. It will act as an extension of the Hanoi-Hai Phong Expressway to create
     better connections from the north to the Lach Huyen port, Cat Bi airport and Hai Phong’s industrial parks/economic
     zones, resulting in lower net GHG emissions due to reduced truck traffic through the city center. It will include: (a)
     construction of the RR3 to the TCVN 13592-2022 standards of an urban primary main street including 32 m-wide two
     major bridges of a total length of about 3.5 km over the Cam River and the Ruot Lon River, which will have a design
     life of 100 years and considering Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5 scenarios; (b) implementation of
     road safety and climate resilience measures including road safety audits, soil treatments, bio-engineering methods
     etc.; (c) engineering design and construction supervision; and (d) support for acquisition of right-of-way and land
     required for the project including compensation for resettlement and site clearance. The RR3 will have phased
     construction with the first phase consisting of (a) 2x10.5 m wide main carriageway, 5 m wide median, and 2x0.5 m
     wide paved shoulders in a 68 m wide right-of-way, (b) grade-separated intersections for crossings with Ha Noi – Hai
     Phong expressway and NH 5, and (c) at-grade crossings for the rest of the intersections. The second phase will include
     capacity expansion of the ring road18 and construction of grade-separated intersections for crossings with NH 10,
     Provincial Road 359, and road at Vu Yen Island. Only the first phase is included in the scope of the proposed project.
     The second phase is proposed for implementation during 2027-2030 and Hai Phong PMU has proposed IBRD
     additional financing to support the potential scale-up.



18
 The final cross-section will have 2x15 m main carriageway, 2x7 m frontage road, 5 m central median and 2x2 m median between
main carriageway and frontage road (specifications of an urban primary street as per TCVN 13592-2022)

                                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


 21. Component 2: Re River Environmental Improvement (estimated cost: US$63.04 million; IBRD loan US$49.2
     million). This component would help improve environmental sanitation in the catchment area of Re River. It would
     include support for: (a) Re River infrastructure upgrades through: (i) construction of a 14.1 km-long and 3.5 m-wide
     river management road along Re River to create space for arrangement and maintenance of the wastewater
     collection system, and (ii) construction and upgrade of 11 km of embankment, (b) Re River basin environmental
     sanitation improvement consisting of: (i) construction of the An Duong 1 Waste Water Treatment Plant (WWTP) with
     a capacity of 10,000 m3; (ii) building a 17.3 km-long wastewater interceptor sewer (Primary sewers) and 1.4 km of
     pressure mains to the An Duong 1 WWTP; (iii) building 12 wastewater pumping stations along the Re River
     management road; (iv) construction of 11.6 km-long tertiary sewer for the wastewater collection network (including
     tertiary sewers and households connections), and (v) procurement of equipment for a flood risk management, water
     quality, and air environment.

 22. Component 3: City Center Flood Reduction (estimated cost: US$18 million; IBRD loan US$16.4 million). To reduce
     flood risk in the historical city center, an urban resilience strategy of delay, store and discharge will take an integrated
     approach for identification and optimization of priority interventions. Given unique spatial, tidal and terrain patterns
     in Hai Phong, this strategy will support the city addressing its flood risk in a manner that is environmentally friendly,
     with dependence on nature-based solutions, and does not cause negative impacts to areas outside of the city center.
     The component will implement the “delay” and “discharge” part of the overall resilience strategy by expanding and
     upgrading the secondary and tertiary combined sewers system. The “storage” portion of the resilience strategy will
     be implemented through utilization of green infrastructure and nature-based solutions. Specifically, two new sluice
     gates will be constructed at the joints of existing Tam Bac River with Thuong Ly river and Cam River, thus transforming
     it into a regulation lake of 10.1 ha for meeting the increasing storm water regulation demand. A new connecting box
     culvert to the existing Tam Bac Lake will help to increase the total area to 14.3 ha and effective regulating capacity19
     of about 150,000m3. A pumping station, with planned capacity of 12m3/s, will optimize the use of the new regulation
     lake to pump excess stormwater into the Cam River. About 5 km combined sewers will be upgraded to meeting the
     technical drainage standards of Viet Nam.

 23. The component will also invest in environmental remediation measures to reduce wastewater discharge into the
     Tam Bac River, while improving and protecting public spaces. In addition to improving the environmental sanitation
     conditions in the city center, the upgrading of wastewater collection and treatment will contribute to improved
     surface water quality. A comprehensive investment package of new tertiary and secondary sewers, 16 new CSOs, 5
     new wastewater pumping stations and existing Lan Be pumping station upgrade, interceptors along Tam Bac River
     and wastewater transmission to the existing Vinh Niem wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) is planned to collect
     and treat approximately 3,000m3 wastewater daily.

 24. Component 4: Systems and Capacity Development to Improve Urban Resilience (estimated cost: US$42.5 million;
     IBRD loan US$0 million). This would include the following sub-components:
       i.   Sub-Component 4.1: Urban Flood Management Capacity Enhancement. This will support the development
            of a system that will enable technical experts and decision-makers to better predict and respond to flood
            events through: (a) creating and calibrating a dynamic hydraulic model for flood forecasting and early-warning
            scenarios for An Duong, Hong Bang, Thuy Nguyen, Le Chan, Ngo Quyen and Dong Hai areas, (b) and
            operationalization of an integrated flood risk management system for the historical city center areas, including
            operating procedures for sluice gates and stormwater pumping station when extreme conditions are

19
  Effective regulating capacity is estimated at 70% (under real operational conditions) of the regulating capacity (215,000m3)
derived from MIKE hydraulic modelling.

                                                                                                                                 Page 9



                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)


            predicted, (c) establishing a framework and information system for improving the O&M of the flood control
            structures for An Duong, Hong Bang, Thuy Nguyen, Le Chan, Ngo Quyen and Dong Hai areas, and (d) providing
            training, workshops and technical assistance to Hai Phong city officials to enhance their capacity for flood risk
            management, including incorporating nature-based solutions into flood control infrastructure.
      ii.   Sub-Component 4.2: Urban Environment Monitoring Improvement. This will support development of real
            time monitoring of water and air quality, comprising: (a) Influence and effluence quality and quantity
            monitoring for An Duong 1 WWTP and water quality at Tam Bac sluice gates constructed under the project,
            (b) Air quality monitoring for An Duong 1 WWTP, and (c) Support to improve the arrangements for the
            operation and maintenance of the wastewater services in the city.
     iii.   Sub-Component 4.3: Project Management. This will support the overall management and implementation of
            the project to ensure quality construction, compliance with the Bank’s environment and social standards,
            procurement and financial management procedures.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          TBD
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



The Project’s environmental risk is rated Substantial. The project involves construction of urban roads, bridges, river
embankments, drainage systems, wastewater facilities, and sluice gates within the project area. Construction-phase
risks include air and noise pollution, dust and emissions, impacts on water quality and aquatic habitats, partial loss of
river protection forest leading to erosion, dredging and disposal of excavated materials, and potential soil and water
pollution. Operation-phase risks include traffic-related pollution, odor and sludge management at wastewater treatment
systems, occupational health and safety concerns, and pollution risk from system failure. These impacts are moderate to
substantial but largely reversible and can be mitigated through sound design, construction practices, and ESMP
measures. The project’s social risk rating is High, primarily due to significant land acquisition and resettlement (LAR),
permanently affecting approximately 120 hectares of lands from 2,600 households. Of these approximately 1,350 will
need to be relocated. Beyond LAR, the project is expected to cause major disruptions to urban livelihoods and business
activities during sewer system and road improvement works; risks associated with land acquisition for developing
resettlement sites and potential delays in site development; substantial impacts from labor influx, community health
and safety concerns, and traffic safety issues; disproportionate impacts on households that squat or encroach for
livelihoods or residential purposes; relocation of a significant number of graves. Construction activities may further pose
community health and safety risks, while operational phases carry risks like traffic accidents and other hazards.
Furthermore, the influx of labor could give rise to risks including sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA-
SH), spread of sexually transmitted and communicable diseases. Additionally, there may be uneven access to project
benefits among disadvantaged households who may face difficulties connecting to the domestic sewage system.

                                                                                                                        Page 10



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Pratap Tvgssshrk
 Senior Transport Specialist

 Cuong Duc Dang
 Sr Urban Spec.

 Phyrum Kov
 Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Implementing Agencies
 Hai Phong City Project People's Committee

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Pratap Tvgssshrk, Cuong Duc Dang, Phyrum Kov

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Benedict L.J. Eijbergen              29-Nov-2025

Country Director:                        Mariam J. Sherman                    23-Dec-2025




                                                                                                   Page 11



                                                                                            Official Use Only
The World Bank
Hai Phong City Resilience Development Project(P507658)




                                                                Page 12



                                                         Official Use Only
