Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)




                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Project Information Document (PID)


            _For Official Use Only_
                                                       Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 02-Jul-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01303




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                       Pacific Region
                          Samoa                          EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          P507749                        Preparedness, Adaptation
                                                                                                                       and Resilience - Samoa
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         01-Jul-2025                    27-Nov-2025                    Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Finance,
                                                         Ministry of Natural
                          Independent State of           Resources and




_For Official Use Only_
                          Samoa                          Environment, Ministry of
                                                         Works, Transport and
                                                         Infrastructure

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To strengthen disaster preparedness and increase resilience to climate and disaster risks, and in case of an eligible
                          crisis or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.

                          Components
                          Component 1: Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems
                          Component 2: Emergency Preparedness and Response
                          Component 3: Resilient Infrastructure
                          Component 4: Project Management
                          Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

                          SUMMARY



                                                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                              Total Operation Cost                                                                                                              35.28

                              Total Financing                                                                                                                   35.28
                                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                                 30.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                                                      0.00

                            DETAILS
                              World Bank Group Financing
                                 International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                    30.00
                                   IDA Grant                                                                                                                    30.00
                              Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                 Trust Funds                                                                                                                     5.28
                                   Total Program Cost                                                                                                            5.28




_For Official Use Only_
                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                            Decision




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1. Samoa's high exposure and vulnerability to severe natural hazards, compounded by climate change, have caused
                          significant economic damage and threaten key economic sectors, particularly in vulnerable coastal areas. In the decade
                          leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, the economy faced multiple economic shocks resulting mainly from tropical
                          cyclones, which led to more volatile and slower growth, around 2.5 percent per year on average. These shocks
                          underscored the economy’s vulnerability to external factors, particularly the devastating impact of natural and climate-
                          related hazards. Such hazards have caused substantial damage and losses over time, with major disasters occurring at an
                          average rate of one every three years. Notably, the 2009 tsunami and Cyclone Evan in 2012 caused damages equivalent
                          to 20 percent and 29 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), respectively,1 demonstrating the severe economic impact


                          1 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), Disaster Risk Reduction in Samoa: Country Update 2022, (Suva: UNDRR, Sub-Regional

                          Office for the Pacific, 2022).

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 2



                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                          of disasters. Between 1965 and 2025, Samoa experienced 56 disaster events, resulting in US$543 million in economic
                          losses, i.e., annual losses averaging 5 percent of GDP. Climate change is expected to worsen the frequency and intensity
                          of natural and climate-related hazards, further endangering infrastructure and livelihoods, while rising sea levels and
                          increasing temperatures threaten agriculture, fisheries, and tourism. Over 70 percent of the Samoan population resides
                          in low-lying coastal zones, highly exposed to floods, coastal inundation, droughts, tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and
                          tsunami.

                          2. The Project targets disaster risk management (DRM) and urban resilience investment needs in Samoa to reduce risk
                          and prepare for future disasters. Its multi-pronged approach includes improving national-level multi-hazard early warning
                          systems (MHEWS) and emergency response capacities, building community preparedness, and investing in resilient
                          infrastructure in urban areas of the country. The Project is guided by four overarching principles: (i) enhancing end-to-end
                          integrated systems, recognizing that effective MHEWS need to integrate hydrometeorological and geophysical services
                          through four key areas – disaster risk knowledge, hazard observations and forecasting, dissemination and communication,
                          and preparedness and response; (ii) investing in resilient public facilities to reduce the exposure and vulnerability of
                          priority assets to climate and natural-related hazards; (iii) advocating for a people-centered approach, prioritizing
                          community engagement and participatory design; and (iv) complementing global and regional initiatives, including the
                          Early Warnings for All initiative, Weather Ready Pacific initiative, Climate Risk Early Warning Systems, Systematic
                          Observations Financing Facility (SOFF), Building Safety and Resilience in the Pacific II (BSRP II), and the Pacific Humanitarian
                          Warehouse Program (PHWP).




_For Official Use Only_
                              Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          3. Samoa continues to face considerable challenges as residual risks are exacerbated by climate change and increasing
                          urbanization. The evolving risk landscape makes early warning and response systems essential to safeguarding lives and
                          economic assets. Strengthening these systems is not just about immediate safety; it also ensures long-term economic
                          resilience. Continued investments in MHEWS and in strengthening emergency preparedness and response (EP&R)
                          capabilities will better equip Samoa to protect its communities and economy from the growing impacts of natural and
                          climate-related hazards. With every dollar spent on these systems, global estimates indicate that countries can save
                          between US$4 and US$10 in disaster response costs, making them a critical focus for Samoa’s resilience strategy. 2
                          Additionally, integrating risk considerations into urban planning is aligned with proactive DRM, and helps avoid the
                          placement of people and critical assets in exposed areas. Public buildings also need design solutions that suit Samoa’s
                          climate and risk profile, including energy and water efficiency standards that meet the requirements of the National
                          Building Code of Samoa, which were updated in 2017 to align with international standards. In addition, enhanced
                          compliance with current resilience and adaptation design measures, in consideration of Samoa’s growing climate and
                          disaster risk, will help to minimize long-term operations and maintenance costs, as well as over-reliance on main networks.

                          4. Over the past decade, Samoa’s approach to DRM has evolved, moving from a focus on post-disaster response to a
                          more balanced approach that includes proactive interventions. This shift has been led by the Ministry of Natural
                          Resources and Environment (MNRE),3 which is responsible for national disaster management, hazard monitoring, and the
                          operation of the country’s MHEWS. MNRE has been supported through initiatives such as the World Bank-financed Pacific


                          2  Stephane Hallegate, Jun Rentschler, and Julie Rozenberg, Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure Opportunity, Sustainable Infrastructure
                          Series (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2019).
                          3 The key divisions responsible for Samoa’s MHEWS are the Disaster Management Office, Samoa Meteorological Division, Water Resource Division,

                          and Information Communications and Technology division.

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                          Resilience Program – Samoa Project (PREP-Samoa),4 which improved MHEWS, enhanced the resilience of critical school
                          infrastructure, and contributed to financial protection against disasters. The Government of Samoa has also ensured that
                          disaster and climate resilience standards are integrated in other sectoral investments to reduce risk proactively, including
                          those implemented by the Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI), which include transport, urban
                          development, and coastal protection projects. Additionally, the Ministry of Finance (MoF) is implementing a Disaster Risk
                          Financing Policy to guide the utilization of post-disaster financing instruments, such as contingent financing from the
                          World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the sovereign parametric insurance for tropical cyclones and
                          earthquakes provided by the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company. These tools have provided timely financial
                          resources in the aftermath of disasters and have supported a DRM reform agenda, laying the foundation for a more
                          resilient Samoa.

                          5. The Government of Samoa is actively implementing a series of regulatory changes to improve climate and disaster
                          risk management, although operational policies and procedures need to be enhanced. The Government has
                          demonstrated a strong commitment to enhancing MHEWS as a critical element of proactive DRM. Since 2021, the
                          Government has enacted the Meteorology, Geoscience and Ozone Services Act 2021, approved a National MHEWS Policy,
                          and established a Technical Working Group to regulate MHEWS. These reforms support integrated hazard monitoring and
                          effective downstream dissemination, as well as the implementation of impact-based forecasting for specific hazard
                          impacts and recommendations. In February 2024, the Government approved the Samoa Disaster Risk Management Policy,
                          which outlines a coordinated approach to addressing climate, natural, and health-related hazards, with a focus on




_For Official Use Only_
                          community-based preparedness and awareness of risk.5 Meanwhile, the Disaster and Emergency Management Act 2007
                          is under review to incorporate lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and consider more proactive DRM
                          approaches. The Pathway for the Development of Samoa 2021–2026,6 Samoa’s national development plan, calls for
                          building climate and disaster resilience for all Samoans, including through increased investments in Savai’i, Samoa’s largest
                          island, home to the country’s second largest – but growing – population. While the regulatory improvements have clarified
                          legal mandates for DRM, more efforts are needed, especially for day-to-day implementation. For instance, operational
                          policies and procedures would strengthen long-term institutional capacities, especially given persistent challenges of staff
                          turnover and subsequent loss of institutional knowledge.

                          End-to-End Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems
                          6. Significant gaps in reliability and effectiveness remain. The Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific 2017–
                          2030 includes a regional commitment to establish “end-to-end” MHEWS7 across the Pacific. In Samoa, however, persistent
                          issues such as data transmission failures, aging instrumentation and facilities, poor network coverage across the country,
                          absence of specialized technical expertise, and the lack of adequate decision support systems have limited the system’s
                          overall efficiencies. These structural issues lead to early warnings that are less accurate and do not reach users and
                          communities in a timely manner. To address these gaps, the Government is committed to continue strengthening the
                          foundational elements of the system. This requires enhancing real-time data collection and forecasting accuracy to
                          improve warning precision; modernizing communication infrastructure to ensure coverage in remote and underserved

                          4 PREP – Samoa Project (P154839)
                          5 The policy reforms are complemented by investments in MHEWS systems, instrumentation, and capacity building, including through the PREP

                          project. Data management is also being strengthened to support comprehensive risk assessments, including for non-financial assets and
                          communities, to increase their resilience to current and future climate and disaster risk.
                          6 Ministry of Finance of Samoa, Pathway for the Development of Samoa (Apia: Ministry of Finance, Economic Policy and Planning Division, 2022),

                          2022. https://www.mof.gov.ws/publications/economic-policy-planning/pathway-for-the-development-of-samoa.
                          7 According to the World Meteorological Organization, “end-to-end” MHEWS refers to a comprehensive, integrated approach that covers all stages

                          of the early warning cycle. This includes hazard monitoring and prediction, disseminating warnings to communities, and ensuring communities are
                          prepared to respond to the warnings.

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                          areas; and developing automated decision support systems to streamline responses and reduce human error through
                          enhanced technical capacity across key sectors. It is also critical for Samoa to further integrate the monitoring of various
                          types of hazards, such as hydrometeorological, geophysical, climate, and health-related hazards, into a seamless system.

                          7. Samoa has made efforts toward providing actionable information to guide decision making during disasters, yet
                          faces challenges in operating, maintaining, and leveraging advanced technologies and systems. The sustainable
                          maintenance of observation and monitoring networks for both hydrometeorological and geophysical hazards is a known
                          challenge across the Pacific region. The unavailability of funds for spare parts, insufficient capacity to repair and calibrate
                          instruments, and obsolescence of equipment all contribute towards lack of sustainability. To address these challenges,
                          Samoa needs support to participate in several critical global and regional initiatives. First, the streamlining of data sharing
                          with the Oceania Regional Seismic Network, which aims to integrate seismic monitoring across the region, would further
                          enhance real-time earthquake and volcanic hazard monitoring and tsunami warning. Second, implementation of the
                          regional Weather Ready Pacific Decadal Programme of Investment will strengthen the country’s ability to manage
                          high-impact and extreme weather, water, and ocean events. Finally, a grant from SOFF, a global initiative to improve
                          weather and climate data, was approved in May 2024 to address critical data gaps for extreme weather observations
                          through additional land-based and upper air monitoring stations.8 Additionally, countries like Samoa can integrate
                          community insights and local traditional knowledge into early warning systems to improve their relevance and




_For Official Use Only_
                          effectiveness by combining modern technology with place-based knowledge of hazards and increasing community trust
                          and acceptance.

                          Emergency Preparedness and Response (EP&R) Capabilities
                          8. The compounding effects of Tropical Cyclone Harold and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 highlighted the complexity
                          of managing multiple emergencies simultaneously. While the National Emergency Operations Center (funded by PREP-
                          Samoa) represents a significant improvement in inter-agency coordination during disaster events, there remains a critical
                          need for more comprehensive and adaptable EP&R systems that allow for effective interagency response. Addressing this
                          need requires substantial enhancements in emergency management infrastructure and equipment, particularly in areas
                          such as incident monitoring (to observe and coordinate responses to the impacts of hazards) and incident management
                          (including inter-agency emergency response services). For example, Samoa needs a robust digital information system,
                          which could leverage information from hazard monitoring and forecasting (supported under Component 1) to connect
                          with emergency response systems and directly reach those at risk more quickly and efficiently. These improvements are
                          not only critical at the national level but must also extend to the subnational level, where local and rural emergency
                          personnel and communities require the necessary infrastructure, equipment, and systems to respond effectively to
                          disasters through a more coordinated approach.

                          9. There is a strong need to prioritize institutional capacity building and community engagement to ensure Samoa can
                          effectively utilize investments in emergency management. As a small island nation with competing demands for scarce
                          government resources and personnel, Samoa faces unique challenges in managing emergency situations efficiently. To
                          maximize the effectiveness of continued World Bank support and complementary programs financed by other
                          development partners, such as the PHWP and the BSRPII, it is essential to ensure that the country’s institutions have the
                          necessary capacity to make full use of the investments in infrastructure and equipment. Boosting that capacity calls for
                          investing in training programs that develop the skills and competencies of emergency personnel, as government staff well-
                          versed in emergency management protocols can respond more effectively during crises. Expanding and strengthening

                          8 Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF), Samoa Country Hydromet Diagnostics (Canberra, Australia: Bureau of Meteorology, 2023),

                          https://www.un-soff.org/document/samoa-country-hydromet-diagnostics/

                                                                                                                                                                Page 5



                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                          community outreach initiatives such as the Government’s Community Disaster and Climate Risk Management Programme
                          will also foster greater public awareness and preparedness, allowing citizens to play an active role in emergency response
                          efforts and further increasing the effectiveness of DRM investments.

                          Urban Resilience
                          10. Samoa was the first country in the Pacific to adopt a systems-based approach to urban management, focusing on
                          holistic urban planning. This approach led to the development of district- and local-level plans that incorporate good
                          practices in urban planning, including participatory planning. The country’s Community Integrated Management (CIM)
                          Plans links local priorities to national development strategies and highlight essential infrastructure upgrades and disaster
                          preparedness. Select urban areas and towns have established additional development controls and regulatory
                          mechanisms. The 2012 Vaitele Sustainable Management Plan (SMP) and the 2018 Urban Design Standards for the Apia
                          Waterfront provide guidelines for the specified urban areas to: (i) guide land use; (ii) promote safe, functional, resilient,
                          and sustainable urban spaces; and (iii) ensure that new urban infrastructure enhances safety and livability. The Planning
                          and Urban Management Act 2004 mandates development policy controls for the entire country, and the Government is
                          committed to developing SMPs and planning policies for additional priority urban areas.

                          11. Integrating climate and disaster resilience proactively into the development of secondary cities such as Sālelologa
                          is critical, given their growing population and exposure to natural and climate-related hazards. In the Pathway for the




_For Official Use Only_
                          Development of Samoa (2021-2026), the Government emphasizes the need for long-term planning to achieve a more
                          spatially balanced distribution of economic opportunities across the country, while promoting overall national economic
                          growth. Focusing investments solely in Apia will be insufficient to achieve the Pathway’s goals. Recognizing this, the
                          Planning and Urban Management Agency (PUMA) under the MWTI intends to develop a township plan and SMP for
                          Sālelologa on the island of Savai’i due to the town’s strong economic potential as the transportation gateway between
                          Savai’i and Upolu. The plan would act as a catalyst for development, as there are currently no policies to guide and regulate
                          future growth in Samoa’s secondary urban areas, especially to manage urban amenities, address climate and disaster risk,
                          and ensure environmental and social safeguards. This is a critical gap, since the population of Savai’i grew by 3.7 percent
                          between 2016 and 2021, reaching 45,175 (one-fifth of Samoa’s population), with 34 percent of the island’s population
                          residing in Sālelologa’s district of Fa’asaleleaga. However, Sālelologa is in a low-lying area, parts of which are within the
                          tsunami evacuation zone, and the town is exposed to flooding, coastal erosion, and landslides. Its key infrastructure—
                          including the wharf, ferry terminal, airport, fire stations, market, schools, public library, and electricity substation—are
                          crucial for the community’s daily life and economic activity, making it essential to integrate climate and disaster resilience
                          into its future development, including public buildings and spaces. Yet these critical public assets are often not designed
                          to suit Samoa’s climate and disaster risk profile (e.g., improper design standards and construction practices) and thus
                          remain vulnerable to hazards. Environmentally sustainable designs adapted to the changing climate are needed, and must
                          include mitigation measures (particularly for climate-related hazards such as floods and strong winds). Universal
                          accessibility standards are also needed.

                          12. However, Samoa is experiencing uneven and often unmanaged urbanization, which poses additional challenges,
                          particularly as it intersects with increasing climate and disaster risks. Although Apia’s physical footprint continues to
                          expand, urbanization is largely occurring outside of urban administrative areas, which has led to urban sprawl and leapfrog
                          development along the coastal infrastructure corridors, where disaster risk such as related to flood hazards is higher. This
                          pattern of peri-urban development can be attributed to the topography, the distribution of primary roadways, the
                          availability of customary land in the coastal plain, and the subdivision and sale of land. Without strategic planning and
                          regulation, urbanization increases the concentration of people and assets in hazard-prone areas. Therefore, it is critical to
                          integrate urban infrastructure with national-level adaptation planning to reduce the exposure and vulnerability of priority
                          assets to climate and natural hazards.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 6



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                           C. Proposed Development Objective
                           13. The proposed Project Development Objective is to strengthen disaster preparedness and increase resilience to
                           climate and disaster risks, and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.


                            Key Results

                          14. Achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following PDO-level indicators:
                               a. People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number, disaggregated by sex and age) corporate scorecard
                                   indicator. Measured by two sub-indicators:
                                         - People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure; and
                                         - People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response.
                               b. Population with access to an enhanced emergency response system provided by functional emergency
                                   management infrastructure (percentage, disaggregated by sex and age).9


                            D. Project Description

                          15. The Project is structured under five components. Activities have been determined based on: (i) strategic alignment




_For Official Use Only_
                          with national development planning and DRM strategies; (ii) recommendations from technical assessments and
                          diagnostics;10 (iii) funding availability; and (iv) complementarity with other DRM programs and initiative.

                          Component 1: Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems
                          16. Component 1 will be implemented by MNRE and will invest in global and country-level decision support systems,
                          instrumentation, and capacity and institutional strengthening for MHEWS, supporting both climate-related and
                          geophysical hazards. This involves strengthening the “upstream” end of effective MHEWS through investments in
                          observations and forecasting for natural and climate-related hazards (especially extreme weather, tropical cyclones,
                          flooding, volcanic activity, earthquakes, and tsunami), including for the World Meteorological Organization Global Basic
                          Observing Network. Component 1 investments build on the Concept of Operations, Technical Design, Investment Plan,
                          and Capacity Building Plan for MHEWS prepared under PREP-Samoa. Using the principles of a people-centered early
                          warning system, which combines technological solutions with community empowerment under Component 2 activities,
                          Component 1 aims to promote a more integrated approach to disaster resilience. The SOFF financing will fund selected
                          activities of Component 1 only, including three weather stations – two land-based automated weather stations and an
                          upper air station (radiosonde) – and associated ancillary infrastructure, systems improvements, spare parts, training, and
                          technical assistance.

                          Component 2: Emergency Preparedness and Response
                          17. Component 2 will be implemented by MNRE and will enhance national- and community-level response capacities
                          to better prepare for, and respond to, future disasters. This will be achieved through supporting the “downstream” end
                          of effective MHEWS by investing in four key pillars of EP&R: information, facilities, equipment, and personnel. National
                          hazard monitoring centers that are critical for emergency response will be designed and constructed to national

                          9 Enhanced emergency response refers to the provision of functional emergency management infrastructure, including operational emergency

                          operations centers, adequately equipped first responders, and community-level preparedness measures.
                          10 Such as the Concept of Operations, Technical Design, Investment Plan, Procurement Plan, and Capacity Building Plan for MHEWS developed under

                          PREP-Samoa; the Government’s Emergency Radion Network and Emergency Siren Network Analysis and Diagnosis Report; the World Bank’s ongoing
                          Technical Inputs for a Design Brief for a Proposed Samoa Meteorological Facility; Emergency Preparedness and Response Diagnostic; and Urban
                          Resilience Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment and Investment Options for Sālelologa; and the SOFF Country Hydromet Diagnostic.

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 7



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                          climate-resilient building design standards, including for water and energy efficiencies, and relevant climate adaptation
                          measures such as climate-resilient building materials and environmentally sustainable design practices. This includes the
                          proposed Meteorological Facility, a specialized center equipped with instruments and technology for observing, recording,
                          and analyzing weather, climate and atmospheric conditions. Emergency management capacities and community outreach
                          programs will be supported to ensure that early warning information through improved MHEWS is accessible,
                          understandable, and actionable across all sectors and communities. Activities are expected to have benefits at the
                          regional, national, and community levels.

                          Component 3: Resilient Infrastructure
                          18. Component 3 will be implemented by MWTI and will invest in national and local activities to reduce the exposure
                          and vulnerability of select urban areas to climate and natural-related hazards. The focus of this component is to reduce
                          risk proactively through township planning and urban policy frameworks that are informed by climate and disaster risks,
                          and through prioritized physical investments in new and upgraded green public buildings and spaces that incorporate
                          disaster and climate resilience standards. This approach builds on global experience and lessons learned from World Bank-
                          financed projects in the Republic of the Marshall Islands and Vanuatu, which combine physical infrastructure with
                          institutional strengthening for urban planning. Activities under this component will focus on secondary urban areas. Long-
                          term planning in other urban areas is critical to a cost-effective and viable approach to infrastructure development. In
                          Savai’i, there are opportunities to encourage inclusive growth and shared prosperity and provide more opportunities for
                          economic development, social inclusion, basic services, and urban livability. Risk reduction investments in waterfront and




_For Official Use Only_
                          streetscape upgrading have been prioritized in the first phase of implementation to improve urban amenities immediately;
                          additional resilient public facilities (buildings or spaces) will be confirmed once the township plan and investment
                          prioritization are completed by Year 2 of implementation. For all such public facilities, construction materials will adhere
                          to global environmental sustainability and climate mitigation and adaptation standards, as set out in the National Building
                          Code (e.g., materials with low-embedded greenhouse gas emissions, such as low-carbon concrete and sustainably sourced
                          timber); and buildings will include green features such as automated lighting, and water- and energy-efficient appliances,
                          cyclone fastening, rainwater harvesting, and marine-grade, flood resistant materials suitable for coastal areas. This
                          component will also establish urban planning committees to support decision-making responsibilities, and promote
                          representation of women with a minimum target of 50 percent women.

                          Component 4: Project Management
                          19. Component 4 will be implemented by MWTI and will support project management and implementation support for
                          Components 1 to 3. Responsibilities include environmental and social management, procurement and contract
                          management, financial management, communication, monitoring and evaluation, and training. Key activities include the
                          preparation of annual work plans and budgets, regular project and financial reporting, auditing, development of a
                          monitoring, evaluation, and learning system, and day-to-day project and contract management activities. The Project will
                          support: (i) the recruitment of consultants to support the implementation of all Project activities, such as a Procurement
                          Officer, Financial Management Officer, Safeguards Officer, and Monitoring and Evaluation Officer; (ii) technical assistance
                          to support evaluation of the Project at the mid-term point and completion, as well as auditing; and (iii) capacity building
                          and training on project management and implementation.

                          Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
                          20. Component 5 will be implemented by MoF and will support emergency response activities under a pre-allocated
                          CERC. Despite the ex-ante resilience-building activities planned under this Project, the increasing vulnerability of Samoa
                          to natural and climate-related hazards means that access to contingent financing is a key requirement under MoF’s
                          Disaster Risk Financing Policy. The CERC provides a mechanism with pre-allocated funding: (i) for quick disbursements to
                          meet the immediate liquidity needs of the Recipient following an eligible disaster event to finance critical imports; or (ii) to

                                                                                                                                                     Page 8



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                          finance emergency response, recovery and reconstruction works and associated services. The CERC Annex in the Project
                          Operations Manual (POM) provides the overall financing framework and types of activities to be financed under the CERC.
                          All eligible activities included in the CERC POM Annex will consider climate risks, on both mitigation and adaptation to
                          demonstrate alignment with the Paris Agreement. This ensures alignment for the specific activities that are to be financed
                          and included in the Emergency Action Plan, based on the information available at the time of activation of CERC.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                              Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          21. The project’s environmental and social (E&S) risk has been assessed as Substantial due mainly to master planning in
                          Sālelologa and associated downstream impacts of planning decisions. The project is expected to result in long-term




_For Official Use Only_
                          positive social and environmental impacts in target communities through enhanced capacity to respond to and mitigate
                          the impacts of natural hazards. Other key environmental risks that are likely specific to the project site include dust, noise,
                          erosion, resource consumption, waste generation, worker safety, and hazardous waste disposal. Key social risks include
                          the potential for i) land and livelihood impacts associated with proposed investments in emergency management
                          infrastructure, and investments in resilient public facilities; ii) community health and safety risks associated with
                          construction/labor influx (i.e. antisocial behavior, transmissible disease and sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual
                          harassment); and iii) labor and working condition risks. There is also a risk of exclusion of vulnerable groups and inequity
                          in the supply and access to early warnings, emergency management equipment, emergency relief supplies, and delivery
                          of community-based outreach programs. The adverse environmental and social risks are predictable and can be effectively
                          managed through project design and standard E&S mitigation measures (including E&S considerations in site selection) to
                          avoid serious adverse effects to human health and safety. However, the project has been rated as substantial due to the
                          potential downstream E&S implications associated with the Sālelologa masterplan such as greenspaces, nature
                          conservation, and livelihood impacts when implementing the Sālelologa masterplan. Further, beneficiaries and key
                          stakeholders can be unintentionally excluded during the masterplan design, which requires a rigorous E&S and
                          stakeholder engagement process to manage these risks. MNRE and MWTI have prior experience managing E&S risks on
                          World Bank financed projects. An E&S focal point will be appointed for project preparation. The MOF Centralized Technical
                          Services Support Unit (CTSSU) E&S Specialist will also provide support. The project is expected to partially utilize Samoa’s
                          country E&S framework. The project will prepare several environmental and social instruments prior to appraisal. These
                          include an Environmental and Social Management Framework, Stakeholder Engagement Plan; and Terms of Reference for
                          a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment of the Sālelologa Master Plan; and an Environmental and Social
                          Commitment Plan (ESCP). The ESCP will describe the material measures and actions and timing to ensure compliance with
                          the World Bank’s environmental and social standards. This will include but not be limited to: maintaining adequate E&S
                          resources; the implementation of the E&S screening process and land access process as part of the Environmental and
                          Social Management Framework; preparation of site-specific environmental and social assessments; incorporating E&S
                          considerations in project financed technical assistance; labor and working condition requirements and measures for
                          preventing and responding to sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment.



                                                                                                                                                    Page 9



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          22. Project Governance. The Project will be governed by the Climate Resilience Steering Committee (SC), chaired by the
                          Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of MoF, and including the CEOs of MNRE, MWTI, MFAT, Ministry of Health, and the Samoa
                          Fire and Emergency Services Authority. The key mandate of the SC is to coordinate, provide advice, and guide climate and
                          disaster resilience investments of the Government. The responsibilities of the SC for this Project will include approval of
                          the Annual Work Plan and Budget and any other strategic decisions. The Aid Coordination and Management Division of
                          MoF serves as the Secretariat for this committee. A Technical Working Group (TWG) will be established prior to Project
                          Effectiveness to support the detailed preparation and implementation of the Project, consisting of Assistant CEOs (ACEOs)
                          implementing the Project and other key stakeholders from line ministries that are required to provide technical inputs to
                          the design and implementation of Project activities.

                          23. Implementing Arrangements. MoF is the Executing Agency, with MNRE, MWTI and MoF designated as the
                          Implementing Agencies (IAs). MNRE will be responsible for implementing Components 1 and 2, MWTI will be responsible
                          for implementing Components 3 and 4, and MoF will be responsible for implementing Component 5 (if the CERC is
                          activated). The Project Management Division of MWTI (MWTI-PMD), led by its ACEO and in coordination with the ACEOs




_For Official Use Only_
                          of the TWG, will carry out the day-to-day project management and implementation functions, including project
                          engineering oversight, procurement, environmental and social management, contract management, and monitoring and
                          evaluation, with funding from Component 4. Most of the day-to-day financial management functions will be carried out
                          by the MWTI-PMD as laid out in the POM, while MoF will be responsible for selected tasks including processing payments,
                          submitting Withdrawal Applications and Interim unaudited Financial Reports to the World Bank, and conducting annual
                          audits. Contracts will be signed by the respective IA with assigned technical focal points at the ACEO level (who are also
                          part of the TWG) providing oversight and technical approvals. IAs will be supported by technical specialists (consulting
                          firms and individual consultants) carrying out project activities (not project management) under Components 1, 2, and 3.
                          The CTSSU under MoF will advise MWTI-PMD and IAs on procurement, financial management, environmental and social
                          management, and monitoring and evaluation as needed. Human resource capacity constraints in the line ministries will
                          be mitigated by the longer six-year project implementation timeframe, agreement on an investment plan prior to
                          Appraisal, advance procurement of selected activities, and additional consultant resources in the MWTI-PMD dedicated
                          to the Project.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank




                                                                                                                                                Page 10



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)


                           Yong Jian Vun
                           Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                           Vica Rosario Bogaerts
                           Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                           Jessica Rachel Schmidt
                           Urban Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Independent State of Samoa

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Finance
                           Saoleititi Maeva Betham-Vaai
                           Chief Executive Officer
                           maeva.bethamvaai@mof.gov.ws




_For Official Use Only_
                           Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
                           Lealaisalanoa Frances Debra Brown-Reupena
                           Chief Executive Officer
                           fran.reupena@mnre.gov.ws

                           Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure
                           Tupai Mau Simanu
                           Chief Executive Officer
                           mau.simanu@mwti.gov.ws

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Yong Jian Vun, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Jessica Rachel Schmidt

                          Approved By


                                                                                                                                        Page 11



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                          Practice Manager/Manager:

                          Country Director:                       Stephen N. Ndegwa                       02-Jul-2025




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                               Page 12



                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
