Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04553




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 28, 2024                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym             Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507749                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        PREPARE-Samoa                 2026

                     Operation Name            Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Samoa                     Samoa                                     EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC         Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                       Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Independent State of      Ministry of Natural Resources and         20-May-2025                   28-Aug-2025
                     Samoa                     Environment, Ministry of Works,
                                               Transport and Infrastructure

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     08-Oct-2024               35,280,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve the capacity of the Government Samoa to prepare for and manage the impacts of natural hazards
                     effectively, to strengthen the resilience of select urban areas, and in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, respond
                     promptly and effectively to it.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project would target investments in Savai’i, on which almost a quarter of Samoa’s population resides, and
                     also national-level investments (such as in multi-hazard early warning systems – MHEWS, meteorology and seismic
                     services for advanced climatic weather information, emergency response services including fire and emergency services,
                     improved green and resilient health infrastructure) that will include enhanced service delivery or benefits for Savai’i.
                     The proposed project would support integrated investments in decision support systems and service delivery, as well as

                    Oct 28, 2024                                                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     institutional strengthening and technical training, for an end-to-end MHEWS that considers both upstream hazard
                     monitoring (Component 1) and downstream early warning dissemination to the “last mile” users and communities
                     (Component 2). Urban resilience investments under Component 3 would include the planning activities and technical
                     studies for the proposed new Sālelologa township and other select urban areas, as well as demonstration investments
                     in select public facilities that showcase current disaster and climate resilience, sustainability, and accessibility standards.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Samoa is a small Polynesian country in the South Pacific with a population of around 218,764 as of 2021, mainly residing
                     on the islands of Upolu and Savai’i, with Apia as its capital. The population is mostly ethnic Samoan. Samoa is prone to
                     natural disasters such as floods, droughts, cyclones, earthquakes, and tsunamis, with significant events including the
                     2009 tsunami and Tropical Cyclone Evan in 2012. Climate change poses further risks with more frequent and severe
                     weather events, sea-level rise, and heat hazards, which threaten infrastructure, livelihoods, and key economic sectors
                     like agriculture, fisheries, and tourism, often employing vulnerable groups.
                     The project typologies include i) hazard monitoring, communication and early warning equipment; ii) emergency
                     management infrastructure (e.g. new metrological facility in Apia, satellite metrological office near Faleolo Airport,
                     Seismic Operations Centre and district-level firehouses) – all on brownfield sites; iii) acquisition of emergency
                     equipment, relief supplies and communication tools; iv) type 3 technical assistance for strengthening the capacity of
                     country-level DRM institutions and support community level DRM through community outreach programs; v) type 2
                     technical assistance for supporting the formulation of urban resilience policies, programs, plans, strategies or legal
                     frameworks including development of a sustainable management masterplan for Salelologa; and vi) and investments in



Public Disclosure
                     resilient public infrastructure such as pilot waterfront upgrading in Saleologa, settlement stormwater and coastal
                     protection infrastructure and access roads, public/government buildings, and multifunctional public spaces (i.e. parks,
                     greenspaces and floodplain management spaces). The project will integrate environmental and social dimensions into
                     the type 2 technical assistance, such as master planning for Salelologa—by avoiding the concentration or placement of
                     people and critical assets.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project would be implemented by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE) and the Ministry of
                     Works, and Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI). The Ministry of Finance (MOF) will act as the Executing Agency. MNRE
                     would manage Components 1 and 2, while MWTI would oversee Component 3. MNRE, MWTI and MoF have prior
                     experience around E&S risk management and the Environmental and Social Framework. The day-to-day project
                     management functions, including environmental and social management, may be centralized under the Project
                     Management Division (PMD) of MWTI. The PMD would include an Environmental and Social Specialist. The Centralized
                     Technical Services Support Unit (CTSSU) under MOF, includes an environmental and social specialist who would provide
                     E&S support. In addition to E&S resourcing, E&S capacity strengthening will form part of the operation to augment
                     other technical assistance being provided to support the strengthening of Samoa’s E&S framework.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Substantial




                    Oct 28, 2024                                                                                                          Page 3 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     Environmental risk is rated as ‘Substantial’ mainly due to the potential downstream environmental risks and
                     implications such as greenspaces, natural environment, nature conservation and biodiversity, flooding, water quality,
                     land use, and climate change associated with the Sālelologa masterplan. Other project typologies described in Section
                     C likely cause moderate temporary and reversible impacts in scale and magnitude. Key environmental risks and
                     impacts of the emergency management infrastructure may be direct, indirect and cumulative and relate to dust,
                     noise, erosion and sedimentation, resource consumption, waste generation, worker safety, and hazardous waste
                     disposal (e.g., contaminated oil and e-waste). However, their potential environmental impacts are site-specific,
                     predictable and manageable through standardized environmental and social risk management or subproject E&S
                     instruments under the World Bank and Samoa's E&S framework. The project is expected to result in long-term
                     positive environmental impacts in targeted areas through an enhanced capacity to respond to and mitigate the
                     effects of climate and natural disaster hazards.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risk has been assessed as ‘Substantial’ due to the potential for i) land and livelihood impacts associated with
                     proposed investments in emergency management infrastructure, master planning in Sālelologa (and associated
                     downstream impacts of planning decisions) and investments in resilient public facilities; ii) community health and
                     safety risks associated with construction/labor influx (i.e. antisocial behavior, transmissible disease and sexual
                     exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment); and iii) labor and working condition risks. There is also a risk of
                     exclusion of vulnerable groups and inequity in the supply and access to emergency management equipment,
                     emergency relief supplies, and delivery of community-based outreach programs. Social risks are expected to be



Public Disclosure
                     predictable and readily managed through standard social mitigation measures and rigorous E&S and stakeholder
                     engagement process.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The E&S risks are substantial due to downstream E&S implications such as greenspaces, nature conservation, and
                      livelihood impacts when implementing the Sālelologa masterplan. Further, beneficiaries and key stakeholders can be
                      unintentionally excluded during the master planning. The Environmental and Social Management Framework will
                      include preliminary assessment of E&S risks and outline a process for screening, assessing, and managing these risks
                      during project implementation. An E&S exclusion list and E&S screening and site selection tool will be developed. All
                      Technical Assistance activities will manage risks under ESS1 paragraphs 14-18. A TOR for a Strategic Environmental
                      and Social Assessment (SESA) of the Saelologo master plan will be prepared during project preparation. Risks
                      associated with the procurement, installation, and operation of monitoring equipment will be mitigated through
                      procurement specifications and standard operating procedures as needed.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant




                    Oct 28, 2024                                                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared for the Project during project preparation. The SEP will identify
                      and analyze key project stakeholders; describe the process and modalities for sharing information on the project
                      activities and seeking and incorporating stakeholder feedback into project design and implementation; outline
                      strategies for culturally appropriate consultation and information dissemination; and outline approaches for
                      reporting and disclosure of project documents. The SEP will outline an indicative plan for stakeholder engagement for
                      the Saelologo master planning process. The SEP will also outline the Project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
                      which will enable stakeholders to raise project related concerns, grievances and SEA/SH complaints.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                          Relevant

                      The project workforce is expected to include i) direct workers, including consultants employed directly by the
                      implementing agencies; ii) contracted workers employed or engaged through third parties such as contractors and
                      consulting firms; and iii) community workers engaged for community-level DRM activities. The project workforce will
                      be confirmed during preparation. All project workers will be required to be 18 years of age and over. The ESCP will
                      include the requirement to manage the project workforce in accordance with Samoan employment and OHS
                      Regulation 2017 and ESS2 requirements. Samoa’s country systems for labor and working conditions risks associated
                      with project activities will be analyzed against ESS2 requirements. Any additional measures to ensure compliance
                      with ESS2 will be included in the ESCP. Labor management procedures will be included in the ESMF and requirements
                      outlined in sub-project E&S assessments and individual employment contracts / 3rd party contracts.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                           Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The project may procure and install equipment that generates a small volume of end-of-life waste. These waste risks
                      can be mitigated via the inclusion of simple requirements for procurement and end-of-life waste management
                      committed in the ESCP. Construction materials for the emergency management infrastructure are likely imported due
                      to limited supply within the country. The ESCP will include material measures to conserve water, energy, and raw
                      materials. The project may procure and install equipment (e.g., early warning systems) that can generate a small
                      volume of end-of-life waste. These risks can be mitigated by including simple requirements for procurement and end-
                      of-life waste management committed in the ESCP. The small volume of e-waste is expected to be addressed through
                      the national environmental and social framework. Greenhouse gas emissions are irrelevant due to the small-scale
                      footprint of emergency management equipment and infrastructure construction.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                           Relevant

                      The project is expected to lead to long-term improvements in community health and safety through improved
                      capacity to mitigate the impacts of natural hazards. The early warning systems equipment and emergency
                      management infrastructure will be designed to relevant national-level climate-resilient design standards. The project
                      will apply the concept of universal access to the design and construction of new buildings and structures. Community
                      health and safety risks associated with the infrastructure investments include community exposure to i) physical
                      hazards on sites; ii) water/vector-borne diseases from poor site management; iii) communicable diseases (e.g.,
                      COVID-19 and HIV/AIDS), anti-social behavior and SEA/SH risks from project workforce; vi) noise, dust and vibration
                      impacts; and vii) health impacts from poor management of hazardous materials (e.g., asbestos). The ESCP will require
                      these risks to be managed, including through sub-project E&S assessments and management plans.




                    Oct 28, 2024                                                                                                    Page 5 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                     Relevant

                      Land is an essential input for the upgrade or construction of emergency preparedness and response infrastructure
                      investments and investments in resilient public facilities. Where possible state land will be utilized. Land access for
                      customary land will be negotiated via lease arrangement. Where arrangements cannot be agreed upon, alternative
                      land will be found for project infrastructure. A Land Access Procedure will be included in the ESMF, covering all
                      dimensions of a resettlement policy framework. The LAP will be developed in accordance with Samoa’s existing
                      framework and ESS5. The Sālelologa master planning activity is also expected to include decisions on land use which
                      may result in downstream impacts. The ESMF will also include initial due diligence of land tenure risks associated with
                      the Sālelologa Master Plan, and a requirement in the SESA TOR to assess land implications and outline measures for
                      managing these in accordance with ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                      Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project is anticipated to require negligible vegetation clearance of biodiversity conservation importance.
                      Potential negative impacts and downstream impacts from the master planning on biodiversity will be assessed in the
                      ESMF are expected to be negligible. Further, the ESCP will require a choice of appropriate technical design and site
                      selection of the project activities as part of the sitting criteria or exclusion list – to be outlined in the ESMF to avoid
                      investments in sensitive biodiversity or environmental areas in the selected islands or locations.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                  Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is not relevant for Samoa. There are no known distinct IP groups that meet the criteria in ESS7 as the vast
                      majority of people are ethnic Samoan (92.6%) with a minority of Europeans and biracial European/Polynesian people.
                      Cultural needs will be managed through culturally appropriate stakeholder engagement informing project design and
                      implementation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant

                      ESS 8 is currently considered relevant due to the unknown location of activities. Impacts on cultural heritage will be
                      assessed during preparation. An appropriate environmental and social exclusion list or screening will be carried out
                      along with the preparation of relevant mitigation/management strategies for project infrastructure investments. The
                      ESCP will require contractors to implement Chance Find Procedures or measures to avoid impacts on cultural
                      heritage, including consultation of key sites to avoid inclusion of cultural heritage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                     Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS7 is not relevant as the prject actvities do not invovle any finanical intermdeaires.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                             No


                    Oct 28, 2024                                                                                                          Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          TBD
                       The ESMF will include a gap analysis of the Samoa’s E&S framework relevant to project activities and risks against the
                       World Bank ESF. This will include assessing the national environmental permit process, land access processes,
                       regulatory arrangements for managing labor and OHS risks, and statutory public consultation requirements. The ESMF
                       will clearly detail where the borrower framework can be used against each relevant ESS. The ESCP will include
                       additional actions and measures to address the gaps.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following environmental and social instruments will be prepared prior to appraisal:
                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework including gap analysis of Samao’s ESF against the World Bank’s ESF
                     relevant to project activities and risks; preliminary E&S assessment of proposed project typologies/activities; exclusion



Public Disclosure
                     list; E&S screening, assessment and management procedures; site and E&S screening tool; labour management
                     procedures; land access procedure; Chance Find Procedure; and terms of Reference (TOR) for a Strategic Environmental
                     and Social Assessment (SESA) of the Sālelologa Master Plan
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                     -Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)

                     The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) will include actions and measures to be implemented during
                     project implementation, including:
                     -Additional actions and measures needed to meet the Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards.
                     -E&S screening and site selection criteria implemented for relevant activities.
                     -Management of any associated facilities in accordance with the ESSs
                     -Management of e-waste generated by the project to meet relevant national E&S / ESF requirements.
                     -Design of DRM activities considers the needs of vulnerable and marginalised groups
                     -Preparing Environmental and Social Assessment Report (SESA)
                     - Preparing sub-project E&S instruments to ensure compliance with ESF and GoS requirements. These must be
                     submitted for World Bank review and no objection.
                     -ToR and outputs of TA activities include assessment and management of E&S risks in accordance with WB ESF and GoS
                     requirements and GIIP and be submitted for World Bank review or no objection.
                     - Implementing Land Access Procedure for all relevant activities.
                     - Management of the project workforce in accordance with Samoan employment and OHS legislation and ESS2
                     requirements and standard SEA/SH prevention and response measures.


                    Oct 28, 2024                                                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     -Measures to manage community health and safety risk in accordance with ESS4 and GoS requirements.
                     -Measures to avoid impacts on cultural heritage in accordance with ESS8 and GOS requirements, including
                     implementation of chance find procedures.
                     -Environmental and Social Capacity Building and Training Plan to ensure the IA and contractors are suitably informed
                     and trained to implement the WB and national E&S requirements.
                     -Measures to adopt and implement project-level and worker GRMs.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Yong Jian Vun                        Title:          Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  jvun@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Vica Rosario Bogaerts                Job Title:      Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  vbogaerts@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Jessica Rachel Schmidt               Job Title:      Urban Specialist



Public Disclosure
                      Email:                  jschmidt@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                      Yong Jian Vun, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Jessica Rachel Schmidt

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:             Bunlong Leng

                     ADM Social Specialist:                    Thomas John Callander




                    Oct 28, 2024                                                                                                   Page 8 of 8
