Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                             Report No: PADHI01177

                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                                                                                 ON A
                                                                            PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                                  IN THE AMOUNT OF EUR 127.7 MILLION
                                                                     (US$150.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                                       TO

                                                                                BURKINA FASO




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                     FOR A

                                                       BURKINA FASO AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION PROJECT

                                                                              FEBRUARY 16, 2026




                                Agriculture and Food Global Practice




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Western and Central Africa Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.




                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

              (Exchange Rate Effective, December 31, 2025)

                                   Special Drawing Rights (SDR),
                 Currency Unit =
                                   EURO
                       US$1.00= SDR 0.98251
                       US$1.00 = EUR 0.85128118

                                FISCAL YEAR
                          January 1 - December 31




  Regional Vice President: Ousmane Diagana
Regional Practice Director: Chakib Jenane
         Division Director: Clara Ana Coutinho De Sousa
        Practice Manager: Elhadji Adama Touré
      Task Team Leaders: Idriss Serme, Erick Herman Abiassi




                                                                   i
                 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AfDB     African Development Bank
ATP-BF   Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project
BDS      Business Development Services
CCDR     Country Climate and Development Report
CERC     Contingent Emergency Response Component
CPF      Country Partnership Framework
CRI      Corporate Results Indicator
CSA      Climate-Smart Agriculture
DA       Designated Account
DCMEF    Direction Générale du Contrôle des Marchés Publics et des Engagements
         Financiers (Control Directorate of Public Procurement)
DGPER    Direction Générale de la Promotion de l’Économie Rurale (General Directorate of
         Promotion of the Rural Economy)
DMP      Direction des Marchés Publics (Directorate of Public Procurement)
E&S      Environmental and Social
EIRR     Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESCP     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF      Environmental and Social Framework
ESIA     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
EX-ACT   Ex-Ante Carbon-balance-Tool
FAO      Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FCV      Fragility, Conflict and Violence
FISP     Financial Inclusion Support Project
FM       Financial Management
FSRP     West Africa Food System Resilience Program
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GHG      Greenhouse Gas
GFPP     Grant Facility for Project Preparation
GoBF     Government of Burkina Faso
GRM      Grievance Redress Mechanism
IDP      Internally Displaced Person
IFC      International Finance Corporation
IFR      Interim Financial Report
IPF      Investment Project Financing
IsDB     Islamic Development Bank
LMP      Labour Management Procedures
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MAERAH   Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Eau, des Ressources Animales et Halieutiques
         (Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries)
MFD      Maximizing Finance for Development
MG       Matching Grant
MIS      Management Information System
NDC      Nationally Determined Contribution
NPV      Net Present Value
PARIIS   Projet d’Appui Régional à l’Initiative pour l’Irrigation au Sahel (Sahel Region
         Irrigation Initiative Support Project)
PCM      Private Capital Mobilization
                                                                                           ii
PDO       Project Development Objective
PIM       Project Implementation Manual
PIU       Project Implementation Unit
PMP       Pest Management Plan
PO        Producers’ Organization
PPSD      Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PReCA     Projet de Résilience et Compétitivité Agricoles (Agriculture Resilience and
          Competitiveness Project)
RAP       Resettlement Action Plan
RF        Results Framework
SEP       Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SME       Small and Medium Enterprise
SOBIMAP   Société Burkinabé d’Intrants et de Matériels Agro-Pastoraux (Burkina Faso Agro-
          Pastoral Inputs and Equipment Company)
SOE       Statement of Expenditure
SONATER   Société Nationale de l’Aménagement des Terres et de l’Équipement Rural (National
          Corporation for Land Development and Rural Equipment)
STEP      Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
UNFCCC    United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
WAAPP     West African Agricultural Productivity Program
WBG       World Bank Group




                                                                                             iii
             The World Bank
            Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ......................................................................................................................... vi
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
      A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................1
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 4
      A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................4
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................4
      C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................5
      D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................5
      E. Roles of Partners ............................................................................................................................12
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................12
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 13
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................13
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................14
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................15
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 15
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................15
      B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................18
      C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................20
      Grievance Redress Services ................................................................................................................23
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 23
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 26
ANNEX 2: MONITORING & EVALUATION PLAN: ................................................................... 32




                                                                                                                                                           iv
        The World Bank
        Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate

DATASHEET

BASIC INFORMATION



Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)

Burkina Faso              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project

                                                      Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                      Classification

                         Investment Project
P507256                                               Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate

Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)

[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [✓] Fragile State(s)

[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [ ] Small State(s)

[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country

[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [✓] Conflict

[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster

[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                  Expected Closing Date

10-Mar-2026                             31-Dec-2031

Bank/IFC Collaboration                  Joint Level

Yes                                     Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


Proposed Development Objective(s)


                                                                                                                  vi
        The World Bank
        Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase production, market access, and climate resilience of
smallholder farmers along selected value chains in the project areas.



Components

 Component Name                                                                                           Cost (US$)
 IMPROVING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE
                                                                                                     104,200,000.00
 CHANGE
 IMPROVING STORAGE, AGRO-PROCESSING AND ACCESS TO MARKETS                                              23,200,000.00
 PROMOTING ACCESS TO FINANCE AND PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT                                             63,000,000.00
 INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND PROJECT COORDINATION                                                  25,500,000.00
 CONTINGENT EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMPONENT (CERC)                                                                 0.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate


Organizations

 Borrower:                       Burkina Faso

 Implementing Agency:            Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No


SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        215.90

  Total Financing                                                                                             215.90
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                150.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00

                                                                                                                   vii
          The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                150.00

        IDA Credit                                                                                            150.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Counterpart Funding                                                                                         17.90

        National Government                                                                                    10.00

        Local Beneficiaries                                                                                     7.90

   Commercial Financing                                                                                        48.00

        Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                      48.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                           Guarantee
                              Credit Amount   Grant Amount            SML Amount                         Total Amount
                                                                                             Amount

National
Performance-Based                    150.00               0.00              0.00                0.00           150.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                                150.00               0.00              0.00                0.00           150.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate

Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)

WB Fiscal
Year                  2026           2027         2028           2029              2030         2031          2032

Annual                0.80           35.00        32.00          30.00             24.00        20.00         8.20
Cumulative            0.80           35.80        67.80          97.80         121.80           141.80       150.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate

PRACTICE AREA(S)


                                                                                                                     viii
           The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas

Agriculture and Food                                          Water; Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



CLIMATE



Climate Change and Disaster Screening

Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate

SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)



Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Substantial
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Substantial
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Other                                                                    ⚫ High
10. Overall                                                                 ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate

POLICY COMPLIANCE



Policy


                                                                                                               ix
          The World Bank
          Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?

[ ] Yes     [✓] No



Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?

[ ] Yes     [✓] No




ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL



Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal

E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate

LEGAL

Legal Covenants

                                                                                                                      x
        The World Bank
       Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



Sections and Description
The Recipient shall, not later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, or any later date agreed by the Association,
establish and thereafter maintain, throughout the Project implementation period, a committee (the “Steering
Committee”) with composition, mandate and resources satisfactory to the Association.
Without limitation to Section I.A.3(c) of this Schedule, the PIU shall include the following additional key staff:from a
date no later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, or any later date agreed by the Association, a security
specialist, and a GBV/SEA/SH consultant
Without limitation to Section I.A.3(c) of this Schedule, the PIU shall include the following additional key staff: from a
date no later than six (6) months after the Effective Date, or any later date agreed by the Association, and an internal
auditor
Without limitation to Section I.A.3(c) of this Schedule, the PIU shall include the following additional key staff: from a
date no later than nine (9) months after the Effective Date, or any later date agreed by the Association, an external
auditor; and other staff as and when may be specified in the ESCP.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate

Conditions

Type                           Citation                       Description                      Financing Source
                                                              The Recipient has
                                                              established the Project
                                                              Implementation Unit, with
Effectiveness                  Section I.A.3 of Schedule 2    key staff, in accordance         IBRD/IDA
                                                              with Section I.A.3 of
                                                              Schedule 2 to this
                                                              Agreement
                                                              The Recipient has prepared
                                                              and adopted a Project
                                                              Implementation Manual, in
Effectiveness                  Section I.C of Schedule 2                                       IBRD/IDA
                                                              accordance with Section I.C
                                                              of Schedule 2 to the
                                                              Financing Agreement.
                                                              No withdrawal shall be
                                                              made for payments under
                                                              Category (2) until and
                                                              unless the Recipient has: (i)
                                                              adopted the Matching
Disbursement                   Section III.B.1(b)                                              IBRD/IDA
                                                              Grants Manual; and (ii)
                                                              entered into two Matching
                                                              Grant Agreements with
                                                              Eligible Beneficiaries; all in
                                                              form and substance


                                                                                                                        xi
       The World Bank
      Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                                                          satisfactory to the
                                                          Association.
                                                          No withdrawal shall be
                                                          made for payments under
                                                          Category (3) until and
                                                          unless the Recipient has
Disbursement                Section III.B.1(c)            prepared and adopted the     IBRD/IDA
                                                          Insurance Premium
                                                          Subsidies Manual, in form
                                                          and substance satisfactory
                                                          to the Association.




                                                                                                  xii
            The World Bank
           Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
 A. Project Strategic Context
   1. Agriculture remains the cornerstone of Burkina Faso’s economy, employing over 90 percent of the rural
      population and accounting for about 18.5 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP)1. Cotton production,
      about 14 percent of total exports, remains a key livelihood source for rural communities in the sector. Although
      gold mining now brings the most export income and government revenue, agriculture remains vital for economic
      stability and growth. However, the pace of agricultural transformation has been sluggish, with limited progress in
      shifting from subsistence farming to higher-value, market-oriented production. The slow progress is largely
      attributed to persistent challenges, including security crises, climate shocks, and the resulting displacement of
      millions, all of which have hampered structural change and growth in the sector.
   2. The government of Burkina Faso (GoBF) has prioritized territorial recovery and economic revitalization through
      its Stabilization and Development Action Plan (2023–2025), which was centered on restoring security, rebuilding
      state capacity, and addressing humanitarian needs. Recent progress includes restoring state control, supporting
      internally displaced people’s return, and improving economic conditions. Opportunities for sustainable agriculture
      are emerging, though challenges around weak institutions, limited resources, and poor infrastructure persist.
      Through the Lijeeguoli Initiative (2024–2032), the GoBF aims to boost productivity, competitiveness, and effective
      management in agropastoral and fisheries sectors. The Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (ATP-BF)
      will help implement this initiative by enhancing productivity, climate resilience, market access, storage, processing,
      and private investment in order to promote growth, food security, and jobs.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

   3. Burkina Faso’s agricultural sector is primarily characterized by subsistence production systems. Most of the
      cultivated land is covered by millet, sorghum, maize, rice, and fonio, which are the main staple foods. Other
      significant crops include cowpeas, onions, mangoes, and cash crops such as cotton, groundnuts, soybeans, and
      sesame. These production systems are characterized by very low productivity and limited diversification. As a
      result, Burkina Faso suffers from food and nutrition insecurity. According to the 2021 Demographic and Health
      Survey, 22.6 percent of children are stunted, 10.6 percent wasted, and 56 percent of women aged 15-49 are
      anemic, with higher rates among pregnant women. The agricultural sector needs profound agricultural
      transformation to boost production, diversification and value addition to strengthen food and nutrition security,
      and boosting rural incomes. Tailored support will be needed for the recovery of rural communities’ as security
      improves by helping farmers from Bankui and Yaadga regions resume farming activities, re-engage with the sector
      and build resilience.
   4. Institutions supporting agriculture remain weak. The Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries
      (Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Eau, des Ressources Animales et Halieutiques, MAERAH) is facing capacity
      constraints in key areas including extension services, planning, as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems.
      There are few structured organizations and platforms, particularly Producers’ Organizations (POs), which offer
      services like advocacy, technical support, access to credit facilitation, market access, and support for specialized
      activities such as reforestation and empowering women farmers. Existing POs are generally weak in organizational
      management, basic infrastructure, and business planning, limiting their ability to provide effective support to their
      members. Few organizations have the skills or capacity to engage with local private market actors as contracting
      parties under defined trading rules and quality standards. This challenge is further exacerbated by the limited

1 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099070725193540162/pdf/P507242-d1d2d1e3-c63b-49ba-a5da-c9994d3e747a.pdf


                                                                                                                          1
             The World Bank
             Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



         access to equipment and the lack of technical skills among spot traders and small processors, which prevents them
         from evolving into competitive aggregators.
    5. Fertilizer and improved input usage in Burkina Faso remains among the lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa, with only
       17 kg/ha used in 2024. Adoption of improved seeds and basic farm equipment is similarly limited, leading to low
       labor productivity and yields. High costs, limited distribution points, and insufficient extension services hinder
       smallholder farmers' access to inputs, while weak distribution systems and inadequate quality control exacerbate
       the issue. Locally produced equipment is often poor in quality, and access to mechanized services for tillage and
       harvesting is restricted. Additionally, a lack of adequate storage facilities contributes to post-harvest losses
       exceeding 30 percent. Regulatory frameworks for seeds and fertilizers are in place, including the 2007 fertilizer
       regulation (Law n° 026-2007/AN of November 20, 2007) establishing fertilizer control in Burkina Faso focused on
       quality, health, consumer, and environmental protection, as well as authorization for importers and distributors.
       In July 2025, the law was updated (Law No. 010-2025/ALT of July 04, 2025) to cover more fertilizing products, to
       grant Burkina Faso Agro-Pastoral Inputs and Equipment Company (Société Burkinabè d'Intrants et de Matériels
       Agro-pastoraux, SOBIMAP) an import monopoly, and mandating MAERAH for quality control before market
       distribution. Seed regulation is governed by Law n° 010-2006/AN of 31 March 2006, which established a national
       committee for seed policy, certification, and variety registration. This law is currently being revised to align with
       recent sector developments.
    6. Legal Framework for Land Tenure Rights: Law No. 015-2025/ALT of 21 October 2025 on agrarian reorganization in
       Burkina Faso, forms the basis of a land tenure law. The law restricts among others foreign land ownership
       (foreigners cannot possess full ownership rights on rural land but can benefit from long term agricultural leases of
       18–99 years) and introduces local commissions as well as conflict resolution mechanisms. The local commissions
       (or ad hoc commissions) play a key role in the supervision and formalization of customary land rights, through the
       creation of Rural Land Possession Certificates, securing the use and transmission of land, while facilitating land
       management and mobilization for development projects. Challenges in Burkina Faso’s land tenure system
       include weak implementation of land laws despite reforms, conflicts between customary and state systems,
       insecurity from terrorism and resource competition, and significant disparities affecting women, youth, and
       migrants, hindering equitable access and investment, with most rural land lacking formal registration.

    7. Access to credit and private investment capital is limited for smallholder farmers2 and agri-entrepreneurs. This
       restricts acquisition of improved inputs, value addition and development in downstream industries, especially for
       rice and maize. Only 4 percent of total credit is allocated to agriculture, largely for cotton, and commercial banks’
       interest rates are high, placing a financial burden on borrowers. Collateral requirements exclude small farmers.
       Limited access to credit also constrains investment in value chains such as maize and poultry feed processing. Rice
       processing equipment is insufficient to process the national production, and quality improvements have been
       minimal. Scaling up and diversifying these industries will require improved access to finance, alongside targeted
       reforms, and greater private sector engagement.
    8. Agricultural insurance in Burkina Faso faces a complex set of challenges that limit its effectiveness, scale, and
       impact on farmer resilience. Most agricultural insurance initiatives are small-scale pilots, with only a few thousand
       farmers covered at any time (in the 2025 rainy season, only 22,000 producers in Burkina Faso were enrolled
       in index-based climate insurance - including 41 percent of women)3. Premiums are sometimes unaffordable for
       women, especially for those who face liquidity and credit constraints. In addition, women-led businesses in Burkina
       Faso have lower access to and use of insurance compared to men, due to a combination of factors such as insurance

2
  Smallholder farmers in Burkina Faso refer to small-scale, family-focused producers who rely primarily on family labor and cultivate limited areas of land (generally
less than 2 hectares).
3 DGPER, Annual report, 2025.


                                                                                                                                                                         2
              The World Bank
              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



           products not addressing women’s specific risks, lower financial account ownership, and limited control over
           financial tools. These challenges are compounded by lower financial literacy, reduced trust in financial institutions,
           and less tailored information reaching women entrepreneurs4.
      9. Climate change threatens agricultural production in Burkina Faso through droughts, floods, and erratic rainfall,
         causing crop losses and reduced rural incomes. The sector’s reliance on rainfall makes crops vulnerable, and while
         farmers adopt adaptive practices such as crop rotation, agroforestry, and soil conservation, these measures alone
         are insufficient. Agriculture is central to Burkina Faso’s climate strategy, with Nationally Determined Contributions
         (NDCs) aiming for significant greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions by 2030 (unconditional GHG emission reductions of
         20.67 percent and conditional reductions of 30.87 percent), land rehabilitation, and expanded renewable energy
         access through the Mission 300 initiative. The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and updated NDCs target agriculture,
         livestock, and natural resources, coordinated by various ministries and research institutes. Key challenges for its
         implementation include insecure land tenure, limited finance and technical capacity, policy gaps, market
         distortions, environmental degradation, technological limitations, knowledge gaps, and security risks.
      10. Gender disparities are a significant barrier to agricultural productivity. Most economically active women in
          Burkina Faso work in rural areas, primarily in food production, yet female-headed households experience the
          lowest returns on labor, with productivity 16 percent lower than male-owned farms for all crops and 22 percent
          lower for food crops5. As a result, female-managed farms experience less crop diversification, and reduced market
          engagement, highlighting the need for more inclusive approaches to extension, technology dissemination, and
          infrastructure design6. Women account for 55 percent of the agricultural labor force but own just 17 percent of
          land compared to 41 percent for men, largely due to customary practices and limited knowledge of land rights 7.
          Fewer women hold bank accounts. In 2024, only 23.26 percent of women had a bank account compared to 34.18
          percent of men. Data suggests women's access to formal credit is limited to roughly 4.84 percent–5 percent8. Major
          obstacles include lack of collateral (land ownership), high interest rates, and multiple responsibilities (farm work,
          childcare) that hinder business expansion. The matching grant (MG) scheme under component is intended to
          improve women access to finance. The grants will represent only a smaller share of the overall investment costs
          (between 30 and 40 percent, to be increased when beneficiaries are women). Women generally have less access
          to inputs, equipment, and extension services, and mostly use traditional tools. They have limited control over
          family resources, less crop diversification, and are excluded from contract farming due to lack of land, labor,
          financial resources, and support services. Nutrition and care burdens fall disproportionately on women, influencing
          their ability to adopt Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices or engage in value-added activities.
        Box 1: Lijeeguoli initiative: An opportunity to build on Burkina Faso’s emerging private sector champions in Agriculture. In
        recent years, several local enterprises have demonstrated leadership in transforming Burkina Faso’s agricultural sector and
        elevating standards through partnerships with smallholder farmers. Notable rice brands such as Kokuma, Faso Malo, and Neema
        have improved urban market offerings by sourcing through contractual agreements with growers - providing them with critical
        inputs, access to loans, and technical assistance. Agroserv has positioned itself as the leading producer of maize flour and a key
        supplier of grits to the brewery sector. Mango exports are likewise advancing, with Société Nouvelle Ranch du Koba investing in
        improved export packing and processing capabilities, joined by other emerging actors including FRUITEQ, Sanlé Séchage Export,
        and Rose Eclat. Financial innovation is also underway, exemplified by Yelen Assurance’s pioneering use of satellite-based index
        insurance for smallholder producers of maize, millet, and sorghum, offering crucial protection against drought and rainfall
        shortfalls.


4 https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/Search/40068416
5https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/273649/1/182048226X.pdf
6 https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/Search/34264389
7
    https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099062524130526315/pdf/P177349-b99447b0-f84f-4e0f-a767-e64a0d05e45b.pdf
8 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02255189.2024.2415583?src=exp-

la&utm_#:~:text=The%20choice%20of%20Burkina%20Faso,consequence%20of%20gender%2Dbased%20inequalities.
                                                                                                                                        3
              The World Bank
             Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



    11. ATP-BF is aligned with the World Bank Group (WBG) AgriConnect initiative as it aims to have a transformative
        impact on Burkina Faso’s agriculture with direct impacts on job creation and improvement of food security. This
        ambitious goal will be achieved by addressing the critical underlying structural constraints facing agricultural
        activities and building upon other initiatives in the sector, including the WBG-financed operations. The proposed
        activities are fully aligned with the three pillars of the AgriConnect framework: (a) foundational infrastructure,
        clustered around irrigation and aggregation facilities, with connection to transport/logistics and energy networks;
        value-chain based structuring of smallholder organizations coupled with farmers development skills; support to
        establishing the digital public infrastructure for value chains coordination and climate services; (b) reforms and
        regulatory measures, focusing on institutional realignment of extension services with the introduction of AgTechs9,
        as well improved regulations on norms, quality and traceability; and (c) mobilizing of private capital, through
        deepening existing derisking mechanism and introducing new financing modalities and instruments to increase
        access to financial services for the underserved. The activities supported by the project are also aligned with the
        six AgriConnect scalable solutions: (a) aggregation models; (b) AgTech solutions; (c) physical infrastructure; (d)
        skills, extension & research; (e) financial ecosystem for farmers; and (f) policy reforms.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 A. Project Development Objective
      12. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase production, market access, and climate resilience of
          smallholder farmers along selected value chains in the project areas.
    13. Key PDO indicators are: (a) people fed as result of increased agricultural/food production (number, Corporate
        Results Indicator, CRI); (b) farmers and agri-value chains actors having increased market access/linkages or trade
        (number); and (c) farmers and/or agri-value chain actors adopting improved agricultural technology (including
        climate-smart agriculture) (number).

 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
    14. The Theory of Change in Figure 1 presents the project’s results chain. The PDO objective will be achieved through:
        (i) adoption of modern technologies (including improved seed varieties, mechanization and CSA technologies) and
        development of irrigated land; (ii) support to diversification; (iii) strengthening POs and facilitation of access to
        markets; (iv) agro-processing enterprise development and improved access to finance; and (v) institutional
        strengthening of both public sector agencies, private enterprises and financial institutions to facilitate technology
        adoption, service delivery, and access to finance. In the long term, the project will build Burkina Faso’s capacity
        for food self-sufficiency, improved resilience to climate shocks, and support more job creation in the targeted value
        chains.
    15. The Theory of Change in Figure 1 is based on the results chain and outlines the logical link between activities and
        expected outcomes. It summarizes the activities, the outputs and outcomes as measurement of the PDO,
        contributing to high level outcome of people with improved food security) and the country’s long-term goals.




9AgTech refers to companies using innovations in agriculture aimed at improving efficiency, profitability and resilience. It includes devices, sensors, robotics

automation, and artificial intelligence. In the context of Africa, AgTechs help structure smallholder farmers, facilitate their access to technologies, services and
markets.


                                                                                                                                                                       4
              The World Bank
              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                                              Figure 1: Project Theory of Change
   16. Low agricultural production, vulnerability to climate change, and weak market linkages—driven by limited access
       to inputs, technology, finance, and infrastructure—are constraining food security, jobs, and inclusive growth for
       farmers and agri-value-chain actors.




    :
          A



      ,   A
      A
              A
  :




      A

   :A     A
  F A


   : ns tu onal
  trengthening
   and project
  coordina on




C. Project Beneficiaries
   17. The project is expected to reach about 150,000 direct beneficiaries with a focus on smallholder farmers as key
       players in the structural transformation of the sector. The majority of these beneficiaries are farmers including
       women, youth and internally displaced persons (IDPs), POs and agriculture-related small and medium enterprises
       (SMEs). Other direct beneficiaries include the public institutions involved in project implementation that would
       benefit from increased capacity, primarily the public agriculture services. The project is also expected to benefit
       rural communities through targeted functional and technical skills development programs and the creation of job
       opportunities resulting from investments in lowland and irrigation schemes development, and the promotion of
       private sector investment in the targeted value chains. The positive externalities from enhancing climate resilience
       will also ensure a broader local community impact, hence making local communities’ members indirect
       beneficiaries of the project. Project interventions will be tailored to address specific needs of beneficiaries’ groups
       (IDPs, women and youth).

 D. Project Components

   18. Project geographic scope and commodity focus. The project will focus on four of the seventeen regions of Burkina
       Faso10. These regions were selected based on their agricultural potential, prevalence of targeted value chains and
       the scalability of Burkina Faso Agriculture Resilience and Competitiveness Project (Projet de Résilience et


10 Tannounyan, Guiriko, Bankui, and Yadga.
                                                                                                                            5
             The World Bank
            Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



         Compétitivité Agricoles, PReCA
         – P167945) interventions. The
                                                          Figure 2: Top Ranked 5 food security crops in Burkina Faso and averages scores for West Africa
         frequency of terrorist attacks                                                            (Source: IFC HEATMAP)
         and associated fatalities has
                                                    Region average
         declined across all four regions                            Maize
                                                    Country scrore
         in 202511, most notably within             Region average
         urban and peri-urban zones,                                 Rice
                                                    Country scrore
         resulting in enhanced safety               Region average
         and more reliable transit                                   Millet
                                                    Country scrore
         through these areas, presenting            Region average
         an opportunity to use increased                       Groundn Cotton
                                                    Country scrore


                                                                  ut    seed
         agricultural productivity, value           Region average

         addition, and climate resilience           Country scrore

         to mitigate socioeconomic                                 0                   2                  4                  6                8                 10                 12
                                                                      Score for the 5 top food security crops in Burkina Faso and comparison with the average score in West Africa
         drivers of insecurity. The
         project will start in more secure
         zones and progressively expand activities as the security situation improves. Key project investments such as
         irrigation, storage facilities and aggregation centers will be concentrated in these regions, where supporting
         infrastructures (energy, rural roads) will be co-located. The project’s priority value chains are rice and maize, the
         main staple crops of Burkina Faso in terms of consumption, production, number of farmers involved in the value
         chains, and private sector interest. These two value chains are selected based on existing market demand and
         supply conditions, key competitiveness drivers and the business environment (Burkina Faso HEATMAP12). These
         value chains have also been selected for their financial profitability, their potential for job creation and/or their
         importance for export/import substitution. This list is meant to be adjustable as a function of the private sector
         appetite and the changing sector environment, both domestic and external, and based on the specific factors that
         have determined their selection in the first place. For the targeted value chains the project will support private
         sector through MGs and derisking instruments (aggregators, agribusiness, agro-dealers, agro-industries, agro-
         processors, exporters, business development services-BDS) with high impact in terms of smallholder farmer
         participation in the supply chains and contributing to the PDO.
     19. Rice: Domestic rice production covers only about half of national demand, driving costly imports and vulnerability
         to price shocks. Less than 10 percent of roughly 500,000 ha of suitable lowlands and under 5 percent of 233,500
         ha irrigable land are developed for rice. Rainfed yields average around 2 tons/ha. Irrigated rice accounts for about
         23 percent of the area but over half of production, reflecting higher yields (4–7 tons/ha). Constraints include weak
         seed systems, fertilizer access, mechanization, post-harvest losses, suboptimal milling (60–62 percent yields),
         limited market organization, and access to credit. Under the National Rice Development Strategy (2021-2030)13,
         Burkina Faso plans to develop new irrigation schemes and lowlands, rehabilitate degraded sites, and invest in
         soil/water conservation to unlock high-yield potential. The country aims to increase rice production by 200 percent
         by 2030 (3 million metric tons/year). The project will contribute to an increase in volume of 300,000 metric
         tons/year.
     20. Maize: Maize is the second largest agricultural crop after sorghum, and a staple crop for food security and
         marketing. The government aims to achieve a production of 2.4 million tons of maize for the 2025-2026 wet season.


11 https://acleddata.com/conflict-data
12
   Heatmap is a data-driven tool developed by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) for prioritizing investment opportunities in food security value chains and
based on more than 60 country and crop specific quantitative and qualitative datapoints from public and in-house WBG data.
13 https://riceforafrica.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/burkinafaso_sndr2021-2030.pdf


                                                                                                                                                                                6
         The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



      Maize yields vary widely, ranging from less than 3 t/ha in food-production areas to more than 4 t/ha in cotton-
      production areas. The major challenges in maize production are (a) frequent contamination by aflatoxins due to
      insufficient post-harvest practices; (b) low productivity compared to international standards; (c) high dependence
      on rainfall conditions; and (d) weak link with markets and low level of processing. The country aims to increase
      maize production by 50 percent by 2030 (3.6 million metric tons/year) by using hybrid maize varieties and increase
      the use of crop specific fertilizer recommendations. The project will contribute to an increase in volume of 500,000
      metric tons/year.
COMPONENT 1: IMPROVING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE (TOTAL US$104.2 MILLION EQUIVALENT;
IDA FINANCING US$96.3 MILLION, COUNTERPART FUNDING: US$7.9 MILLION)
  21. The focus of Component 1 is to increase use of solar powered equipment, strengthen farmers’ resilience to climatic
      shocks, and diversify crop production in response to effective market demand. Expected outcomes from this
      component include improved farm-level productivity, increased volume and quality of marketable products,
      diversification of production including vegetable production, and improved nutrition. Project support will initially
      be delivered through the national extension service and agriculture sector institutions, gradually transitioning to
      partnerships with cooperatives, aggregators, processors, and AgTech firms that have demonstrated effective
      outreach and contracting with smallholder farmers. ATP-BF will utilize the organization assessment and tracking
      tool developed under IFC’s Agriculture Leadership Program (ALP) to identify organizations with the necessary
      governance and management capacity. Potential partner cooperatives and private organizations will be identified
      through an initial value chain ecosystem mapping effort, which will inform a database and pipeline of promising
      entities for scaling up of ATP-BF’s successes. Support under this component is proposed to be organized around
      the following subcomponents.

  22. Subcomponent 1.1: Enhancing access to agricultural inputs and improved technologies. To improve rice and maize
      productivity, this subcomponent aims to support and incentivize the adoption of CSA technologies and practices
      that deliver triple wins of increased productivity, enhanced resilience to climate shocks, and reduced GHG
      emissions. Key activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: (a) strengthening institutional and
      commercial input supply systems (for example, seeds, plants and fertilizers) to improve availability and timely
      access to high-quality inputs by using the existing e-voucher mechanism. This includes assessing current systems,
      enhancing quality control mechanisms, and expanding the production and distribution of improved planting
      materials, certified seeds, fertilizers, and agrochemicals.; (b) improving advisory service delivery by local extension
      teams, local agro-dealers, technology suppliers, and aggregators, including support for capacity building and
      outreach—particularly targeting technologies having strong potential impact on women farmers; and (c) enhancing
      adoption of appropriate mechanization and digital technologies including labor saving technologies for women,
      and facilitating access to climate forecasting, early warning systems and pest/disease monitoring tied to climate
      change. Targeted technologies and services will be adapted to local production environments, customized to
      farmer capacities and resources (with special attention to labor-saving, GHG emission reduction, affordable
      technologies for women), and driven by market demand. To this end, ATP-BF will progressively partner with existing
      service providers and foster the creation of cooperative, SME, and AgTech-led services.
  23. The project will also support maize and rice POs and aggregator networks involved in extension as part of their
      business model to facilitate technology transfer, technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training,
      improved availability and access to germplasms and inputs that are more productive and adapted to climate
      change, and efficient advisory service delivery. This will include: (a) strengthening of selected POs and private
      network field agents through training in group dynamics to promote good governance; and (b) strategic planning,
      operational and business management, and marketing plans. In delivering these training courses, IFC will provide

                                                                                                                           7
         The World Bank
        Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



      expertise and training modules through its ALP, which will work with national extension to adapt modules and
      introduce its stakeholder tracking tool to assess and monitor capacity progress.
  24. Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting diversified production, lowland development and irrigation schemes. To
      strengthen the resilience of rice-based and maize-based cropping systems, and enhance farmers ability to address
      mono-cropping related risk, this subcomponent aims at supporting productive land development by increasing the
      provision of irrigation services, including the use of solar-powered irrigation systems, and promoting crop rotation
      combining rice and maize production with high value crops (for example, horticulture) year-round. The project will
      finance 3,900 ha of new solar pumping irrigation schemes and 1,800 ha of lowlands development with special focus
      on integrated soil fertility, CSA practices with a special attention to women and youth through MGs planned under
      Subcomponent 3.1. Women-led CSA demonstration plots will be established and farmers’ field days for women
      will be organized to promote adoption of improved agricultural technologies. The procurement of development of
      irrigated land works will be selected competitively using international competition. As an exception, in security
      challenging zones where private contractors are not expected to operate, the National Corporation for Land
      Development and Rural equipment (Société Nationale de l'Aménagement des Terres et de l'Equipement Rural,
      SONATER) will be contracted directly as a public enterprise in accordance with the provisions of Clause 3.22 (c) of
      the Procurement Regulations, September 2025 edition. To manage potential conflicts of interest with MAERAH,
      the following measures will be taken: (a) the SONATER contract will be awarded on the basis of the World Bank's
      standard forms of works contract; (b) the contract will be concluded in areas with security challenges where private
      operators may have difficulty securing the sites; (c) a supervision engineer will be hired by the PIU to supervise
      works; (d) a third-party monitoring agent will be appointed to supervise execution and address any conflict of
      interest; and (e) SONATER will sign subsequent contracts only if performance is satisfactory. In this regard, the
      project will support acquisition of equipment for SONATER to reinforce its capacity to perform irrigation land
      development works.
  25. The project will provide support to water user associations to ensure that irrigation water is optimally utilized. For
      all project investments land tenure rights will be secured in collaboration with the relevant land tenure department.
      About 20 percent of irrigated areas will be allocated to women, while 30 percent of beneficiaries of irrigated land
      are expected to be women. Support to women’s leadership in Water Users Associations will also be provided. Due
      attention will be paid to operations and maintenance arrangements, both during project implementation and after
      project completion, to avoid the pitfalls in that area encountered in many past irrigation operations. Activities will
      be implemented in close coordination with the on-going World Bank-financed Water Security Project (BFWSP,
      P177094). A successful shift in favor of more diversified production, together with sustained increases in the
      productivity of staples, would not only generate increased productivity and better incomes for farmers, but it will
      also result in improved nutrition and food security, foster biodiversity, and strengthen resilience of the production
      systems to climate change. The project will also explore the multipurpose use of water by farmers (irrigation,
      drinking water and livestock). Building on the experience of other projects, particularly PReCA (P167945),
      irrigations studies are being conducted so that implementation can begin promptly after project approval.
COMPONENT 2: IMPROVING STORAGE, AGRO-PROCESSING AND ACCESS TO MARKETS (TOTAL US$23.2 MILLION EQUIVALENT IDA
FINANCING)
  26. Under Component 2, the project will support producers, off-takers and processors to better access domestic and
      export markets, reduce the risks associated with diversification (for example, for production of perishable such as
      fresh fruits and vegetables), diminish post-harvest and marketing losses, and increase the range and quantity of
      locally produced agricultural commodities for both rural and urban markets. The focus will be on supporting agri-
      related women groups, cooperatives, and SMEs. This will be done in synergy with IFC, as well as with other World
      Bank - financed projects supporting value chains development and private sector investments (for example, West

                                                                                                                          8
         The World Bank
        Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



      Africa Food System Resilience Program-FSRP, P172769 and Burkina Faso Entrepreneurship, Skills and Technology
      Project-ESTP, P177005).
  27. Subcomponent 2.1: Developing market access and infrastructure. This subcomponent will finance the following
      activities: (i) a comprehensive territorial market ecosystem study, inspired by the model co-developed by IFC and
      World Bank in the region, will be conducted under this subcomponent. The study will map existing infrastructure,
      identify gaps relative to target production zones and anticipated market flows, and integrate value chain actor
      assessments. To facilitate linkages, this subcomponent has a twin focus: (a) ensuring agri-food quality and safety is
      integrated in the food trade; and (b) improving access to market information and communication between market
      actors to coordinate logistics and facilitate equitable trading practices for processed products and access to
      advisory services for agri-SMEs; (ii) developing and updating quality norms and standards and methods to make
      them applicable in the food system; (iii) training of producers on sanitary and Phytosanitary Standards (SPSs) (with
      a special emphasis on women processors) to effectively engage/participate in specific markets by meeting the
      processors needs in terms of commodity standards (for example, through support by BDS to integrate these
      standards in the contracting process); (iv) training of processors on quality standards and safety of marketed
      products; (v) developing market intelligence (including market information systems); (vi) introducing farmers and
      SMEs to digital technologies facilitating post-harvest activity planning, product tracking and aggregation, and
      product traceability to monitor conformity to standards. IFC’s ALP and the Africa Adaptation Acceleration Program
      (AAAP) initiative will coordinate with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to transfer best practices in cooperative
      commercial management and digitally supported aggregation technologies respectively, with the objective of
      building local enterprises (BDS and AgTech) to sustainably support the sector and create job opportunities for
      youth; and (vii) developing small to medium scale climate-resilient marketing and storage facilities that will be
      managed by POs and benefitting SMEs as under ongoing projects (PReCA and FSRP-Burkina Faso). This
      infrastructure consists of, two solar-powered 500 metric ton cold rooms, fifteen 250-ton grain storage warehouses
      with drying areas, fifteen 250-ton storage warehouses for input storage and twenty onion storage warehouses to
      reduce post-harvest losses and spoilage and extend products’ “seasonal marketing window”, especially for
      perishable products and climate-resilient market facilities (four aggregation points), ensuring that these facilities
      are demand-driven by end-beneficiaries and optimally utilized and maintained. To facilitate the transport of
      commodities from producing areas to end markets, the project will rely on investments planned on roads under
      the Sikasso- Korhogo-Bobo-Dioulasso (SKBo) Basin of Integration Project - P181499 and Secondary Cities Urban
      Mobility and Development Project - P177918.
  28. Subcomponent 2.2: Supporting agro-processing and value addition. This subcomponent aims to: (a) increase
      returns to investments in the selected value chains through agro-processing and (b) promote adoption, acquisition
      and sustained use of climate-resilient processing, packaging and handling technologies and practices to improve
      output, efficiency, competitiveness of targeted agro-processing activities and adaptation of processors to extreme
      climate events. Activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: (a) training of processors in processing
      techniques and packaging with a particular emphasis on youth and women; (b) construction and equipment of
      maize and rice processing units; and (c) training of manufacturers of processing equipment. SME performance will
      be tracked to identify those showing promise for expansion and scale, that could benefit from IFC upstream
      advisory and other investment pathways.

COMPONENT 3: PROMOTING ACCESS TO FINANCE AND PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT (TOTAL US$63.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT; IDA
FINANCING US$15.0 MILLION, UNGUARANTEED FINANCING: US$48.0 MILLION)

  29. Subcomponent 3.1: Promoting access to finance and leveraging green financing opportunities. This
      subcomponent focuses on (a) broadening the availability and affordability of financial services—especially for
      underserved groups such as Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), women, and youth—and (b)
                                                                                                                          9
       The World Bank
      Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



    mobilizing resources for investments that support environmental sustainability, climate resilience, and low-carbon
    growth. Key activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: (a) providing MGs with a focus on
    beneficiaries adopting CSA technologies; (b) strengthening the national agricultural insurance programs; and (c)
    expanding the scope of the existing partial portfolio credit guarantee mechanism in the country for private capital
    mobilization (PCM) developed with World Bank support.
30. Matching Grants (MG). The project will establish an MG mechanism that will provide partial support (blended
    finance) to farmers and agri-business operators. The grants will represent only a smaller share of the overall
    investment costs (between 30 and 40 percent, to be increased when beneficiaries are women, youth or IDPs), and,
    therefore, for financial closure, beneficiaries will mobilize the remaining resources either with their own capital or
    loans from financial institutions. The MG mechanism will target (a) smallholder producers, POs, women groups,
    cooperatives, and SMEs that need financing to create, acquire, upgrade and/or modernize their existing agriculture
    production, storage and processing facilities and (b) all other private sector players and entrepreneurs involved in
    the selected agriculture value chains with similar needs.
31. The project will finance a total of 800 MGs through two dedicated windows: (a) Window 1: about 400 small MGs
    of up to US$4,000 for IDPs with 80 percent of sub-project financing requirements supported by the project and the
    remaining 20 percent by beneficiaries, and (b) Window 2: about 400 medium MGs of up to US$10,000 with 30
    percent of a given sub-project’s financing requirements supported by the project and the remaining 70 percent by
    beneficiaries and financial institutions. Over time, Window 2 could broaden its impact by supporting larger national
    private sector companies that can serve as key drivers in developing and strengthening priority value chains. The
    eligibility and selection criteria of the beneficiaries, and the accessibility to the MGs predicated on the kind of
    investments to be undertaken, as well as procedures to be followed all along the investment cycle, will be detailed
    in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The MG scheme will be managed by the PIU in close collaboration
    with MAERAH regional directorates. PCM of US$3 million has been added to the financing table based 20 percent
    of 400 beneficiaries’ contribution for window 1 (US$4,000*0.2*400= US$320,000) and 70 percent of 400
    beneficiaries’ contribution for window 2 (US$9,571*0.7*400= US$2,680,000).

32. Agriculture insurance. To protect farmers and cooperative production assets, the project will work with the
    General Directorate of Promotion of the Rural Economy (Direction Générale de la Promotion de l'Economie Rurale,
    DGPER) to strengthen the national agricultural insurance program, through (a) strengthening data collection to
    enhance the design of the index insurance products as tools to manage climate risks; (b) providing insurance
    premium subsidies to agricultural producers (the project will support the subsidy which is equal to 50 percent of
    the premium - further details will be provided in the PIM); and (c) capacity building and awareness raising of all
    stakeholders along the agriculture insurance value chain. This risk-sharing mechanism will provide a sustainable
    continuation of activities initiated through MG funding and ensure that the risk due to climate-induced
    unpredictability in yields and incomes is duly considered. A differentiated premium subsidy will be established to
    increase the use of insurance services by women. The project will provide technical support to MAERAH to
    implement a one-stop window for agricultural risk management.

33. Partial portfolio credit guarantee scheme. Acknowledging the importance of de-risking and mobilizing additional
    financing from banks and microfinance institutions, the project will leverage the existing agriculture window of the
    partial portfolio credit guarantee scheme established under the Financial Inclusion Support Project in Burkina Faso
    (FISP - P164786) to facilitate access to credit and increase PCM. The project will coordinate with FISP to add new
    eligibility criteria to the agriculture window that are aligned with the objectives of the Lijeeguoli initiative without
    additional endowment to the window. The project will also provide capacity building activities for selected
    beneficiaries to make better use of the existing financing opportunities with special emphasis on women-focused

                                                                                                                         10
         The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



      financial literacy and coaching. Guidance for women to access partial credit guarantee will also be provided.


  34. Subcomponent 3.2: Promotion of private investment. Activities to be financed under this subcomponent include:
      (a) provision of tailored technical assistance and capacity building to BDS providers so that they can in turn
      strengthen traceability, participation and management skills of client investors to develop their business plans and
      coach them to ensure the success of their projects; (b) promoting access to market for processed products through
      certification, traceability, participation to both national and international fairs; (c) promoting contract farming
      along the targeted value chains; and (d) supporting activities aided at dissemination of the law on the Agricultural
      Investment Code. The project will leverage IFC’s experience in supporting private investment projects across the
      value chains and conducting deep dives on investment opportunities.

COMPONENT 4: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING, AND PROJECT COORDINATION (TOTAL: US$25.5 MILLION EQUIVALENT; IDA FINANCING
US$15.5 MILLION, COUNTERPART FUNDING US$10.0 MILLION)
  35. Subcomponent 4.1: Support to institutional strengthening will finance (a) assessing public institutional and
      training needs and financing critical capacity-building initiatives to meet those needs including training extension
      workers to better serve women producers and (b) establishing a robust planning and M&E system and an
      Management Information System (MIS), integrated with similar systems across other relevant ministries.
  36. Subcomponent 4.2: Support to project coordination, monitoring and evaluation will finance, among others: (a)
      the operational costs for project management both at the central and regional level; (b) the environmental and
      social (E&S) activities designed to monitor and comply with the requirements of the World Bank’s Environmental
      and Social Framework (ESF); (c) project fiduciary management and M&E activities; (d) communication and
      knowledge management activities; and (e) citizen engagement activities and the project’s grievance redress
      mechanism (GRM).
COMPONENT 5: CONTINGENT EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMPONENT (CERC) (US$0)
  37. A CERC with zero allocation may be used to contribute to an emergency response through the timely
      implementation of activities in response to an eligible national emergency. A CERC is included in the project in
      accordance with the World Bank Investment Project Financing (IPF) Policy (paragraphs 12 and 13, for Situations of
      Urgent Need of Assistance and Capacity Constraints). This will allow for rapid reallocation of uncommitted funds in
      the event of an eligible emergency as defined in the World Bank Operational Policy on Rapid Response to Crises
      and Emergencies (OP 8.00). A Contingent Emergency Response Manual will be prepared as an annex to the PIM.
      The E&S instruments required for the CERC are prepared, disclosed, and adopted in accordance with the CERC
      Manual and the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). For the CERC to be activated, and financing to
      be provided, the government will need to: (a) submit a request letter for CERC activation, and the evidence required
      to determine the eligibility of the emergency, as defined in the CERC annex, an Emergency Action Plan, including
      the emergency expenditures to be financed; and (b) meet the E&S requirements as agreed in the Emergency Action
      Plan and ESCP.




                                                                                                                       11
          The World Bank
          Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



E. Roles of Partners
 Name of Partner                        Nature of Involvement /Description
 African Development Bank (AfDB)        ATP-BF will work with AfDB supported projects for the choice of sites where
                                        storage, processing, and marketing infrastructures will be constructed.
                                        Beneficiary lists and information on irrigation sites to be developed will also be
                                        shared to avoid duplication.
 West African Development Bank          ATP-BF will work with West African Development Bank - funded project for the
                                        choice of sites where storage, processing, and marketing infrastructures will be
                                        constructed to avoid duplication.
 Islamic Development Bank (IsDB)        ATP-BF will share beneficiary lists and information on irrigation sites to be
 International Fund for Agricultural    developed to avoid duplication.
 Development (IFAD)
 Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
 (KfW) Development Bank


 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
   38. The design reflects international consensus on agriculture development and draws on the specific operational
       experiences from World Bank -funded projects in Burkina Faso and other countries, as well as reviews by external
       bodies. Lessons from significant World Bank-funded projects include first those from the PReCA. ATP-BF’s design
       drew also from various other projects in Burkina Faso and West Africa: (a) the Burkina Faso Agricultural Productivity
       and Food Security Project (PAPSA, P114236), the Burkina Faso Agri-Sylvo-Pastoral Value Chains Support Project
       (PAFASP, P081567) and the Mali Support to Agro-industrial Competitiveness Project (PCDA, P151449) - all these
       projects supported irrigation and food crops destined for the market; (b) the West Africa Agricultural Productivity
       Program (WAAPP, P095214), which facilitated new technology adoption through Farmer Field Schools; (c) the
       region wide Food System Resilient Project (FSRP, P172769), the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Support Project (Projet
       d’Appui Régional à l’Initiative pour l’Irrigation au Sahel, PARIIS, P154482); and (d) the Financial Inclusion Support
       Framework (FISF, P147776) that aimed to accelerate and increase the effectiveness of reforms and other country-
       led actions to achieve national financial inclusion goals. ATP-BF also incorporates insights from the Independent
       Evaluation Group (IEG) review of the World Bank’s experience in agriculture and agri-business sectors, emphasizing
       the importance of supporting production, processing, market access, and capacity building.

   39. Key lessons considered in project design are as follows:
    a) Project alignment with past and ongoing initiatives to address gaps and scale up successful pilot projects.
       Ensuring alignment with national initiatives is important to avoid duplication and isolated efforts. The project
       builds on sector interventions by MAERAH, focusing investments in high-potential areas within targeted zones to
       address constraints, achieve economies of scale, and stimulate overall economic activities.
    b) An integrated, demand-driven approach is necessary for effective results. The project aims to increase
       productivity, value addition, and climate resilience comprehensively along selected value chains in the project
       areas. Investments will be promoted jointly within the different segments of selected value chains from
       production to marketing in an integrated fashion based on end-users demands.
    c) Supporting private investments in targeted value chains to enhance agri-SMEs' access to finance is critical. It
       involves: (i) selecting promising proposals; (ii) assisting investors in developing detailed proposals that meet
       financing institutions’ requirements; (iii) de-risking lending by using the existing partial loan guarantees; and (iv)
       assisting investors in launching their activities successfully. These activities are integral part of the project design.



                                                                                                                             12
             The World Bank
            Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



     d) Strengthening government capacity is key for successful project implementation. The project will strengthen
        government capacity to deliver public services such as planning, research, sanitary control, and M&E while
        promoting private service providers involvement.
     e) Considering the role of women and youth, and the needs of IDPs, is vital for project design. Women, youth and
        IDPs play significant roles along the selected value chains. Offering opportunities to facilitate their access to assets,
        finance, and jobs, thereby improving their welfare is therefore required. In this regard, the project will increase
        economic opportunities for women and youth by promoting postharvest technology and developing
        entrepreneurial skills. Women, youth, and marginalized groups such as IDPs will be involved in decision-making
        processes, fostering a sense of shared responsibility and mutual benefit.
     f)   nhancing beneficiaries’ capacities regarding all aspects of investment implementation (technical, financial,
        organizational, and management) is crucial for value chain development and competitiveness. World Bank
        experiences highlight the need for activities to improve beneficiaries’ capacities all along the supply chain to
        achieve competitiveness and development, such as supporting production volume and quality, strong
        communication, efficient market infrastructure, and technical expertise. Enhancing these capacities is integral to
        the project's activities.
     g) Adaptive management and local capacity building are critical in fragility, conflict and violence (FCV) contexts.
        Adaptive management requires ongoing monitoring and readiness to adjust to changes. Flexibility and
        responsiveness are key to managing projects successfully in unstable settings. Implementing conflict-sensitive
        practices ensures that projects do not exacerbate existing tensions. Training programs, mentorship, and
        collaborative planning empower local stakeholders, enabling them to take ownership of project activities and
        continue project objectives beyond external involvement.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
    40. MAERAH will have overall responsibility for ATP-BF’s implementation; it will liaise closely with the inistry of
        Trade and Industry for private sector development and agro-processing. The project will contribute to the
        implementation of the Lijeeguoli Initiative. The initiative’s National PIU is housed in MAERAH's ‘Steering and
        Support’ Budget Program 080. The project is implemented under the responsibility of a coordinator who works
        under the authority of the National Coordinator of the Lijeeguoli Initiative. A dedicated PIU will be established for
        this project and in accordance with the provisions of the general regulations for development projects and
        programs implemented in Burkina Faso.
    41. ATP-BF will have the same Steering Committee (SC) as the Lijeeguoli Initiative. The SC will be chaired by
        MAERAH’s Secretary General and serve as a guidance body. It will have appropriate representative membership
        and will meet at regular intervals. It will approve the Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) and progress reports.
        The project implementation structure will consist of a PIU at national level, based in Ouagadougou, and regional
        units based in MAERAH’s regional directorates in the four regions covered by the project. ATP-BF’s PIU will be fully
        integrated into MAERAH’s structure as advocated by the authorities and operate in close synergy with the PIUs of
        other operations contributing to the Lijeeguoli initiative14. The PIU will work in close coordination with MAERAH’s
        technical directorates (DGADI, DGPER, DGPV, DGFOMR) at central and regional levels, as well as with partner
        government agencies (SONATER, SOBIMAP) involved in project implementation. To facilitate project
        implementation, there will be Focal Points in MAERAH’s central directorates and partner agencies, as well as in key
        directorates of the Ministries in charge of Industry and Commerce, and Dumu Ka Fa, the fund facility in charge of
        implementation of the project MG scheme. The PIU will sign technical agreements with the above entities to carry


14 Those projects include IFAD and AfDB supported operations under preparation with specific dedicated PIU under the Lijeeguoli initiative.


                                                                                                                                              13
        The World Bank
       Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



     out project activities within their respective mandates. Concerning project readiness for implementation, a draft
     PIM has been prepared, and the Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP) grant will be used to conduct
     technical, E&S safeguards studies and proceed with project staff recruitment to have them onboard before project
     effectiveness.
 42. ATP-BF’s oordinator and high-level staff will be appointed or competitively recruited. The Project Coordinator
     signature will be required to commit project funds. S/he will be assisted by a team of high caliber, competitively
     recruited staff, covering technical, fiduciary and safeguards functions deemed critical for proper project
     implementation and management. MAERAH has been responsible over the past decade, and is still responsible
     currently, for implementing several important World Bank-funded projects, including PARIIS (closed FY 2024) and
     the ongoing PReCA, Livestock Resilience and Competitiveness Project (PRECEL, P178598), FSRP-BF, Regional Sahel
     Pastoralism Support Project II (PRAPS2-BF, P173197)and Burkina Faso Water Security Project (BFWSP, P177094).
     MAERAH’s reasonable track record in managing these projects is evidence that it has acquired a degree of capacity
     to support ATP-BF’s PIU from technical, financial management (FM), safeguards and M&E viewpoints. However,
     there are still weak areas where improvement is needed, particularly in terms of fiduciary management.
     Subsequently, detailed implementation arrangements will be worked out as part of the preparation of the PIM to
     ensure that MAERAH and other ministries maintain sufficient implementation capacity, promote complementarity
     and avoid overlapping between the different projects under their watch. The PIM will compile all ATP-BF’s
     operational procedures, encompassing the administrative, fiduciary, procurement, M&E and social and
     environmental safeguards procedures. It will include detailed Terms of Reference (ToRs) for all PIU staff. Drawing
     on the experience of other World Bank-financed projects, similar sections of the PIM will be prepared for the MGs
     scheme.
B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
 43. A comprehensive M&E system will be implemented to provide quality data to inform the Results Framework (RF)
     and allow the government and the World Bank to react immediately if any issues arise regarding project
     implementation. The M&E system will serve as a day-to-day management tool to guide project implementation,
     and as a mechanism for periodic assessment of project performance to gauge project impact. It will combine
     collection of quantitative data on the RF performance indicators with provision of qualitative information on
     project impacts that cannot be fully assessed quantitatively. The system will comprise regular quantitative data
     collection with periodic qualitative surveys on key thematic areas such as the underlying causes of inequalities,
     such as cultural values, social norms, and decision-making power. This will support project supervision by ensuring
     that baseline and follow-up survey data on the key performance indicators are available and regularly updated.
     The M&E system will be designed to link technical and financial data regarding project implementation, so that it
     helps establish a comprehensive project MIS.
 44. In undertaking M&E activities, to collect data in areas difficult to reach due to insecurity or conflict, the project will
     use geo-enabled methods supplemented by community discussions. Such monitoring will be provided by national
     non-governmental organization (NGOs) or firms, hired and trained by the PIU, to collect just-in-time information
     via mobile apps/tablets, building on geo-tagging of activities.
 45. The specialized M&E manual will provide details about the definition of the RF performance indicators, and the
     methodology and instruments to be used for data collection, the institutional arrangements for M&E functions
     (identification of actors and definition of their respective responsibilities), the GRM, and the mechanism to be used
     for disseminating information. It will inform the communications strategy to be developed and implemented by
     the PIU. A baseline survey will be conducted during the first year of the project to establish the RF reference data
     and verify targets. Beneficiaries will be surveyed subsequently in year 3 (mid‐term) and year 6 (project end) to track


                                                                                                                            14
        The World Bank
        Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



     changes in their livelihood conditions because of project performance. M&E reports will be issued every six months
     for physical implementation and results monitoring.


C. Disbursement Arrangements
 46. One Designated Account (DA) will be established at the Central Bank of West African States (Banque Centrale
     des États de l’Afrique de l’Ouest, BCEAO) to facilitate project disbursements. Funds will be transferred to a
     transactions account, which will be opened at the Banque de Dépôt du Trésor (BDT) or in a commercial bank that
     meets World Bank standards after formal authorization from the Ministry of Economy and Finance, as outlined in
     paragraph 5 of the IDA Disbursement Directives for Borrowers (disbursement conditions). This account will be
     managed by the PIU. Cash withdrawals from the transactions account will require joint authorization by the Project
     Coordinator and the project’s FM specialist.
 47. Disbursements will be made in accordance with the Disbursement Guidelines for IPF, dated February 2017.
     Withdrawal application requests will be prepared by the project’s FM Specialist, signed by an authorized signatory
     (or signatories) designated in a letter signed by the Minister of Finance, and submitted to the World Bank for
     processing. Applications will be submitted electronically through the World Bank’s e-Disbursements tool,
     accessible at the Client Connection web-based portal. The Authorized Signatory Letter, signed by the GoBF will
     grant designated signatories the authority to obtain Secure Identification Credentials from the World Bank for
     submitting applications electronically.
 48. Flow of Funds. Funds will be disbursed into the DA. The project will use FundsChain, an online tracking tool made
     available by the World Bank, for purposes of supporting the Recipient’s financial reporting to the World Bank on
     the use of Credit proceeds during project implementation.
 49. Disbursement of funds related to the MGs component will be subject to a specific manual. The PIU will prepare
     an MG manual to regulate the activities of the MG. This manual will include: (a) the selection criteria of
     beneficiaries; (b) the selection and evaluation process; (c) the modalities of disbursement of the IDA contribution;
     (d) the reporting and supporting documents required from the beneficiaries; and (e) the auditing and archiving of
     the supporting documents
 50. Disbursements of IDA funds for IPF activities will be based on Statements of Expenditures (SOEs). Upon financing
     effectiveness, an initial advance will be deposited into the DA based on the cash forecast to cover project
     expenditure for the first quarter. The DA will be replenished monthly using SOEs. Other disbursement methods,
     such as reimbursement, direct payment, and special commitment, will also be available. Detailed instructions on
     the withdrawal of funds will be outlined in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter, and operational
     details for the DAs will be provided in the Project’s Financial and Accounting Manual.


IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis

Rationale for Project Technical Design
 51. The project will support MAERAH’s core mandate of delivering public goods and services for the agriculture
     sector. Primarily, it will focus on strengthening MAERAH’s role in providing advisory and research services related
     to CSA practices under Component 1. These efforts will underpin irrigated and lowland agricultural production in
     the primary irrigated perimeters targeted by the project, as well as in small community and privately managed
     systems. Component 1 will address the needs for public support at both the production level and the downstream
                                                                                                                       15
         The World Bank
        Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



      agri-processing stages of the targeted value chains. Additionally, the project will enhance MAERAH’s broader
      public service delivery in the agriculture sector in a large array of activities, including investment planning and
      coordination, data collection, statistical analysis and M&E, development of sanitary and food safety standards,
      packaging norms and regulations, and support for environmental management, climate change adaptation and
      mitigation, biosecurity, pollution control, and related services.
  52. The project will address several market failures that currently hinder the sustainable and inclusive
      development of the targeted agricultural value chains. These market imperfections include weak or absent
      formal linkages between farmers and off-takers, inadequate storage and market infrastructure to access market
      outlets, imbalances in bargaining power, and persistent knowledge gaps that limit the socio-economic progress
      of small producers and processors—such as limited access to market demand data and market signals. Under
      Component 2, the project will support marketing infrastructure (drying areas, storage facilities) and agri-
      processing activities, and the development of attendant norms and standards, and market intelligence, to better
      access markets. Additionally, the project through the MG scheme under Component 3 will provide the financial
      support needed by producers and SMEs to fund their operations and mobilize the funding of the financial
      community.
  53. Project-financed investments will contribute significantly to both climate change adaptation and mitigation.
      Numerous studies over the past two decades have consistently highlighted the substantial cost of climate change
      to the global economy and its negative impact on poverty reduction and shared prosperity. For example, the
      Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change (2006) estimated that, without action, climate change could
      cause a 7 percent loss in Africa’s GDP by the end of the twenty-first century. The review also emphasized that
      such a climate-driven GDP reduction could greatly increase the number of people living below the US$2 per day
      poverty line by 2100 compared to a scenario without climate change. These forecasts underscore the urgency of
      addressing climate change. Consequently, the rationale for including strong climate change adaptation and
      mitigation measures in the project is compelling for both the Borrower and the World Bank. Through the adoption
      of CSA practices, the project will reduce GHG emissions per unit of agricultural output, enabling increased
      agricultural production at lower emissions levels than under a business-as-usual scenario. These practices will
      also help producers adapt more effectively to increasingly erratic and adverse weather patterns anticipated under
      current and future climate change trends.
Project Development Impact and Economic Justification
  54. Approach. The project spans a six-year implementation period, with benefits assessed over a 20-year time horizon.
      The economic analysis applies a ‘with and without project’s cost-benefit comparison (Cost Benefits Analysis-CBA),
      using a 6 percent discount rate to evaluate the economic viability of the project. Long-term impacts are expected
      to include enhanced food security, improved rural livelihoods, and increased private investment in agri-food
      systems contributing to the structural transformation of the agricultural sector in a fragile and conflict-affected
      setting.
  55. Justification for public sector provision and World Bank value-addition. Burkina Faso’s agricultural sector faces
      systemic constraints driven by market failures, institutional weaknesses, and climatic vulnerabilities. These include
      limited access to finance for smallholders and agribusinesses, underinvestment in public goods such as irrigation
      and storage infrastructure, and insufficient capacity to adopt climate-resilient technologies. The high risks and long
      investment horizons associated with agricultural transformation, especially in fragile and conflict-affected regions,
      discourage private sector engagement without public support. Moreover, the benefits of interventions such as CSA,
      land rehabilitation, and rural infrastructure development often extend beyond individual producers, generating
      positive externalities including reduced environmental degradation, improved food security, and social stability.

                                                                                                                         16
             The World Bank
             Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



         These public goods are typically underprovided in the absence of government intervention. Public sector financing
         is therefore essential to address these failures, reduce entry barriers, and crowd in private investment.
    56. Financial models and economic analysis results. The economic analysis carried out for the ATP-BF considers the
        incremental benefits generated by a diverse typology of financial models and beneficiaries across various segments
        of the targeted value chains. The analysis includes: (a) Type 1 Irrigation, which supports lowland irrigation schemes
        dedicated to rice cultivation and off-season crops, targeting subsistence-oriented producers and enhancing their
        production stability; (b) Type 3 Irrigation focuses on organized producer groups engaged in rice and horticulture,
        providing them with improved access to irrigation infrastructure and technical services to scale up their activities;
        and (c) Type 4 Irrigation which consists of hydro-agricultural developments downstream of dams, serving a mix of
        production systems ranging from community-managed plots to commercially oriented farms, with a focus on
        optimizing water use efficiency and boosting land productivity. In addition to irrigation, the project incorporates
        models on enhancing post-harvest management and value addition (agro-processing and storage) and activities
        under the MG mechanism and other financial facilities15 for farmers, SMEs and large-scale agribusinesses involved
        in the targeted value chains (rice and maize). Based on the total project cost of US$215.9 million (including US$150
        million IDA financing), the results of the analysis indicate a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$92.4 million and an
        Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 13.7 percent. Sensitivity analysis showed that a 20 percent increase in
        costs (including operational costs) and a 20 percent reduction in all project benefits yielded an EIRR of 11.6 percent
        and 11.2 percent respectively.
    57. Greenhouse Gas (GHG) mitigation benefits. The environmental externalities of the project were estimated using
        the latest version of the Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT). The tool provides estimations of the impact of
        Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) projects and policies on the carbon balance. The carbon balance
        using the EX-ACT tool is defined as the net balance across all GHGs expressed in CO2 equivalents (CO2e) that will be
        emitted or sequestered due to project implementation (with project), as compared to a business-as-usual scenario
        (without project)16.
    58. The direct CO2 impact of the project activities for the accounting duration of 20 years (that is, 6 years
        implementation + 14 years capitalization period) is estimated at 290,559 tons CO2-eq over a total land area of 5,700
        hectares (of which 3,900 hectares are under irrigation schemes), corresponding to - 1.7 tCO2-eq per hectare and
        per year. Key mitigation gains stem from the conversion of annual to perennial cropland, which sequesters -405,126
        tCO₂-eq, and from the transition of previously unused or less productive land categorized as ‘other land-use’ into
        more efficient systems, contributing -193,606 tCO₂-eq. These land-use shifts increase biomass and soil carbon
        storage, creating long-term carbon sinks. However, these benefits are partially offset by project-related emissions.
        The introduction of flooded rice systems which are associated with methane (CH₄) emissions results in 233,406
        tCO₂-eq over the 20-year period. Additionally, increased use of agricultural inputs including fertilizers, pesticides
        and mechanization contributes 74,767 tCO₂-eq.
    59. The net environmental benefit has been included in the economic valuation in line with the World Bank
        guidelines17. The GHG emissions results have been valued using the social price of carbon, using the gradually
        increasing estimates at both low and high ranges (respectively an average of US$71 and US$141 / tCO2-eq) and
        current market price estimate at US$32 /tCO2-eq18. The full economic potential of the project when higher social


15 The purpose is (i) to promote adoption, acquisition and sustained use of improved and efficient technologies; and (ii) finance micro-projects and sub-projects by

leveraging the existing agriculture window such as Dumu Ka Fa Fund.
16 EX-ACT is a land-based accounting system developed by Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). It estimates CO e stock changes, i.e., emissions
                                                                                                                                       2
or sinks of CO2) expressed inequivalent tons of CO2 per hectare and year.
17 Based on the World Bank 2024 Guidance note on shadow price of carbon in economic analysis.
18 https://markets.businessinsider.com/commodities/co2-european-emission-allowances


                                                                                                                                                                       17
             The World Bank
             Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



          prices of carbon are considered would generate a NPV of US$111.7 million and an EIRR of 15.1 percent over the
          20-year period.
      60. Paris Alignment. The project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both adaptation and mitigation.
          It is consistent with Burkina Faso’s NDC to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
          2026-203019. The project is also aligned with Burkina Faso’s National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (NAP) 2024-
          202820, and the G5 Sahel Region Country Climate Development Report (CCDR)21 on climate resilience and reducing
          of GHG emissions. The NAP highlights that the agriculture, water resources and transport sectors are highly
          vulnerable to the impacts of climate change like damage from floods and soil erosion. The CCDR highlights the
          importance of investing in greener food production systems. On adaptation, the project design addresses climate
          risks appropriately and according to the local vulnerabilities, including unreliable precipitation and temperature
          increases. The design includes expanding access to irrigation and climate-resilient seeds, promoting the adoption
          of CSA practices among beneficiaries, increasing crop diversification, promoting agriculture insurance for climate
          risks, and implementing integrated soil management. On mitigation, crop production and soil management
          practices conform to CSA approaches with low risk of the project negatively affecting Burkina Faso’s low-GHG
          emissions development pathway. Activities include the use of solar-powered solutions for irrigation and agro-
          processing, combining the use of mineral and organic fertilizers and promoting conservation agriculture practices,
          extension services, and training and capacity building. Most project activities are considered universally aligned
          under the eligible activity categories of “Crop and livestock production using CSA approaches”, “Agri-food value
          chain” and “Education and capacity building”. The remaining activities, for example the MG mechanism and credit
          guarantee scheme, are not likely to lead to a significant increase in GHG emissions. In summary, the activities
          adequately reduce the adaptation and mitigation risks to the project outcomes to acceptable and low levels
          respectively, and the operation is aligned with the Paris Agreement.
     B. Fiduciary
     Financial Management
        61. An FM assessment was undertaken to evaluate and recommend the appropriate project FM arrangements.
            These arrangements are in accordance with the FM Manual for World Bank IPF Operations (March 1, 2010 re-
            issued on September 7, 2021). For the implementation of this project, the government decided to set up a new
            PIU. The objective of the assessment was to determine: (a) whether the new PIU has adequate FM arrangements
            in place (planning, budgeting, accounting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing
            arrangements) to ensure that project funds will be used for their intended purposes in an efficient and
            economical manner; (b) that project financial reports will be prepared accurately, reliably, and in a timely
            manner; (c) that the project’s assets will be safeguarded; and (d) that the project will be subject to acceptable
            audit arrangements.
        62. The assessment observed that the ATP-BF as new PIU has no FM arrangements in place and will need to
            establish them from scratch. The assessment noted: (a) lack of manual of administrative, accounting, and
            financial procedures; (b) no FM staff (FM specialist, accountant, internal auditor and so on) in place; (c) no



19 Burkina Faso’s Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC (2026-2030); December 2025. URL:

https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/2026-01/BKF-CDN%203.0_BURKINA%20FASO.pdf

20  Burkina Faso National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (NAP); Ministry of Environment and Fishery Resources; March 2025. URL:
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/NAP2_BurkinaFaso_2025.pdf
21 World Bank Group. 2022. G5 Sahel Region Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series. © Washington, DC: World Bank. URL;

https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/entities/publication/50936c70-3771-5618-8b3e-52e7c01be5f8
                                                                                                                               18
       The World Bank
       Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



      accounting software; and (d) lack of experience with external auditors and the production of financial statements
      for audit purposes.
  63. To establish a strong PIU and FM capacity, the following should be done: (a) recruit a skilled and experienced
      team by Credit effectiveness (FM staff: Head of Administrative and Financial Section, at least one accountant or
      more depending on the workload); (b) acquire accounting software (e.g. TOM2PRO, SUCCESS) to handle the
      project accounting system; (c) prepare a new manual of procedures to ensure that all project activities are
      covered by appropriate procedures; (d) submit unaudited Interim Financial Reports (IFRs to the World Bank
      every semester, using the format agreed in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL); (e) have
      the project annual accounts audited by an independent external auditor to be recruited in compliance with terms
      of references acceptable to the World Bank; (f) limit advances to the DA to a maximum amount of three month
      forecast, with a ceiling for direct payments set at US$100,000, and (g) prepare a manual of procedures to cover
      MGs activities.
  64. The FM risk is considered Substantial as the new ATP-BF PIU will leverage existing capacity and FM of the
      MAERAH in terms of World Bank financed projects management. In addition, the implementation of the
      aforementioned mitigating actions will further reduce the FM risk of the project.
Procurement
  65. Project procurement will be carried out in accordance with World Bank’s ‘ rocurement egulations for F
      Borrowers’ dated September 2025. The attendant Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and
      Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants are dated October 15, 2006, and they
      were revised in January 2011 and July 1, 2016. Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) will be
      the platform for preparing, submitting, reviewing, and clearing procurement plans and prior review procurement
      activities. STEP will also be used for uploading documents and evaluation reports for post-review contracts. For
      this project, it is planned to set up the ATP-BF’s PIU that will contribute to the implementation of the Lijeeguoli
      Initiative. The newly created ATP-BF’s PIU will be responsible for all procurement activities under the project and
      will play a crucial role in the project's planning and procurement management. It will be responsible for the day-
      to-day management of the project. Coordination of procurement activities will be ensured by the Procurement
      Specialist who will be recruited. All project procurement prior review documents will be submitted to the World
      Bank by the ATP-BF’s PIU.
  66. The procurement capacity assessment showed that MAERAH has good capacity for procurement; but it
      identified several weaknesses. An assessment of MAERAH’s procurement capacity has been completed in
      accordance with the World Bank Procurement Risk Assessment and Management System (PRAMS). The
      assessment shows that MAERAH has been responsible over the past decade, and is still responsible currently,
      for implementing several important World Bank-funded projects, as indicated earlier. Its good track record in
      managing these projects is evidence that it has acquired sufficient capacity to support ATP-BF’s PIU from a
      procurement viewpoint. While MAERAH has previously managed and is managing the implementation of the
      World Bank-financed agricultural portfolio, additional support and resources will be provided to ensure
      increased capacities. Consistent with the institutional arrangements for project implementation in Burkina Faso,
      the ATP-BF PIU’s procurement specialist will work with the Directorate of Public Procurement (Direction des
      Marchés Publics, DMP) and the Control Directorate in charge of Public Procurement (Direction du Contrôle des
      Marchés et des Engagements Financiers, DCMEF) that are familiar with World Bank procurement procedures.
      But bid committee members are not trained in the World Bank’s procurement procedures, and there are
      significant time delays in the procurement process.
  67. The assessment rated the procurement risk as Substantial; it will be reassessed as Moderate if the identified
      constraints are addressed. The country’s overall context is characterized by two major difficulties (a) high
                                                                                                                  19
              The World Bank
             Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



           insecurity in some of the areas in which project activities will be conducted; and (b) the country’s current fluid
           political situation. The procurement annex22contains a full summary of the completed procurement assessments
           and suggested measures to address the inadequacies and risks identified. The main risks identified are the
           following: (a) administrative routines may result in procurement delays, potentially affecting project
           implementation; (b) procurement in fragile areas with few bidders can restrict competition and possibly increase
           prices and collusion risks; and (c) insufficient capacity can lead to poor contract management and administration
           of big contracts. In this context, the following mitigation measures for project procurement are proposed: (a)
           hiring, on a competitive basis, a procurement specialist experienced and familiar with World Bank procurement
           procedures and policies, to be incorporated into the ATP-BF’s PIU; (b) developing a section on procurement
           procedures as part of the PIM to clarify the role of each team member involved in the procurement process,
           define the maximum delay for each procurement stage (specifically with regard to review and approval systems,
           and signing of contracts), and define measures to fast-track procurement; and (c) reinforcing the procurement
           capacity by the training of the DMP, DCMEF, PIU and the bid committee on World bank procurement procedures
           with external training courses.
     68. Summary of the Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD). The PPSD and the Procurement Plan
         detailing the first 18 months of implementation have been prepared by the Borrower and approved by World
         Bank. The project plans procurement of goods such as fertilizers, acquisition of agricultural development works
         brigade for the benefit of SONATER, acquisition of agricultural equipment that will be procured by PIU in
         accordance with World Bank's procurement arrangements. The most important activities will be the
         procurement of development of irrigated land works selected competitively using international and national
         competition. Exceptionally, in security challenging zones where private contractors are not expected to operate,
         SONATER will be directly contracted as a public enterprise in accordance with Clause 3.22(c) of the
         Procurement. The contract will use World Bank’s droit-civil standard contract forms. To avoid any conflict-of-
         interest risks, SONATER performance and deliverables will be closely monitored by a third-party monitoring
         agent. Consultant services involve the selection of consultants for on-site monitoring and control of the
         development work of irrigated land, technical study of the construction/rehabilitation of approximately 300 km
         of rural tracks and roads, conducting feasibility studies for the development of irrigated areas and the
         mobilization of agricultural water (preliminary and detailed design studies), E&S studies, etc. The different
         approaches, selection methods, pre-qualification needs, estimated costs, prior review requirements, and
         timeframe are agreed between the recipient and the World Bank in the Procurement Plans. During
         implementation, the Procurement Plans will be updated as required and at least annually, to reflect actual
         project implementation needs and improvements in institutional capacity. While open national competition is
         generally the preferred method, in some areas the market and security situation might require other options.

 C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies
     Environmental and Social Policies
    69. Project activities could generate some adverse E&S risks and impacts; these risks will be mitigated by appropriate
        project interventions. The risks are, among others, health risks for communities, risks of construction site accidents
        and traffic accidents, risk of drowning in irrigation canals, risk of soil and land degradation during construction,
        biodiversity risks associated with habitat destruction, risk of water and soil pollution by solid and liquid waste from
        living bases and construction sites; occupational Health and Safety of workers; exclusion from the project’s benefits
        of certain category of people such as women, youth, people with disabilities, some rural communities, internal
        displaced populations. The E&S risk classification is rated as substantial at this stage due to mentioned potential

22 Filed in the project documents.


                                                                                                                            20
               The World Bank
              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



            risks and impacts such as those regarding Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), child labor, Sexual Exploitation
            and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH), pollution from civil works, land acquisition, restrictions on land use
            and involuntary resettlement issues and so on. The project will involve direct and contracted workers as well as
            primary supply workers. A screening process will be described in PIM to capture risks and impacts associated with
            expected activities. Appropriate mitigation measures will be outlined in required instruments and implemented
            throughout the project implementation cycle life to ensure that the E&S risks and impacts associated with expected
            activities are fully assessed and all risks and impacts are mitigated and addressed appropriately. In this regard, the
            following documents have been prepared, validated and disclosed both in the country and on World Bank web site:
            ESCP23, Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)24, Labor Management Procedures (LMP)25, Pest Management Plan
            (PMP)26. The Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for
            subprojects will be prepared and implemented during project implementation.

      70. Gender. Project success is dependent on project activities addressing gender gaps. This will require among others:
          (a) integrating the gender actions within the various implementation manuals (defining when these actions take
          place, how and who is responsible); (b) including gender actions within the detailed operational plans with a clear
          budget allocation for the gender actions and targets; (c) having gender indicators in the overall results chain to be
          able to track progress (fully integrated and defined in the M&E manual to guide M&E staff); (d) recruiting gender
          experts and including gender capacity building activities in the project overall capacity building plan (including for
          PIU members and MAERAH staff); (e) integrating gender in the overall project evaluation and conducting specific
          dedicated gender qualitative evaluation as needed; and (f) developing a communication strategy for the project
          that includes women’s specificities. The project is in line with and contributes to the country’s gender priorities
          identified in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF, report number 123712-BF). The priority interventions in the
          CPF focus on supporting women's employment in agribusiness value chain, promoting decentralized management
          of natural resources with a focus on non-timber products used by women and reserving 30 percent of labor-
          intensive public works and training opportunities for young women. Project gender interventions will be guided by
          the project’s Gender Action Plan. The main gender actionable interventions are the following among others, under
          each component: (a) Component 1: the main gender identified gap is in the lower productivity for female headed
          households in producing and exporting food and other crops; the component actionable points are defined as part
          of the special focus on women farmers in MAERAH’s extension and advisory services; (b) Component 2: agri-food
          storage and processing is a key domain of women’s activities in Burkina Faso; the project objective is to give women
          the wherewithal and the skills provision on leadership and entrepreneurship to contribute effectively to the
          running of project-funded facilities; (c) Component 3: to address the results chain’s limited access to finance and
          financial services, MGs will be targeted to address women’s constraints; and (iv) Component 4: MAERAH’s capacity
          building activities will pay special attention to women’s needs in agriculture support advisory and research services.
          These gender actions are based on the project’s engagement with the wider community and particularly with men
          to improve understanding of gender roles and the benefits of women’s economic empowerment. The gender entry
          points are reflected in the project RF that incorporates gender sensitive indicators including CRI. Two important
          indicators that capture targeted gender interventions are (a) farmers and/or agri value chain actors adopting
          improved agricultural technology (including climate smart agriculture – CRI); and (b) people using insurance
          services. Based on the above the project is expected to contribute to women being “beneficiaries of actions to
          expand and enable economic opportunities” (World bank Score Card)”.



23 https://www.agriculture.bf/wp-content/uploads/2026/02/PEES-PATA-version-negociee.docx, disclosed on February 5, 2026.
24
     https://www.agriculture.bf/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/Stakeholder-Engagement-Plan-SEP-Dec-2025.pdf, disclosed on December 22, 2025.
25 https://www.agriculture.bf/wp-content/uploads/2025/10/PGMO-PATA.pdf, disclosed on October 14, 2025.
26 https://www.agriculture.bf/wp-content/uploads/2025/10/BF_PGPP_PATA.version-definitive.pdf, disclosed on October 24, 2025.


                                                                                                                                           21
       The World Bank
      Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



71. Citizen Engagement. The project will be beneficiary oriented. It will use three pathways to conduct citizen
    engagement activities. Building on initial consultations during preparation, consultations with beneficiaries and
    project-affected persons (PAPs) will continue throughout the life of the project. Results will be systematically
    documented, analyzed and used to inform program implementation. Results will be shared with communities,
    closing the feedback loop. The second citizen engagement pathway is the GRM: the project will establish an
    effective and efficient GRM with the capacity to receive and respond to grievances on time. The third citizen
    engagement pathway involves collecting, recording, and reporting on inputs received from beneficiaries through
    beneficiary satisfaction surveys. The project will explore ways to involve beneficiaries and PAPs in the
    administration of these surveys, including securing their collaboration, providing them with oversight
    responsibilities and giving them the attendant resources and decision-making powers. These efforts will focus on
    activities such as strengthening POs and the development of business plans. The corresponding beneficiary
    feedback indicators in the RF will be “respondents expressing satisfaction with project delivered activities and
    services” and “grievances addressed within the project approved timeline.” The PIM and SEP will spell out the
    timeline for addressing and resolving grievances captured through the GRM.
72. Nutrition. The project has nutrition-explicit long-term goals and activities, with the following project activities
    supporting the nutrition goals: (a) under Component 1, the diversified production will improve the nutrition status
    and healthy diets of beneficiaries, especially among women, and fill the gaps in the poor state of nutrition and
    dietary diversity of the targeted farming communities. Nutrition education for farmers (including female farmers)
    will be provided, particularly regarding food safety and dietary diversity to complement crop diversification
    activities; furthermore, research on agriculture and nutrition will be strengthened, in particular, by conducting
    research on post-harvest handling methods that will be the most effective in retaining nutritional value, or linking
    soil health status with the nutrient density in crops; and (b) under Component 2: the post-harvest management or
    phytosanitary-related capacity building to be undertaken as part of the construction and operation of storage and
    agri-processing facilities will contribute to improving nutrition activities; in particular, training or capacity building
    on food safety and nutrition will be provided to actors along the value chain to reduce food-borne or water-borne
    diseases and support safer food systems. The project impact on nutrition and food security will be tracked through
    appropriate diet and nutrition-related indicators.
73. Maximizing Finance for Development. The project is aligned with the World Bank Maximizing Finance for
    Development approach and private investment generated through the project is counted towards Private Capital
    Mobilization. The following activities are potential MFD-enabling justifying the MFD-EP tag: under Component
    2 the project supports agri-related women groups, cooperatives, and SMEs to expand market access and increase
    returns to investments by financing a) training on sanitary and Phytosanitary Standards to effectively
    engage/participate in specific markets; b) training of processors on quality standards and safety of marketed
    products; c) training of processors in processing techniques and packaging with a particular emphasis on youth and
    women d) market intelligence; e) introducing farmers and SMEs to digital technologies facilitating post-harvest
    activity planning, product tracking and aggregation, and product traceability; f) construction and equipment of
    maize and rice processing units, and g) training of manufacturers of processing equipment. Under subcomponent
    3.2 the project aim to create an enabling environment that attracts, retains, and expands private investment—
    both domestic and foreign —by a) strengthening traceability, participation and management skills of client
    investors to develop their business plans and coach them to ensure the success of their projects, (b) promoting
    access to market for processed products through certification, traceability, participation to both national and
    international fairs, (c) promoting contract farming along the targeted value chains, and (d) dissemination of the law
    on the Agricultural Investment Code. The following activities under component 3 are confirmed as PCM: a) MGs
    to farmers and agribusinesses mobilizing US$ 3 million has been added to the financing table based 20 percent of
    400 beneficiaries’ contribution for window 1 (US$ 4,000*0.2*400= US$ 320,000) and 70 percent of 400

                                                                                                                           22
        The World Bank
       Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



     beneficiaries’ contribution for window 2 (US$ 9,571*0.7*400= US$ 2,680,000) and (b) Agricultural insurance
     mobilizing US$45.0 million has been added to the financing table based on private premium flows, derived from
     an expected 150,000 beneficiaries paying an average US$10 premium (US$1.5 million) and an indicative market
     leverage of 1:30 for private risk-bearing capacity mobilized relative to subsidized premiums and technical
     assistance. There is no PCM attributable to the project under the partial portfolio credit guarantee scheme given
     absence of any formal commitment associated with this scheme. The Total PCM from the project is therefore US$
     48 million.


  Legal Operational Policies
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate

Legal Operational Policies                                                          Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         Yes
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   No




  74. OP/BP 7.50 on International Waterways is applied to the project, as several planned activities will take place
      within the Volta River Basin, which is an international waterway. Following the required notification process and
      assessment, it was determined that the project would not result in significant adverse impacts. Consistent with
      the Policy, all other riparian countries were formally notified, and no objections to the project were received.
      The notification process was completed and received management approval to proceed with the project on
      December 17, 2025.
Grievance Redress Services

  75. Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
      supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the
      Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in
      order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their
      complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel,
      which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies
      and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the
      opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any
      time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management and after Management
      has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance
      Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to
      the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.


V. KEY RISKS

 76. The overall risk rating for the proposed operation is Substantial. This reflects the substantial implementation risk
     to PDO achievement in the context of Burkina Faso’s fragile environment with limited technical and institutional

                                                                                                                      23
       The World Bank
      Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



    capacity to manage large programs, high political, governance, and security risks; substantial macroeconomic and
    institutional capacity and sustainability risks; and substantial risks related to technical design, sector strategies,
    stakeholders, fiduciary, and E&S.
77. Political and governance risks are rated Substantial. Persistent insecurity may lead to constraints on civil space
    and affect the country’s stability. The focus on security-related issues could potentially delay key investments in
    project’s areas mainly due to conflict in neighboring countries and displaced people. The implementation risk will
    be mitigated by ensuring the governance and leadership of the project implementation is clearly defined, and by
    supporting communication on the expected impact of the government program on citizens.
78. Macroeconomic risks are rated Substantial. These risks arise from potential external and domestic shocks and
    fiscal policy setbacks. Burkina Faso has experienced shrinking fiscal space due to increased current expenditures,
    especially for security matters. In addition, financing sources have become scarcer or more costly, placing
    additional constraints on public finances and reducing the share of budget allocated to the agriculture sector.
    Activities partially mitigating such risks include the Internation Monetary Fund Program and the World Bank’s
    technical assistance on tax expenditure under the Sustainable Development Finance Policy, which aims to expand
    fiscal space.
79. Institutional capacity and sustainability risk is rated Substantial. Burkina Faso is a country with limited technical
    and institutional capacity. Capacity weaknesses at the national and regional levels will be remedied through a well-
    designed and diversified capacity-building program as well as technical assistance to support implementation.
80. Technical design of project risk is rated Substantial. This is mainly on account of the multiple interventions
    identified along the targeted value chains that required coordination among the various stakeholders. The
    coordination of activities across several domains in which implementing entities lack technical expertise is a
    daunting challenge, as experience has shown. This risk will be mitigated by creating “intersectoral” Steering and
    Technical Committees, which will be responsible for ensuring that adequate technical support and implementation
    capacity are available across the array of activities supported under the project. In addition, flexibility in reallocating
    funds and the option to drop some activities if needed will be considered during implementation. A WBG
    implementation support team representing expertise across multiple Global Practices will also be put into place to
    provide the necessary technical base for implementation.
81. Fiduciary risk is rated Substantial. This is due to limited involvement of MAERAH's procurement and internal
    control units, which may slow down the execution of activities. In addition, the project involves a multitude of
    actors and beneficiaries which may lead to weak compliance with the World Bank requirements particularly in
    areas that are facing security issues. To mitigate this risk, a coordination and accountability mechanism will be put
    in place to strengthen collaboration between MAERAH and the PIU as is the case under ongoing projects. In
    addition, the project will competitively recruit FM specialists (accountants, internal auditors) as well as
    procurement specialists with qualifications and experience required for World Bank projects.
82. Environment and social risks are rated Substantial. The environmental risk is rated as “Substantial” due to the civil
    work activities that will be financed by the proposed project. Project activities may generate negative
    environmental impacts associated with agricultural intensification, irrigation development, and infrastructure and
    may exacerbate conflicts over land use and increasing pressure on already degraded natural resources. Involuntary
    resettlement may occur. The project implementing agency, including some key stakeholders, is already familiar
    with the World Bank's E&S safeguard procedures, although additional support may be required to reinforce their
    capacity for risks and impacts management based on the ESF requirements. The anticipated impacts as well as the
    guidelines for dealing with them have been defined in the following E&S required instruments on preparation
    process (see Heading C - E&S Section above).

                                                                                                                            24
       The World Bank
      Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



83. Other: Security risks are rated High. Security risks could have a negative impact on the project implementation. To
    address this risk, a Security Management Plan will be developed latest three months after project effectiveness.
    This plan will help the project to mainstream security into project activities. The project will prioritize areas that
    are less prone to conflict. The strategy will consider the flexibility to select alternative sites based on the security
    situation. The government will appoint a security specialist to closely monitor the security situation in the project
    areas. This will be in addition to a portfolio-wide risk monitoring approach to be implemented by the World Bank
    to better identify and tackle specific FCV risks to ensure effective and safe implementation of supported operations.




                                                                                                                         25
       The World Bank
       Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)                                                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate

PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes


   Baseline                   Period 1                  Period 2                 Period 3                Period 4                  Period 5              Closing Period
   Increase production
   People fed as a result of increased agricultural/food production (Number of people) CRI
   Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029                  Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                          500,000                   1,200,000                1,900,000               2,600,000                 3,300,000             4,000,000
     ➢People fed as a result of increased agricultural/food production - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029                  Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                          330,000                   680,000                  1,030,000               1,380,000                 1,730,000             2,080,000
     ➢People fed as a result of increased agricultural/food production - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029                  Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                          150,000                   320,000                  490,000                 660,000                   830,000               1,000,000
   Market access
   Number of farmers and agri-value chains actors having increased market access/linkages or trade (Number)
   Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029                  Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                          15,000                    30,000                   45,000                  60,000                    75,000                90,000
     ➢Number of farmers and agri-value chains actors having increased market access/linkages or trade - Female (Number)
   Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029                  Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                          4,500                     9,000                    13,500                  18,000                    22,500                27,000
     ➢Number of farmers and agri-value chains actors having increased market access/linkages or trade - Youth (Number)
   Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029                  Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                          3,750                     7,500                    11,250                  15,000                    18,750                22,500
   Climate resilience
   Farmers and/or agri value chain actors adopting improved agricultural technology (including climate smart agriculture). (Number) (Number)
   Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029                  Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                          15,000                    30,000                   45,000                  60,000                    75,000                90,000
     ➢Farmers and/or agri value chain actors adopting improved agricultural technology (including climate smart agriculture) - Female (Number)



                                                                                                                                                                             Page 26


                                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)                                                                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


   Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                  Dec/2028                  Dec/2029                   Dec/2030            Dec/2031
   0                       5,000                     10,000                    15,000                    20,000                     25,000              30,000
     ➢Farmers and/or agri value chain actors adopting improved agricultural technology (including climate smart agriculture) - Youth (Number)
   Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                  Dec/2028                  Dec/2029                   Dec/2030            Dec/2031
   0                       3,750                     7,500                     11,250                    15,000                     18,750              22,500


Intermediate Indicators by Components


   Baseline                  Period 1                 Period 2                Period 3                   Period 4                 Period 5              Closing Period
   IMPROVING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE
   Area provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services (Hectare(Ha))
   Jun/2025                  Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                Dec/2028                   Dec/2029                 Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                         0                        1,500                   3,000                      4,800                    5,700                 5,700
     ➢Irrigated land developed with the support of the project (Hectare(Ha))
   Jun/2025                  Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                Dec/2028                   Dec/2029                 Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                         0                        1,000                   2,000                      3,000                    3,900                 3,900
     ➢Lowland developed/rehabilitated with the support of the project (Hectare(Ha))
   Jun/2025                  Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                Dec/2028                   Dec/2029                 Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                         0                        500                     1,000                      1,800                    1,800                 1,800
     ➢Irrigated land area cultivated by women (Hectare(Ha))
   Jun/2025                  Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                Dec/2028                   Dec/2029                 Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                         0                        260                     520                        780                      780                   780
   Increase in the production of targeted value chains (Metric ton)
   Jun/2025                  Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                Dec/2028                   Dec/2029                 Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                         0                        160,000                 320,000                    480,000                  640,000               800,000
     ➢Rice production (Metric ton)
   Jun/2025                  Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                Dec/2028                   Dec/2029                 Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                         0                        60,000                  120,000                    180,000                  240,000               300,000
     ➢Maize production (Metric ton)
   Jun/2025                  Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                Dec/2028                   Dec/2029                 Dec/2030              Dec/2031
   0                         0                        100,000                 200,000                    300,000                  400,000               500,000
   Farmers reached with agricultural assets and services (Number)



                                                                                                                                                                            Page 27


                                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)                                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                            20,000                  40,000            60,000     80,000     100,000            120,000
  ➢Female (Number)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                            5,000                   12,000            19,000     26,000     33,000             40,000
  ➢Youth (Number)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                            5,000                   10,000            15,000     20,000     25,000             30,000
  ➢IDPs (Number)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                            750                     1,600             2,450      3,300      4,150              5,000
Increased yields for targeted agricultural value chains (Metric ton)
Jun/2025                                                                                                        Dec/2031
0                                                                                                               0
  ➢Irrigated rice (Metric ton)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
3.61                         4.00                    4.50              5.00       5.50       6.00               6.00
  ➢Lowland rice (Metric ton)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
2.31                         2.50                    3.00              3.50       4.00       4.00               4.00
  ➢Maize (Metric ton)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
2.90                         3.10                    3.30              3.60       4.00       4.50               4.50
IMPROVING STORAGE, AGRO-PROCESSING AND ACCESS TO MARKETS
Storage facilities built or rehabilitated (Number)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                            0                       20                40         50         50                 50
Volume of market sales for targeted commodities (Percentage)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
-                            -                       -                 -          -          -                  -
  ➢Rice (Percentage)
Jun/2025                     Dec/2026                Dec/2027          Dec/2027   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
32                           40                      50                55         60         75                 75
  ➢Maize (Percentage)


                                                                                                                              Page 28


                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)                                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
13                       20                      35                       50         60         70                 70
Volume of processed products in targeted value chains (Metric ton)
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
119,227                  150,000                 250,000                  350,000    400,000    450,000            500,000
  ➢Rice (Metric ton)
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
103,227                  120,000                 200,000                  250,000    300,000    350,000            400,000
  ➢Maize (Metric ton)
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
16,000                   30,000                  50,000                   100,000    100,000    100,000            100,000
PROMOTING ACCESS TO FINANCE AND PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT
People using insurance services (Number of people) CRI
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                        0                       30,000                   70,000     100,000    150,000            150,000
  ➢People using insurance services - Female (Number of people) CRI
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                        0                       20,000                   30,000     45,000     50,000             50,000
  ➢People using insurance services - Youth (Number)
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                        0                       15,000                   25,000     30,000     37,500             37,500
Businesses using insurance services (Number of businesses) CRI

Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                        0                       50                       100        150        200                200
  ➢Businesses using insurance services - Women-led (Number of businesses) CRI
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                        0                       20                       40         60         70                 70
Matching grants funded by the project (Number)
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                        0                       400                      800        800        800                800
  ➢Female (Number)
Jun/2025                 Dec/2026                Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                        0                       100                      300        300        300                300
  ➢Youth (Number)


                                                                                                                                 Page 29


                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)                                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         100                      200          200          200                  200
  ➢IDPs (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         200                      400          400          400                  400
Beneficiaries having access to financial services with the project support (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         250                      500          750          1,000                1,200
  ➢Female (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         100                      200          280          320                  360
  ➢Youth (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         70                       130          180          220                  250
Private capital mobilized with the support of the project (Amount(USD))
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         10,000,000               20,000,000   30,000,000   36,000,000           48,000,000
Jobs created as a result of project support to targeted value chains (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          50                        200                      400          600          800                  10,000
  ➢female (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         1,000                    1,500        2,000        2,500                3,000
  ➢Youth (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          0                         500                      1,000        1,500        2,000                2,500
INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND PROJECT COORDINATION
Direct project beneficiaries (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          25,000                    50,000                   80,000       110,000      140,000              150,000
  ➢Female (Number)
Jun/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028     Dec/2029     Dec/2030             Dec/2031
0                          10,000                    20,000                   25,000       30,000       40,000               45,000
  ➢Youth (Number)


                                                                                                                                             Page 30


                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)                                                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                   Dec/2028             Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                       10,000                    20,000                     25,000               30,000     35,000             37,500
  ➢IDPs (Number)
Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                   Dec/2028             Dec/2028   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                       500                       1,000                      2,500                3,500      4,500              5,000
Capacity Building (Number of staff trained) (Number)
Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                   Dec/2028             Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                       20                        100                        150                  200        250                300
  ➢Female (Number)
Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                   Dec/2028             Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                       10                        25                         50                   100        120                150
  ➢Youth (Number)
Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                   Dec/2028             Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                       10                        20                         40                   60         80                 100
Respondents expressing satisfaction with project delivered activities and services (Percentage)
Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                   Dec/2028             Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                       30                        40                         60                   60         80                 80
Grievances addressed within the project approved timeline (Percentage)
Jun/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                   Dec/2028             Dec/2029   Dec/2030           Dec/2031
0                       80                        80                         90                   90         100                100
CONTINGENT EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMPONENT (CERC)




                                                                                                                                              Page 31


                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



ANNEX 2: MONITORING & EVALUATION PLAN:

PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
 PDO Outcome 1: Increase production
 People fed as a result of increased agricultural/food production (Number of people) CRI

                                  This indicator will measure the total number of people who benefited from increased
 Description
                                  agricultural/food production.
 Frequency                        Annually
 Data source                      Reports /surveys
                                  Data will be collected from various sources, including reports, existing datasets, and primary data
                                  collection efforts. The number of people fed will be estimated by converting the additional
                                  production due to the Program into kilocalories, using the FAO West Africa Food Composition
 Methodology for Data
                                  Table (2012). This total will then be divided by the minimum recommended caloric intake (2,000
 Collection
                                  kilocalories) multiplied by 365. The number of women and youth is estimated by applying the
                                  share of women (51.3percent based on RGPH-2019) and youth (25percent based on EPA data) in
                                  the population.
 Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
 Collection

 PDO Outcome 2: Market access

 Farmers and agri-value chains actors having increased market access/linkages or trade (number)
                                  This indicator counts the number of unique farmers and agri–value chain actors (e.g., producer
                                  organizations, aggregators, processors, input suppliers, logistics providers) who, due to project
 Description
                                  support, have gained new or strengthened access to markets, formal commercial linkages, or
                                  demonstrable trade transactions that enable selling/purchasing at improved terms.
 Frequency                         Annual
 Data source                      MIS and annual surveys
 Methodology for Data
                                  Yearly surveys administrated with beneficiaries
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                                   Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
 Collection
 PDO Outcome 3: Increased adoption of improved agricultural technology (including climate smart agriculture) (number)
 Farmers and/or agri value chain actors adopting improved agricultural technology (including climate smart agriculture).
 (Number)
                                  The indicator measures the number of project beneficiaries who have adopted improved
                                  agricultural technology (including climate smart agriculture). that lead to increased productivity
 Description                      together with improved resilience to climate variability and mitigation of the effects of climate
                                  change. CSA are implemented in reference to beneficiaries’ “integrated landscape management.
                                  They are area specific. Their definition will be included in the PIM.
 Frequency                        Annual
 Data source                      survey report
 Methodology for Data             Survey will be conducted annually in the project targeted areas to measure the uptake of
 Collection                       climate-smart agricultural technologies and services by project beneficiaries.
 Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
 Collection


Intermediate Results Indicators by Components




                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



 Component 1: Improving agricultural productivity and resilience to climate change

Area provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services (Ha)
                                This indicator measures the total area of land provided with irrigation and drainage services
Description                     under the Project, including (i) the area provided with new irrigation and drainage services, and
                                (ii) the area provided with improved irrigation and drainage services, expressed in hectares (ha).
Frequency                       Every 6 months
Data source                     Surveys
Methodology for Data
                                Annual surveys on agricultural land and drainage services
Collection
Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Irrigated land area cultivated by women (ha)
Description                     This indicator measures the total irrigated land area cultivated by women (percentage)
Frequency                       Every 6 months
Data source                     Surveys
Methodology for Data
                                Annual surveys on agricultural land and drainage services
Collection
Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Area of lowland developed/rehabilitated with the support of the project (Ha))
Description                     This indicator measures the total area of lowland developed or rehabilitated under the project,
Frequency                       Every 6 months
Data source                     Agricultural land and production surveys
Methodology for Data            Surveys
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Farmers reached with agricultural assets and services (Number)
                                This indicator measures the number of farmers who were provided with agricultural assets or
                                services as a result of project support. Farmers are people engaged in agricultural activities or
                                members of an agriculture-related business targeted by the project. The indicator is
                                disaggregated by men and women.
                                Agricultural assets and services include: crops, livestock, Fisheries, aquaculture, agroforestry,
                                timber, and non-timber forest products.
                                Assets include physical assets, biological assets, and farm and processing equipment. Biological
                                assets include animal breeds (e.g., livestock, Fisheries) and genetic material of livestock, crops,
Description
                                trees, and shrubs (including fiber and fuel crops).
                                Services include research, extension, training, education, ICTs input supply (e.g., fertilizers,
                                pesticides, labor), production-related services (e.g., soil testing, animal health/veterinary
                                services), phyto-sanitary and food safety services, agricultural marketing support services (e.g.,
                                price monitoring, export promotion), access to farm and post-harvest machinery and storage
                                facilities and irrigation and drainage facilities.
                                Services also include provision of financial resources for agriculture and agricultural-related
                                activities.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      Progress reports, MIS
Methodology for Data
                                 Farm and market surveys
Collection
Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


Collection

Increased yield for targeted agricultural Value chains (Metric tons/ha)

Rice yield (Metric tons/ha)
                                  This indicator measures the yield per hectare of irrigated rice obtained through project
Description
                                  intervention.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       Annual Survey data
Methodology for Data              Yearly crop surveys administrated with representative sample of targeted project beneficiaries
Collection                        and control group
Responsibility for Data
                                   Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Maize yield (Metric tons/ha)
Description                       This indicator measures the yield per hectare of maize obtained through project intervention.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       Annual Survey data
Methodology for Data              Yearly crop surveys administrated with representative sample of project beneficiaries and
Collection                        control group
Responsibility for Data
                                   Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Increase in the production of targeted value chains (Metric ton)
                                  This indicator will measure the net additional quantity of rice and maize produced by project-
Description                       supported farmers or areas during the reporting period, compared to the baseline, attributable
                                  to the project’s interventions
Frequency                         Annually
Data source                       Reports /surveys
Methodology for Data              Data will be collected from various sources, including reports, existing datasets, EPA data and
Collection                        primary data collection efforts.
Responsibility for Data           Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection

 Component 2: Improving storage, agro-processing and access to markets

Storage facilities built or rehabilitated (Number)
                                  This indicator measures the total number of warehouses built or rehabilitated for target crops
Description
                                  with project support.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                   PIU reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data            Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Volume of market sales for targeted commodities (Metric tons)
Description                       This indicator measures the volume of agricultural output that is sold to the market.
Frequency                         Baseline, midline and end of project
Data source                       Farmers and value chain actors
Methodology for Data
                                   Farm and market surveys
Collection
Responsibility for Data           Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU




                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


Collection
Volume of processed products in targeted value chains (metric tons)
                                 This indicator measures the total quantity of raw maize grain and paddy rice that is transformed
Description                      into finished products (e.g., milled rice, maize flour/grits) within a defined period, expressed in
                                 metric tons (MT)
Frequency                        Six months
Data source                      PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                  PIU reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection

Component 3: Promoting access to finance and private sector investment

People using insurance services (Number of people) CRI
                                 This indicator measures number of people using insurance services as a result of project
Description
                                 intervention.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                       Farmers, value chain actors, insurance service providers
Methodology for Data
                                  Farm and market surveys
Collection
Responsibility for Data           Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Businesses using insurance services (Number of businesses) CRI
                                 This indicator measures number of businesses using insurance services as a result of project
Description
                                 intervention.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      Businesses, value chain actors, insurance service providers
Methodology for Data
                                  Businesses and market surveys
Collection
Responsibility for Data           Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Matching grants funded by the project (Number)
                                 This indicator measures the number of MGs involving a partial subsidy provided to producers,
Description                      producers organization or private sector firms supported by the project to help finance their
                                 business plans regarding their production or agriculture-related activities.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                  PIU reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Beneficiaries having access to financial services with the project support (Number)
                                 This indicator measures the number of beneficiaries having access to financial services with the
Description
                                 project support
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Annual survey and PIU reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


Collection
Private capital mobilized with the support of the project (USD)
                                 This indicator measures the funds from private sector entities that are invested in beneficiaries’
Description                      activities owing to the support or facilitation provided by the project. This can include direct
                                 investments, co-financing, guarantees, and other financial instruments.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Annual survey
Collection
Responsibility for Data           Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Jobs created as a result of project support to targeted value chains (number)
                                 This indicator measures the number of jobs attributable to project interventions within the
                                 specified value chains. It typically includes (i) assistance, financing, or jobs to operate and
Description                      maintain project-supported assets and services (ii) jobs created in the various segments of the
                                 value chains due to project-induced changes in demand, supply, productivity, or market access
                                 (e.g., upstream suppliers and downstream distributors)
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Annual survey
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Component 4: Institutional strengthening and project coordination

Direct project beneficiaries (Number)
                                 It measures individuals or groups who receive direct services or benefits from the project, such
Description
                                 as training, financial support, or infrastructure improvement
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                  PIU reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data           Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Capacity Building (Number of staff trained) (Number)
                                 It measures the number of staff from the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries who
Description
                                 receive training with the support of the project
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                  PIU reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data           Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Respondents expressing satisfaction with project delivered activities and services (Percentage)
                                 This indicator measures the percentage of beneficiaries who report satisfaction with services
                                 provided in project areas based on formal surveys. It is expected that a survey to measure this
Description
                                 indicator will be conducted twice during the project. The sample size should be representative of
                                 the total number of beneficiaries.
Frequency                        At mid-term and at the end of the project




                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)


Data source                     Activity reports
Methodology for Data            Survey to be carried out during the different evaluations (mid-term and final). The survey
Collection                      development will be led by the Regional Coordination Unit.
Responsibility for Data          Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection
Grievances addressed within the project approved timeline (Percentage)
                                Measures the percentage of complaints or grievance addressed/dealt with/ in a timely and
Description
                                satisfactoy manner.
Frequency                       Monthly
Data source                     PIU reports
Methodology for Data
                                PIU reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data         Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Livestock and Fisheries, supporting institutions, and PIU
Collection




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
