Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/22/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04625




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 23, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507256                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       BF - ATP                    2026

                     Operation Name            Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Burkina Faso              Burkina Faso                            WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Agriculture and Food
                                                                                       AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Economy,      Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and   02-Dec-2025                  05-Feb-2026
                     Finance and               Fisheries
                     Forecasting

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     17-Nov-2025               215,900,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase production, market access, and climate resilience of smallholder
                     farmers along selected value chains in the project areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project is designed with four components: (i) Improving agricultural productivity and resilience to climate change,
                     (ii) Improving storage, agro-processing and access to Markets, (iii) Promoting Access to Finance and private sector
                     investment, and (iv) Institutional Strengthening and Project Coordination. Component 1: Improving Agricultural
                     Productivity and Resilience to Climate Change (US$ 96.3 million IDA). Component 1 focuses on boosting agricultural
                     productivity and building resilience to climate change by promoting the adoption of climate-smart technologies,
                     strengthening input supply systems, and supporting farmer organizations. Key activities include expanding access to

                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                     quality seeds, fertilizers, and mechanization, enhancing extension services (with an emphasis on women farmers), and
                     facilitating digital solutions for climate and pest monitoring. The component also supports diversified production and
                     irrigation development, including solar-powered systems and secured land tenure, with targeted support for women
                     and youth. Component 2: Improving Storage, Agro-processing and Access to Markets (US 23.2 million IDA). Component
                     2 focuses on improving market access, reducing risks, and increasing the availability of local agricultural products, with
                     special attention to women, cooperatives, and SMEs. Planned investments include cold storage, warehouses, and
                     climate-resilient market facilities, complemented by road and mobility projects, training processors—especially youth
                     and women—constructing processing units, and encouraging the adoption of climate-resilient technologies. Promising
                     SMEs will be identified for further support and scaling opportunities. Component 3: Promoting Access to Finance and
                     Private Sector Investment (US$15 million IDA). Component 3 focuses on improving access to financial services for
                     farmers and agri-entrepreneurs at various stages of production, processing, and marketing, while also encouraging
                     private sector investment in key agricultural value chains. The component aims to expand financial services, especially
                     for underserved groups—and promote green financing through activities such as matching grants for adopting climate-
                     smart agriculture, bolstering national agricultural insurance programs, and leveraging partial credit guarantees to
                     mobilize private capital. This includes the establishment of two windows for matching grants, targeted insurance
                     improvements, and capacity building with an emphasis on women and youth. The component will also foster private
                     investment by addressing barriers, providing technical assistance to business development service providers, improving
                     market access for processed products, promoting contract farming, and disseminating information about the
                     Agricultural Investment Code. Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, and Project Coordination (US$ 15.5 million
                     IDA). Component 4 will address (i) sector policy and governance issues, and related training needs, and (ii) project
                     coordination and management activities. This component will be implemented by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU)




Public Disclosure
                     under the oversight of the Project Steering Committee (PSC). Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response
                     Component (CERC) (US$0). A CERC with zero allocation may be used to contribute to an emergency response through
                     the timely implementation of activities in response to an eligible national emergency. A CERC is included in the project
                     in accordance with the World Bank IPF Policy (paragraphs 12 and 13, for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance and
                     Capacity Constraints). This will allow for rapid reallocation of uncommitted funds under the credit in the event of an
                     eligible emergency as defined in the World Bank Operational Policy on Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies (OP
                     8.00). A Contingent Emergency Response Manual will be prepared as an annex to the PIM (CERC annex). The
                     environmental and social instruments required for the CERC are prepared, disclosed, and adopted in accordance with
                     the CERC Manual and the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). For the CERC to be activated, and
                     financing to be provided, the Government will need to: (a) submit a request letter for CERC activation, and the evidence
                     required to determine the eligibility of the emergency, as defined in the CERC annex, an Emergency Action Plan,
                     including the emergency expenditures to be financed; and (b) meet the environmental and social requirements as
                     agreed in the Emergency Action Plan and ESCP.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be implemented nationwide. Burkina Faso, with about 20.5 million people (RGPH (General census of
                     population and housing), 2019), is a low-income, landlocked country affected by fragility, conflict and violence (FCV)
                     and has an extreme poverty headcount (32.7% in 2022 with 7.5 million people, RGPH 2019). Its recent political history is
                     turbulent with two coup d'états in one year (2022) and a military transition. The country's economy is informally
                     centered around rainfed agriculture and agropastoralism. Despite relatively strong economic performance in the past
                     decade, Burkina Faso remains one of the poorest countries in the world. More than half of the rural people are poor.

                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                     Agriculture is the most important sector of the economy, with 80% of the labor force primarily employed in agriculture.
                     Over 90% of livelihoods are dependent on agriculture. The volatile security situation has made the humanitarian
                     situation more complex, with persistent food insecurity and the absence of basic services in several regions as well as
                     massive population displacement. Climate shocks such as droughts and floods are a threat, particularly to agriculture,
                     and hence, are a risk to rural livelihoods and food security. Floods have also become recurrent events, causing severe
                     impacts on lives, livelihoods and the economy. For instance, at the Council of Ministers meeting on September 25, 2024,
                     the government made an oral statement on the flood situation in Burkina Faso. According to this statement, as of
                     September 12, 2024, nine of the country's 13 regions had been affected by flooding, with urban, semi-urban, and rural
                     areas in the affected municipalities inundated, leaving 16,568 people affected. Irrigation potential is considerable but
                     only a fraction of the potentially irrigable land has been developed. The irrigation of irrigated areas in this project will be
                     carried out using water from the Mouhoun River.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The General Directorate of Agricultural Development and Irrigation Development (DGAHDI), within the the Ministry of
                     Agriculture, Animal Resources and Fisheries (MARAH) is the implementing agency. DGAHDI has experience
                     implementing projects funded by World Bank such as Burkina Faso Agriculture Resilience and Competitiveness Project
                     (P167945) under implementation under the Safeguards Operational Policies (OP) with a Moderately Satisfactory E&S
                     performance rating in the last Aide-Memoire, December, 2024 and West Africa Food System Resilience Program
                     (P172769) currently being implemented under the WB Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) with Satisfactory E&S
                     performance rating in the last Aide-Memoire, December, 2024. The PIU will be established before the Project's
                     effective date, as stated in the legal agreement. Environmental specialist and Social development specialist will be




Public Disclosure
                     recruited, and the security specialist will be appointed by the Government no later than three (3) months after the
                     Project's effective date and will remain in place throughout the Project's implementation. The consultant specialized in
                     GBV/SEA/SH issues will be recruited during the first year of the Project and retained in this position throughout the
                     implementation of the Project. In addition, at the regional level, the Client will recruit E&S assistants to support project
                     implementation in the field 3 months after effectiveness. Finally, collaboration agreements with ANEVE and an
                     NGO/GBV will be signed no later than six (6) months after the Project effective date.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is classified as substantial , based on the type of project and the nature of its activities.
                     These activities already described in the relevant section above are often associated with substantial environmental
                     negative risks/impacts, health risks on communities, risks of construction site accidents and traffic accidents, risk of
                     drowning in Rivers (the irrigation of irrigated areas will be carried out using water from the Mouhoun River) and
                     irrigation canals, risk of soil and land degradation during construction, biodiversity risks associated with habitat
                     destruction, risk of water and soil pollution by solid and liquid waste from living bases and construction sites, risk of
                     disturbance runoff, risk of poaching by site workers, groundwater and surface water pollution through improper use
                     of agrochemicals (pesticides and fertilizers) as well as risk of soil and water pollution during the operation phase, risk
                     of poisoning of agricultural producers by using empty pesticide containers as drinking water containers, risk related to


                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                          Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                     insecurity, occupational Health and Safety of workers, etc. A screening process will be include in the POM and put in
                     place to ensure that the E&S risks and adverse impacts associated with the activities will be addressed appropriately
                     by the client. The potential for cumulative impacts exists but can be readily avoided or mitigated by adequate
                     mitigatory and/or compensatory measures.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Potential social risks that could be raised by the investments expected from the project are rated substantial based on
                     the project activities described in section C and anticipated social impacts like economic and physical displacement.
                     Most project activities are small-scale (construction/rehabilitation of marketing infrastructures, development of low
                     land and rural roads to open up producing areas) and intended to improve social cohesion and inclusion, as well as
                     support sustainable livelihoods and the social inclusion of women and other disadvantaged groups, as the project will
                     facilitate technology transfer, technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training, improved availability and
                     access to resilient germplasms, and efficient advisory service delivery. In addition, the project will support productive
                     land development by increasing the provision of irrigated water on sites with high production potential and by
                     securing land tenure to produce staple and high value crops. While expected physical activities planned under both
                     components 1 and 2 are expected to have positive social impact and physical footprint, they will be implemented in a
                     fragile, highly volatile environment where there are threats of security and violence . The main social risks from
                     expected activities of the project are risks related to permanent and temporary loss of assets or physical and/or
                     economic displacement, the restriction of access to traditional land, social exclusion of some communities or people
                     among potential beneficiaries (for example women in rural area, Illiterate persons) , child labor, SEA/SH and
                     community conflict between livelihood groups as a result of the possible influx of labor, and the possible expansion of




Public Disclosure
                     certain transmissible diseases during civil works.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The major works that will generate substantial E&S risk and adverse impacts are : rehabilitation of existing irrigation
                      schemes and development of new ones, lowland development, development of climate-resilient market
                      infrastructures, development of subprojects related to agriculture and agri-business operators, activities of
                      upgrading/modernization of existing production and storage. The POM of the proposed project will establish the
                      procedures for screening subprojects, as well as mitigation measures and implementation arrangements. The impacts
                      will be managed during project implementation in accordance with the ESCP/POM that will guide the preparation of
                      ESIAs for the subprojects. The ESCP has been developed, validated and published in the country and on WB site on
                      December 22, 2025, and will be applied throughout the Project implementation. It was agreed that the client will
                      develop and disclose the ESIA for the development works for 680 ha of irrigated land in the village of Sanakui II in the
                      commune of Solenzo, Bankui region, no later than 2 months after project effective date. The ESIA for other known
                      sites during the implementation will be developed and disclosed after required E&S screening and feasibilities
                      studies. In any case, the ESIAs will be developed and disclosed before the launching of bidding documents.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant


                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been developed by updating SEP of West Africa Food System Resilience
                      Program (P172769) and includes an identification mapping of project key stakeholders and a description of the
                      Grievance Mechanism (GM) accessible to key stakeholders. The SEP has been validated and published in the country
                      and on WB site on December 22, 2025, and will be applied throughout the Project implementation. The project GM
                      will be used to receive and resolve project-related complaints; it establishes a systematic approach for consultation
                      and engagement and helps promote an inclusive and participatory approach for stakeholder engagement in
                      addressing any potential risks and negative impact; promotes and provides means for effective and inclusive
                      engagement of the project’s affected parties throughout the project life-cycle. The project GM is capitalizing the GR
                      committees existing in the project areas to avoid duplication on the field.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The Borrower has prepared a Labor Management Procedures (LMP) by updating LMP of West Africa Food System
                      Resilience Program (P172769). It has been validated and published in the country on October 24, 2025, and on WB
                      site on December 2, 2025. and will be applied throughout the Project implementation. It established the terms and
                      conditions of employment, as well as non-discrimination and equal opportunity; the freedom to associate with
                      workers (direct workers, Contracted workers, probably Community workers, Primary supply workers), organizations;
                      exclusion of child and forced labor from project activities; prevention and control against sexual exploitation, abuse
                      and sexual harassment (SEA/SH); outlining adequate occupational health and safety measures and a labor grievance
                      mechanism (GM) before recruitment of project workers. The PIU and contractors will be required to sign and abide
                      by a code of conduct for workers that would address community health and safety risks, including risks of SEA/SH and
                      child labor risk. Contractors will be required, as a condition of their contracts, to prepare, implement and comply with



Public Disclosure
                      their C-ESMP, including LMP and OHS measures outlined in the ESIA/ESMP. The project will prepare the Occupational
                      Health and Safety Management Plan before work begins and thereafter implement the plan throughout Project
                      implementation.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      The proposed project will support rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones, lowland
                      development, development of subprojects related to agriculture and agri-business operators, etc. These activities
                      may require the use of agrochemicals. A standalone Pest Management Plan (PMP) that include both guidance and
                      measures to promote good agricultural practices, and the safe use of agrochemicals, has been prepared. The PMP has
                      been developed by updating PMP of West Africa Food System Resilience Program (P172769). It has been disclosed in
                      the country on October 24, 2025 and in WB site on December 2, 2025. The Borrower will put in place the necessary
                      measures to promote the sustainable use of resources (e.g. energy, water and raw materials). The project will
                      prepare the Waste Management Plan (WMP) (included in the ESIA and site specific ESMP) before the start of physical
                      work, then apply the WMP throughout the implementation of the project. The waste generated by the
                      construction/rehabilitation work will be disposed of at approved sites in keeping with national laws and regulations.
                      The ESMPs will include mitigation measures to minimize and manage the noise levels. There are no plans to purchase
                      electronic equipment for farmers.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant




                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                      The PIU will be required to enforce and monitor the application of CoC for workers, which addresses community
                      health and safety risks, including SEA/SH and child labor risk mitigation measures. The expected civil works will
                      finance the construction and rehabilitation with potential substantial risks and impacts to community health and
                      safety . To address these concerns, the client will prepare site specific instruments which will outline mitigation
                      measures proportionate to the risks and impacts associated with the project. Due to the security conditions in the
                      whole country, the Borrower will conduct a security risk assessment and prepare a security management plan (SMP)
                      proportionate to the security risks level prior to the beginning of physical work and these provisions will be outlined
                      in the ESCP. At this stage, rivers (Mouhoun River) are chosen as source of irrigation water.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      Project activities associated with irrigation schemes and lowland development may require land acquisition,
                      involuntary physical resettlement and/or economic displacement. Given the volatile security situation in the whole
                      country and inaccessibility of some areas, the mitigation hierarchy will be applied to avoid involuntary resettlement .
                      If this cannot be avoided, measures to minimize involuntary resettlement will include preparation of Livelihood
                      Restoration Plans (LRP) for people and communities affected by economic displacement. The RAP for the
                      development of 680 ha of irrigated land in the village of Sanakuy II in the commune of Solenzo is being prepared and
                      will be validated and disclosed no later than two(2) months after the Project's effective date before. The other RAPs
                      will be developed during the project implementation. It is expected that subproject sites will be determined prior to
                      effectiveness. All the RAPs will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank team prior to the start of works.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Resources

                      Among the activities supported by the project that could affect biodiversity conservation and the sustainable
                      management of natural resources are the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones
                      and lowland development. The project will adopt Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) to be included in the ESIA
                      before launching the bidding process for the activity that requires the adoption of the ESIA, then apply the BMP
                      throughout Project implementation. The ESIAs to be prepared will help screen and manage biodiversity issues for the
                      different types of activities funded and help screen out activities that may have unintended negative consequences
                      on the ecological functions of habitats and the biodiversity they support. The ESIAs will also provide mitigation
                      measures to ensure that project activities do not alter or cause the destruction of any critical or sensitive natural
                      habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      There are no known Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Undeserved Traditional Local Communities
                      in Burkina Faso

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      The project will finance rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and development of new ones. These types of
                      activities may affect, or lead to the discovery of, both known and unknown cultural heritage. Though the possibility is
                      not considered significant, the POM will contain Chance Finds procedures which should also be included in the site


                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                      specific ESIAs and subsequently in bidding documents to guide the treatment of cultural heritage that may be
                      encountered during civil works. Site-specific ESIAs for the subprojects will determine, through consultations, the
                      presence of cultural heritage and recommend measures to avoid doing harm to any identified cultural heritage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      The project will not involve an FI.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           In Part
                       The Borrower Framework will not be used. The project is not proposing to rely on the Borrowers’ Environmental and
                       Social Framework but will comply with relevant national laws and regulations (cultural heritage, labor, ESIA, etc.).


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No




Public Disclosure
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The following documents will be prepared no longer than 2 months after the project effective date by the government
                     and disclosed both in-country and on the World Bank's external website
                     - Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for development works for 680 ha of irrigated land in the village
                     of Sanakui II in the municipality of Solenzo, Bankui region.
                     - Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for for the development works for 680 ha of irrigated land in the village of Sanakui II
                     in the municipality of Solenzo, Bankui region.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Idriss Serme                          Title:           Senior Agriculture Economist


                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Burkina Faso Agricultural Transformation Project (P507256)



                      Email:                  iserme@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Erick Herman Abiassi                  Job Title:      Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  eabiassi@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                Idriss Serme, Erick Herman Abiassi

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                       Yacouba Ouedraogo

                     ADM Social Specialist:                              Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre




Public Disclosure




                    Dec 23, 2025                                                                                                   Page 9 of 9
