Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Chad Water Security Project (P507957)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                                Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 06/17/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05016




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 18, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security Project (P507957)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507957                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        Water Security               2026

                     Operation Name            Chad Water Security Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Chad                      Chad                                      WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                         AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Water         Societe Tchadienne des Eaux (STE)         26-Jan-2026                  16-Apr-2026
                     and Energy

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     02-Jun-2025               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Enhance access to water services in selected regions of Chad


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Project will enhance resilience to drought and flood, expand access to water and sanitation services
                     including through an investment program for multi-purpose rainfall water harvesting and storage infrastructure and
                     protect water resources at the sub-basin level. It will support climate-resilient investments in water supply, sanitation,
                     conservation, operations, and reforms to improve sector performance, such as improving the performance of the STE.
                     By addressing immediate water-related concerns and building long-term resilience, the Project aims to foster stability,
                     reduce water-related conflicts, and stimulate economic growth in vulnerable regions. To meet its objectives, the Project
                     will focus on:: (i) the provision of drinking water services in selected urban and rural locations, (ii) the construction of
                     latrines in public settings such as schools and health centers, (ii) the construction of multi-purpose water mobilization

                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security Project (P507957)



                     infrastructure (infiltration and expansion weirs, water abstraction disposals) and (iii) watershed restoration. The Project
                     will prioritize regions with limited access to reliable water sources, including Wadi Fira, Ennedi East, Ennedi West, Mayo
                     Kebbi East, and Mayo Kebbi West. These areas lack perennial watercourses and depend on discontinuous and poorly
                     understood aquifers. Borkou province and N'Djamena city are also included due to their particularly low access to safe
                     drinking water services.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     According to Country Index - Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative, 2021, Chad is the most vulnerable country in the
                     world to the risks of climate change, with a dry tropical climate in the south and the arid conditions of the Sahara Desert
                     in the north. Climate change contributes to desertification; degradation of forests, soil, and natural habitats; loss of
                     biodiversity; reductions in the level of water tables; and the silting of oases. The Chadian population can be
                     characterized as vulnerable given their lack of access to basic services, such as water, education and health. Women
                     and girls in particular bear the cost of economic and social vulnerabilities, driven by social and cultural norms. The target
                     regions include Wadi Fira, Ennedi East, Ennedi West, Mayo Kebbi East, and Mayo Kebbi West, which have limited access
                     to reliable water sources and electricity (access rates at 20 percent in urban area and less than 1 percent in rural area).
                     Many living in rural areas derive their livelihoods primarily from agricultre and livestock rearing, with the popualtions in
                     the provinces targeted by the project being some of the most affected by poverty (national extreme proverty reached
                     36.5 percent in 2024). The two Mayo-Kebbi (East and West) cover part of the Logone wetland in the south and Wadi-
                     Fira Province includes a part of the Ouadi Rimé Ouadi Achim Nature Reserve towards the East. These provinces are
                     further exposed to insecurity due to their proximity to Sudan in the East and Libya in the North. The influx of more than



Public Disclosure
                     one million forcibly displaced people from neighboring countries has put pressure on limited local resources and
                     deepened existing vulnerabilities. As of May 2025, Chad hosted over 1.2 million refugees from Sudan, the Central
                     African Republic, Nigeria and Cameroon, according to OCHA. Gender inequality is widespread, with women facing
                     limited autonomy and high rates of gender-based violence (GBV).

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Capacity (technical and institutional) at the national, provincial, and local levels is weak in the water management
                     sector. Given the limited experience and institutional capacity of the Ministry of Water and Energy (Ministère de l’Eau et
                     de l’Energie, MEE) and the Chadian water utility, Societe Tchadienne des Eaux (STE), sustainability of activities will be
                     promoted through citizen engagement, private operators’ involvement and capacity building. The limited experience
                     and capacity of MEE to implement projects under the Environmental and Social Framework remains a challenge. The
                     Ministry of Water and Energy will establish a central project management unit including environmental, and social
                     specialists no later then three months after effective date. Arrangements for monitoring results and compliance will be
                     established, potentially through third parties, until adequate internal capacity is ensured. Different modalities such as
                     GEMS and IT solutions for monitoring will be explored during preparation. During preparation the existing capacity will
                     be evaluated to assess training needs.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial




                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security Project (P507957)



                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     Potential risks and adverse impacts during the construction phase may include: (i) increased pollution due to the
                     generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste (oil, paints, asbestos), dust, noise, vibration, and accidental spills
                     of fuel and lubricants; (ii) traffic congestion, (iii) ecosystems disturbance, and (iv) occupational and community health
                     and safety issues. Also, (v) the Project area cover critical land areas, such as wetlands (Logone wetland in the south)
                     and protected reserves (Ouadi Rimé Ouadi Achim in the East) to consider during E&S assessment of activities. During
                     the operational phase, the risks and impacts of sanitation infrastructure may include soil and water pollution;
                     community health and safety issues. As works may include excavation there is a possibility of negative impacts on
                     cultural heritage. The abovementioned risks and impacts are readily identifiable and can be avoided, minimized, or
                     mitigated by appropriate assessment and readily available mitigation measures. The project will not support activities
                     related to dams or intakes that would rely on existing dams.
                                                                                                                                       Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is Substantial, given the nature of the activities planned. The main social risks relate to potential
                     limited-scale economic displacement due to construction of rural and urban water infrastructure involving land
                     acquisition; security related risks regarding consultations, compensation payments, and access for contractors in
                     insecure project areas, or in hard to access zones; possible exclusion of marginalized and vulnerable groups, including
                     youth and women from water services; in water stressed areas, lack of water and/or access to water resources can
                     cause tension among different water user groups. In addition, the contextual security risks include the presence of
                     refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) as well as the overall fluid security situation in the project areas.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      Environmental risks and adverse impacts are mainly associated with civil engineering works and include occupational
                      health and safety, pollution, traffic, ecosystem disruption, and community health, cultural heritage and safety during
                      the construction, operation and maintenance phases. Social risks include the potential impact on land tenure and use
                      rights and on the economic activities of the local population. The impacts of civil works will be identified and
                      addressed through ESIA/ESMP prepared by the client based on E&S screening. Contractors’ ESMP will be prepared
                      based on the identified risks and mitigation measures in site specific screening/ESMP. Public health risks during
                      maintenance and service operations will be addressed as part of design measures and capacity building. The Project
                      Operation Manual will capture details for the E&S assessment and monitoring, labor management procedures, waste
                      management, community health and safety, chance finds and biodiversity management.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      To ensure the engagement of stakeholders throughout the project cycle, the Borrower will prepare and disclose by
                      appraisal an inclusive Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) consistent with the requirements of ESS10 and proportional
                      to the nature and scale of the project and associated risks and impacts. The areas where the project will intervene,
                      host IDPs and refugees and the project will reach out to these potential stakeholders in collaboration with


                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security Project (P507957)



                      development and technical partners working in these areas. The SEP will identify vulnerable groups, outline the
                      characteristics and interests of those stakeholder groups and timing and methods of engagement throughout the
                      project lifecycle. The SEP will include a SEA/SH-sensitive grievance management system.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The Project will involve direct workers, contracted workers and primary supply workers. Following a careful
                      assessment of the labor requirements and types of employees engaged in the project, the Borrower will set up
                      mitigation measures to be included in the POM to address key issues, such as working conditions and the
                      management of worker relationships, protecting the workforce, non-discrimination, minimum age of work, measures
                      to prevent forced labor, occupational health and safety requirements, as well as relevant guidance for the
                      employment of youth and women. The labor management measures will include a labor-specific workers’ grievance
                      mechanism that is SEA/SH sensitive, based on national laws and regulations and the provisions of ESS2 and
                      management of labor issues.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      The construction, operation and maintenance of water distribution infrastructures are likely to generate dust and
                      noise emissions, hazardous (including asbestos) and non-hazardous waste, wastewater and sludge, and vibrations
                      that may cause significant harm to local populations. The risks and adverse impacts of sanitation infrastructure may
                      include soil and water pollution. Measures to improve the efficiency of water use, reduce water losses by improving
                      the water network and management, and minimize GHG emissions by installing energy-efficient pumping equipment




Public Disclosure
                      will be taken into account in design of the project. The Project will not support agriculture activities other than
                      irrigation facilities, but may include storage and transportation activities that could involve the use of pesticides.
                      ESIA/ESMPs will provide further guidance and guidelines for the prevention of pollution and soil pollution, the
                      treatment and disposal of waste and pest management procedures.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      Project activities may generate significant health and safety concerns, particularly during the construction phase, as
                      some of the project intervention sites are located in densely populated and very active urban and rural areas. In
                      addition, labor influx and SEA/HS risks are relevant in construction of water infrastructures supply. construction Each
                      site-specific environmental and social management plan (ESMP) for all the planned works will require contractors to
                      secure the work site by installing fences and engaging security guards to safeguard property and protect local
                      communities from any risks associated with construction. A preliminary security assessment related to project
                      implementation zone will be prepared during the project preparation phase, and if needed, a security management
                      plan will be prepared at the beginning of the project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant because project activities may require land acquisition for water supply infrastructure. The
                      installation of infrastructure for water supply services may affect structures, assets and economic activities of the
                      local populations. Works in urban areas may lead to limited scale economic activity disruption on a temporary and
                      permanent basis. To minimize resettlement, project will prioritize sites that do not require physical resettlement.



                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Chad Water Security Project (P507957)



                      Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as needed during implementation and guidance regarding the
                      preparation and timing of the RAPs will be included in the ESCP and POM.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant, due to activities around areas of critical habitat land areas, such as wetlands and protected areas.
                      Potential risks and adverse impacts on biodiversity and habitats will be captured in the POM to ensure that these are
                      avoided or minimized during any operations. An exclusion list will be developed in the operation manual to dismiss
                      activities that may have significant impacts on protected areas (wetlands in Mayo-Kebbi and OROA in the east) for the
                      first track of activities. However, when risks and impacts on critical habitats are assessed, the site-specific ESIA/ESMPs
                      may include biodiversity management plans as relevant.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This ESS is not relevant as there are no communities nor peoples who meet the WB criteria for Indigenous
                      Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities in Chad.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      Since the project will be financing significant civil works for the construction of water pipeline, water supply system,
                      earth movement and disturbance are to be expected. These types of activities and project areas (urban and rural)



Public Disclosure
                      pose the possibility of encountering cultural heritage. The risks, and likely adverse impacts on cultural heritage will be
                      addressed in the ESIAs which will identify known heritage in the areas of project intervention. The Borrower will
                      consult with local communities and other stakeholders as part of the ESIA process to identify any possible cultural
                      heritage that could be affected. The procedures for Chance Finds will be included in the POM, screening process and
                      bidding documents, to be further developed in the site-specific ESMPs. Though the possibility is not considered
                      significant, the Borrower will avoid any impact on known cultural heritage sites and, where such avoidance is not
                      possible, will identify and implement measures to address the impact.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant as this is not an FI operation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             TBD



                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Chad Water Security Project (P507957)



                       The Bank team is conducting an overview assessment of the Borrower's national E&S system. Whether some parts of
                       the system can be used as is will be confirmed during preparation as the assessment is finalized.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                        No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     - Project Operation Manual (POM)


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Taibou Adamou Maiga               Title:          Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  tmaiga@worldbank.org


Public Disclosure    IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                            Taibou Adamou Maiga

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                   Halime Mahamat Hissene

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                          Paivi Koskinen-Lewis




                    Jun 18, 2025                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
