Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDDC01160




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Sierra Leone, Sierra Leone     P507588                     Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access
                                                           Improvement Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            14-Apr-2025                 25-Sep-2025                   Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance         Ministry of Water
Financing (IPF)                                            Resources and Sanitation

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Increase access to water supply and sanitation services, improve operational performance of the water supply services
providers and enhance water resources management in Sierra Leone.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          60.00

  Total Financing                                                                                               60.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                  60.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  60.00
      IDA Grant                                                                                                 60.00



                                                                                                                  Page 1
      The World Bank
      Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                   Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                    The review did authorize the preparation to continue



B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

1. Sierra Leone is susceptible to economic and climate shocks, which has hampered macro-stability and the ability to
   sustain growth. Over the past decade, the country has experienced periods of growth interrupted by shocks—the twin
   shocks of Ebola and commodity price collapse during 2014-15, natural disasters (flooding and mudslides), the COVID-
   19 pandemic, and geopolitical unrests. These shocks have often been compounded by policy missteps resulting in slow
   and volatile growth and macroeconomic imbalances. Sierra Leone’s GDP per capita, estimated at US$726, classifies
   it as a low-income country, and 23.2 percent of the population lives below the international poverty line (WB, Macro
   Poverty Outlook). While the country has set an ambitious target of achieving middle-income status by 2039, reaching
   this goal will require significant efforts to restore macroeconomic stability, enhance human capital, strengthen
   resilience to shocks emanating from natural disasters, improve climate resilience and address institutional and
   governance constraints to growth.
2. Economic pressures have mounted in recent years, making it necessary for the country to take hard measures
   to avoid another crisis. Monetary and fiscal policy slippages had aggravated the impact of exogenous shocks in recent
   years, jeopardizing macroeconomic stability. During 2023, inflation rose to 54.6 percent by October and averaged 47.3
   percent by end-year, the currency depreciated further by 18 percent following a 40 percent depreciation in 2022, the
   fiscal deficit, despite modest improvement, exceeded the target by 2.2 percentage points of GDP, and forex reserves
   declined below 3 months of imports. At 7.4 percent of GDP, Sierra Leone’s domestic revenue collection is one of the
   weakest in the world. The government has since begun to take corrective steps to tighten its fiscal and monetary policy
   stance. Tough measures were adopted in 2023 and 2024, including sharp increases in administered fuel and electricity
   prices (40 percent and 100 percent respectively), significant tightening of monetary policy (775 bps), and expenditure
   consolidation (0.9 percent of GDP). As a result, year-on-year inflation has subsided to 20.2 percent. Employment
   remains concentrated in rainfed, low-productivity, subsistence agriculture on increasingly small, fragmented, and
   degraded plots vulnerable to climate change.
3. Climate change impacts have already been felt in Sierra Leone. Over the past 25 years, Sierra Leone has
   experienced more than 300 disaster events. It is considered the 11th most climate vulnerable country in the world with
   increasing exposure to recurrent and more extreme flooding, landslide, drought, and wildfire events. ThinkHazard
   similarly ranks those climate risks as high, exacerbated by climate change due to increasing temperatures and changing
   rainfall patterns. The WB Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP) surmises that increases in climate change-
   exacerbated droughts and floods affect the country’s water resources and related infrastructure, which hinders growth.
4. Reliable access to Water Supply Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) is a fundamental driver of human
   development and can reduce vulnerability to climate-sensitive public health outcomes. The Human Development
   Index (HDI) score of 0.452 is well below the average for West Africa (0.505) and ranks 182nd of 189 countries (UNDP,
   2022). Water quality, sanitation and hygiene improvements are demonstrated to reduce water borne diseases (such as

                                                                                                                      Page 2
      The World Bank
      Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)


   diarrhea, cholera, etc,) and prevent other illnesses, impacting short-term health outcomes and long-term growth and
   cognitive development potential. The current state of WASH access in Sierra Leone not only negatively affects living
   standards but also hinders future economic progress. To achieve the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6, which
   challenges countries to reach universal access to safely managed water and sanitation by 2030, Sierra Leone must move
   its WASH sector forward by expanding basic access to WASH and investing in higher-quality WASH services that
   have complementary benefits for improving human development and eradicating poverty. Supporting WASH
   interventions in Sierra Leone is thus critical to improve public and environmental health, welfare and development.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

5. Sierra Leone boasts impressive water resources yet faces significant economic water scarcity due to limited
   infrastructure. The country receives an average of 2,526 millimeters of rain annually, translating to a potential 80-
   100 cubic kilometers of water per year. This is the highest in West Africa. Sierra Leone has approximately 160 billion
   cubic meters of annual renewable water. Despite this abundance, the actual utilization highlights scarcity with a mere
   0.1 percent withdrawal rate. Sierra Leone faces systemic economic water scarcity primarily due to limited water storage
   capacity, poor water governance and limited investment in water resource management. The situation is compounded
   by population growth which has doubled between 2000 and 2022, while access to WASH only recorded marginal
   increases during the same period

6. Sierra Leone faces critical gaps in WASH service delivery, which contributes to hindering human development,
   exacerbates poverty and water-borne diseases. Nationally, in the past two decades, the proportion of people with
   access to safely managed water has only increased from 5 percent (2000) to 10 percent (2022). Access to basic water
   increased from 36 percent (2000) to 55 percent (2022). However, disparities exist between those with at least basic
   coverage (combining safely managed and basic access) in rural and urban areas, estimated at 54 percent and 80 percent,
   respectively. Sierra Leone's open defecation rate reduced from 25 percent in 2000 to 16 percent in 2022. However, the
   portion of the population using unimproved sanitation is still high (26 percent), while only 23 percent of the population
   have access to at least safely managed and basic sanitation, and 34 percent have limited sanitation. Thus, close to 50%
   of Sierra Leoneans do not have access to at least basic sanitation.
7. The Sierra Leone Water Supply and Sanitation Diagnostic – 2024: A Paradox of Scarcity in Abundance,
   highlights key binding constraints for the water sector. Sierra Leone faces significant challenges in providing
   universal access to safe and affordable water and sanitation services as well as in effectively protecting and managing
   its water resources for economic development. Despite significant progress in water sector planning, evident in, among
   others, the National Water Resources Management Agency (NWRMA) Act No. 5 of 2017 and the NWRMA- Strategic
   Development Plan, the sector remains underfunded, with a substantial gap between current investment levels and the
   resources needed to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The sanitation sector is lagging behind, with
   only a small percentage of the population having access to safely managed sanitation facilities.
8. Addressing these challenges requires a multifaceted approach. In addition to increasing funding for priority
   infrastructure investments, it is essential to strengthen the governance and institutional capacity of the WASH sector.
   This includes improving coordination among government agencies, enhancing the efficiency of service delivery
   institutions, and addressing underlying sector inefficiencies. The recent transfer of the sanitation mandate from the
   Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Water Resources confers in one ministry the responsibility of the broad water
   sector. The renewed focus on the Government of Sierra Leone in the water sector presents a unique opportunity to
   strengthen institutional and sector staff capacity to deliver and to promote integrated and sector-wide approaches.



                                                                                                                       Page 3
      The World Bank
      Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)


Relationship to CPF

9. Sierra Leone's national medium-term development plan (2019-2024) and the World Bank's Country Partnership
   Framework (CPF) for FY21-FY26 both prioritize WASH (GoSL, 2019; World Bank, 2020). While the national
   development plan prioritizes improvement in water infrastructure systems, the World Bank's CPF, under Focus Area
   2, Human Capital Acceleration for Inclusive Growth, emphasizes improving water infrastructure and waste
   management. This alignment highlights the shared focus on improving water infrastructure and sanitation which are
   crucial aspects of human capital development for inclusive growth. The recently completed Performance and Learning
   Review (PLR) of the CPF (May 2024) also emphasizes the importance of improving access to water services for Sierra
   Leonese and the interest of the government to revive the World Bank’s engagement in the water sector with a new
   operation.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 10. The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase access to water supply and sanitation services, improve
     operational performance of the water supply services providers and enhance water resources management in Sierra
     Leone.
 11. The Project will be financed through an Investment Project Financing of US$ 60 million to be implemented over 6
     years. Selection of this instrument was based on its flexibility and suitability to incorporate financing for a range of
     activities including investments, capacity building, and technical assistance to support system establishment for
     WRM and WASH services improvement.

 Key Results (From PCN)

12. PDO indicators:
      • Number of people with strengthened capacity under the Project
      • Percentage of Non-Revenue Water reduction
      • Nationwide Water Resources Master Plan adopted and under implementation
      • Number of people provided with water, sanitation and /or hygiene, of which (%) is safely managed (Scorecard)
      • Number of people provided with safely managed water (total/female) (Scorecard)
      • Number of people provided with access to limited sanitation in public facilities (total/female)

D. Concept Description

13. The proposed Project will support the country’s engagement to improve Water Resources Management (WRM) and
    access to WASH. It will contribute to address climate change exacerbated floods, droughts, and heatwaves through
    two main aspects: improving Water Security (Components 1 and 2) and improving access and efficiency of WASH
    services (Components 3 and 4). The Project will prioritize investments allowing the most direct impacts on Human
    Development and Human Capital improvement. It will prepare plans and programs to structure activities to strengthen
    institutions and water sector performance, while piloting undertaking water resources protection of selected threatened
    watersheds. It will also promote donor coordination and collaboration, with a special focus on access to water supply
    in rural areas and to make Sierra Leone Open Defecation Free (ODF).


14. The proposed Project is structured in six components:

                                                                                                                          Page 4
      The World Bank
      Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)


Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Human Capital Development (US$ 10 million).

15. This component will focus on strengthening the Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation (MWRS) to integrate the
    recently added sanitation mandate; develop enforcement and monitoring capacity; strengthen MWRS’ role of
    coordinating sector stakeholders and their interventions; and establish a Donor coordination group involving all sector
    stakeholders to ensure coordinated approaches and alignment with the Government’s priorities. It will also support
    comprehensive institutional and staff capacity building of sector agencies, and strengthen national water quality
    monitoring and surveillance.
Component 2: Water Resources Management Improvement (US$ 7 million).

16. This component will strengthen the development of key Water Resources Management (WRM) tools to increase
    knowledge, monitoring and reporting of water resources, both in quantity and quality, and to promote Integrated Water
    Resources Management (IWRM) in Sierra Leone. This will include, inter alia, developing a nationwide Water
    Resources Master Plan, building protective barriers and measures to avoid encroachment of protected areas of selected
    watersheds, and metering abstraction points used for commercial purposes to monitor consumption.

Component 3: Priority Investments in Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 23 million).

17. This component will strengthen the Guma Valley Water Company’s (GVWC) operational efficiency, reduce water
    losses, update customer database, install water meters, and extend access to safely managed water in selected
    underserved areas of the Freetown metropolitan area. It will also develop increase access to improved public toilet
    with handwashing in schools, hospitals/health centers, major market places and bus stations, build a second fecal sludge
    treatment plant in Freetown and prepare a plan to structure the sludge management value chain.

Component 4: Priority Water and Sanitation Investments in Secondary Cities and Rural Areas (US$ 17 million).

18. This component will improve access and operational efficiency of water service, promote improve sanitation and
    hygiene practices in selected secondary cities and underserved districts, This component will also support the MWRS
    in developing a national “Clean and Green Salone” behavior change campaign aiming at making Sierra Leone Open-
    Defecation Free and promoting handwashing with soap. It will seek to initiate a collective action possibly through
    partnerships to promote using toilets and handwashing with soap.

Component 5: Project Management (US$ 3 million).

19. This component will finance costs related to Project implementation, monitoring and reporting. It will also finance a
    Project management consultant and/or technical assistance support to the MWRS and implementing agencies.

Component 6: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$ 0 million).

20. This component is to facilitate fast crisis response for which the Government may want to reallocate funding rapidly.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No

                                                                                                                        Page 5
      The World Bank
      Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)



Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



21. The Project’s Environmental and Social (E&S) risks are rated Substantial. Potential risks emanate from Project
    activities in water infrastructure, pollution, and disease transmission from sewage handling, and weak institutional
    capacity to manage these risks. MWRS and partners will establish E&S risk management per the ESF. The Project
    aims to strengthen institutions, develop human capital, improve urban water and sanitation, and eradicate open
    defecation. It faces risks related to sewage handling, civil works, biodiversity impact, and potential conflicts over
    barriers in water catchment areas. Construction may cause temporary noise, air, and water pollution, and health and
    safety risks.

22. Institutions involved have some E&S risk management experience from previous projects but require ESF training.
    EPASL has a rigorous risk assessment process. The Project will prioritize stakeholders’ consultation and ensuring that
    a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is in place in all Project areas. Risks include social exclusion, involuntary
    resettlement, and ensuring clean water access in poor and remote areas. The construction of a FSTP in Freetown may
    require land acquisition and disadvantaged groups must be included in consultations. Civil works could induce labor
    influx and GBV risks. The Project may cause temporary and permanent land acquisition and displacement. MWRS’s
    E&S capacity will be strengthened through strategic capacity building and technical assistance support for design and
    feasibility studies and to ensure required coordination and consultation of affected communities with special attention
    to involve women and poor and/or vulnerable groups.

23. The risk of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) is substantial, with 62% of women in Sierra
    Leone having faced SEA/SH. The Project will support women’s health, hygiene, and sanitation, contributing to gender
    equality. An SEA/SH assessment and action plan will be prepared, including recruiting a service provider and
    GBV/SEA/SH staff. The Project will leverage existing SEA/SH risk action plans and ensure a responsive GRM, worker
    training, and an Accountability and Response Framework.

24. Stakeholder engagement will focus on inclusive participation and information disclosure using appropriate language
    and media. Key stakeholders include MWRS, NWRMA, the Guma Valley Water Company (GVWC) and the Sierra
    Leone Water Company (SALWACO), Freetown City Council, and city councils of selected secondary cities.
    Beneficiaries include communities with access to clean water, schools, health facilities, students, water service
    providers, maintenance workers, FSTP users, CSO/NGOs, and those adversely affected by the Project. An inclusive
    Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared and implemented, proportional to the Project's nature, scale,
    risks, and impacts. The SEP will be disclosed before Project appraisal, ensuring consultations are timely, relevant,
    understandable, and accessible. A documented record of stakeholder engagement will be maintained and publicly
    disclosed. A Project-wide GRM will address concerns, including a confidential channel for GBV issues. Local actors
    and liaison officers may be designated to coordinate the SEP implementation.



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

                                                                                                                       Page 6
     The World Bank
     Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)



World Bank
 Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene
 Lead Water Specialist

 Judith Ibiada Warmate
 Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance
 Sheku Bangura
 Minister
 safbangura@mof.gov.sl

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation
 Sao-Kpato Hannah Isatta Macarthy
 Minister
 hannahmacarthy@yahoo.fr
 Maada Kpenge
 Managing Director
 mkpenge@gumavalley.sl
 Mohamed Bah
 Programme Officer Monitoring and Evaluation
 smalljueah@gmail.com
 Musa Shiaka
 Performance Tracking Manager & NGO Desk Coordinator
 musashiaka@yahoo.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene, Judith Ibiada Warmate




                                                                                              Page 7
     The World Bank
     Sierra Leone water security and WASH access improvement project(P507588)


Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Anna Cestari                         22-Nov-2024

Country Director:                      Abdu Muwonge                         17-Dec-2024




                                                                                          Page 8
