Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 10/07/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05224




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 08, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507888                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         COSO West                    2026

                     Operation Name            Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Cote d'Ivoire             Cote d'Ivoire                              WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Social Sustainability and
                                                                                          AFRICA                       Inclusion

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                   Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Cote          Cotton and Cashew Council                  02-Mar-2026                  19-May-2026
                     d'Ivoire

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     02-Oct-2025               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve socioeconomic resilience of targeted communities in western Cote d’Ivoire.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Although Côte d’Ivoire has emerged as one of west Africa’s leading economies and an important pillar of regional
                     stability, endogenous and external fragility dynamics as well as historic vulnerabilities in its western regions are putting
                     renewed stress on the country. The western regions, particularly in the Montagnes district which are home to 40 % of
                     the nations poor, remain exposed to fragility, conflict and violence risks (irregular migration, climate change, and
                     resource conflicts) that require urgent attention. The project seeks to improve social and economic resilience of
                     communities in Cote d’Ivoire’s Montagnes District by targeting the following three pathways for improvement: (i)
                     economic resources, through local investments into resilient livelihood opportunities; (ii) institutions, through local
                     investments in public infrastructure for basic services; and (iii) social cohesion, through addressing underlying tensions

                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                                         Page 2 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     between conflicting groups and strengthening the capacity of local governments to coordinate and support local
                     development. The proposed Project is fully aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework for Côte
                     d’Ivoire 2023-2027. It is consistent with Côte d'Ivoire’s latest Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC, 2022) and
                     Biennial update reports (BUR, 2024) and the World Bank’s Country Climate and Development Report for Côte d'Ivoire
                     (CCDR, 2023). The new operation will contribute to Cote d’Ivoire’s climate commitment by financing community level
                     climate resilient investments and building the capacity of local stakeholders in adapting to and mitigating climate
                     change impact. In addition, the project responds to recommendations made in the 2025 Risk and Resilience
                     Assessment. The project intends to build on the approach of the Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion
                     project (P175043), contextualizing it to the specific risks and needs of Montagnes District in Western Cote d’Ivoire. It
                     proposes to improve the socio-economic resilience of communities in targeted areas by (i) financing local investments
                     and income generating activities, identified and implemented with communities through a Community and Local
                     Development (CLD) approach that prioritizes climate resilience and ensures the participation of women, youth, and
                     other marginalized groups; (ii) supporting socio-economic development at the communal/sub-prefectural level to
                     ensure investments made a the local level are linked to broader socio-economic development planning at the
                     communal level and; (iii) generating knowledge and assessing ways to institutionalize a more coordinated and
                     sustainable CLD approach in Côte d’Ivoire. The project is structured around the following components: (i) Resilient and
                     inclusive local development at the community level ; (ii) Socio-economic development at the communal/sub-prefectural
                     level; (iii) Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening and (iv) Project Management and Coordination.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings



Public Disclosure
                     The project will be implemented in western Côte d’Ivoire’s Montagnes district, in the Tonkpi, Guémon, and Cavally
                     regions. These areas, rich in natural reserves, agricultural, forestry, and mining resources, produced 1.8 million tons of
                     cocoa in 2023 but face socio-economic and environmental challenges. The district has diverse and rugged landscapes,
                     humid tropical climates, and major rivers crucial for local water supply: the Cavally and Sassandra river basins. The
                     region also has numerous underground water sources, although the aquifer levels are influenced by climatic hazards
                     and pollution. It is characterized by protected areas and inland wetlands with high-biodiversity settings and wildlife
                     sanctuaries, including Mount Samgbé, Tai and Mont Peko National Parks and the Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve
                     (UNESCO Protected forests) . Agriculture, livestock, trade, crafts, and fishing are key economic sectors, employing over
                     45% of the population, with crop diversity spanning staples, fruit, and cash crops. Population grew from 2.37 million in
                     2014 to over 3 million in 2021 due to migration from neighboring countries (Liberia, Burkina Faso, Mali, Guinea) and
                     from other regions of Cote d'Ivoire.
                     The rapid increase in the population has increased pressure on basic social services and natural resources, leading to
                     land and water conflicts and cultural friction. Vulnerable groups, such as elderly widows and disabled from early 2000
                     political crisis and violence, lack social support. The district is characterized by the great fragility with populations
                     exposed to flooding from the waterways, which affects crops and traffic routes and regularly exposes them to food
                     insecurity, as well as to extreme heat, wildfires and periods of drought during which water sources are significantly
                     reduced. However, the proximity to neighboring countries such as Liberia, offers several opportunities for trade.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Implementation arrangements will follow those of the current Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project
                     in Cote d’Ivoire (P175043) closing in 2027. The project will continue to be housed under the Cotton and Cashew Council
                     (CCA) as Project Implementation Unit (PIU). The existing PIU team includes an environmental specialist and a social

                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     specialist who will support the preparation of the current project. Both specialists are familiar with the World Bank's
                     Environmental and Social Framework requirements. Furthermore, the latest COSO North project (P175043) supervision
                     mission in November 2024, rated the E&S performance as Satisfactory. The exact implementation arrangements,
                     including any additional support needed by the PIU to cover the new project will be finalized during preparation.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The project activities are expected to have some positive environmental impacts owing to the fact that the project
                     will support sustainable natural resources management and adopt a climate-resilient design and invest in climate-
                     adaptive economic opportunities in targeted project areas. The potential environmental risks and adverse impacts are
                     expected to be Substantial, given the sensitivity of the project area environment (mentioned in section D); the nature
                     and medium-scale of activities which entail the construction/ rehabilitation, upgrading, and/or equipment of
                     socioeconomic infrastructure such as rural roads and markets, hand-dug wells works, boreholes, schools, and health
                     centers as well as the development of income generating activities (IGA). Those are mainly related to water, soil and
                     air pollution, waste and hazardous materials management, disruptions of natural and critical habitats with threats to
                     biodiversity, increase in the use of agrochemical, occupational and community health and safety (OHS). Those may
                     include: (i) alteration of air quality by dust rising during construction/ rehabilitation of rural roads and buildings; (ii)



Public Disclosure
                     degradation of the sound climate due to excavation work, noise and vibration from moving of work vehicles and
                     machinery; (iii) contamination of surface water by residues of hydrocarbons, lubricants, oils and suspended solids; (iv)
                     risk of accidents and incidents due to construction materials supply, the transport of equipment; and (v) odor
                     nuisance due to poor management of market-generated garbage. The project risks and impacts are site specific and
                     reversible with some potential transboundary adverse impacts.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is considered substantial at concept stage due to the sensitivity of the receiving socio-economic
                     environment, combined with the proposed basic social infrastructure to be implemented (public water facilities,
                     healthcare and education facilities, rural roads, markets etc.). Risks and impacts anticipated include: (i) limited and
                     temporary physical and economic displacement and land acquisition for infrastructure and activities to be developed;
                     (ii) the project will require several categories of workers, including community workers with potentially poor working
                     conditions, exposure to health and safety risks and possible child labor in agriculture; (iii) new opportunities may lead
                     to the resurgence of underlying community conflicts including disruption of habits and customs that prevail in the
                     regions; (iv) limited access of communities to an accessible grievance management system due to local traditional
                     conflict management procedures requiring a fee hardly paid by poor; (v) sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment
                     (SEA/SH) risks associated with workers influx that may remain limited and (vi) the diversion of the project's positive
                     spin-offs by an elite to the detriment of the rest of the community. The region has experienced a period of security
                     unrest in the 2000s but no violent event has been reported recently. No restriction of access to protected areas is
                     anticipated as the project will mainly provide support to communities with basic infrastructure and income




                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     generating activities and will restrict its interventions in areas already occupied according to the protected areas
                     zoning plans.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      Rural roads, market, water and sanitation facilities, and education and health infrastructure
                      rehabilitation/construction may generate environmental and social risks, such as increased traffic, pollution,
                      hazardous materials, waste management issues, temporary income disturbances and loss of assets, poor working
                      conditions, community conflicts, lack of free of charge grievance systems, and risks of SEA/SH. The precise locations
                      of investments are not yet known and those will be identified using a CLD approach. The Borrower will prepare an
                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for future Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                      (ESIAs) and Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESMF will include a Pest Management Plan and will provide principles
                      that will guide potential land acquisition and compensation. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                      will be prepared and agreed upon.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      At concept stage, the main stakeholders identified are: beneficiaries including communities and their organizations;



Public Disclosure
                      village development committees; national and local government representatives; customary and local authorities;
                      community facilitators, contractors and NGOs. The project will develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that will
                      encompass a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to receive and promptly ensure the resolution of complaints and
                      grievances, that will be developed to be free of charge, including allegations related to SEA/SH related complaints.
                      The SEP will include meaningful consultation activities for all stakeholders, with differentiated measures towards
                      women and vulnerable groups, as well as ethnic minorities and will develop engagement activities at all stages of the
                      project, embedded in the CDD approach. Prior to appraisal, the SEP will be consulted upon and will be publicly
                      disclosed both in country and on the Bank's website.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The project will involve small-scale construction activities with a significant contribution from communities. It will
                      require direct, contracted and community workers for the implementation of the planned activities. An E&S overview
                      assessment has been performed for Cote d’Ivoire in 2024 and has concluded the equivalence of most of the national
                      legal and regulatory requirements with the World Bank’s ESS2, the institutional settings and to some extent, the
                      implementation capacities. The project will use the country system where equivalent, especially on working
                      conditions, non-discrimination, prevention against child labor and protection of vulnerable workers. The
                      requirements relating to the remaining gaps are related to measures to manage community workers, implementation
                      of child labor requirement, and work related SEA/SH; they will be spelt out in the ESCP. The project will ensure a
                      workers GRM is implemented before works and adequate support is provided to workers inspectorate.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant


                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      Water : Measures will ensure rational water use and prevent contamination and will meet national or local sanitary
                      wastewater standards, or follow World Bank Group EHS guidelines if no local standards exist. Air : emissions from
                      works will be managed by adhering to emissions norms, conducting continuous sprinkling, and maintaining vehicles
                      and machinery to minimize dust and exhaust impacts on neighboring communities. Raw materials : Efficient
                      extraction and use of construction materials will be ensured, adhering to EHSGs and GIIPs, and included in ESIAs and
                      ESMPs. Noise: Mitigation measures will be implemented to reduce impacts from works, including not working at
                      night and minimizing the use of noise-intensive machinery. Waste : A hazardous waste and storage plan will be
                      developed, with measures to minimize waste production and encourage recycling. Pest : A Pest Management Plan
                      will be developed, as part of the ESMF, to manage the risks and impacts of increased agrochemical use.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Community health and safety issues are likely to be related to the rehabilitation/ construction of rural roads, water
                      supply, health, education, markets infrastructure . These works may generate nuisances due to increased air and
                      noise emissions and traffic and road safety risks. The civil works will involve a limited influx of workers with
                      correspondingly low risks of communicable diseases, conflict and SEA/SH. Agriculture and fishing activities may give
                      rise to waterborne, water-related, and vector-borne diseases. Prevention and mitigation measures of anticipated
                      risks and impacts will be considered in the ESMF and detailed in site specific ESIAs/ESMPs as well as contractor’s
                      ESMPs. The Bank will conduct a security due diligence prior to appraisal. Since the project is not supporting law
                      enforcement in any of the protected areas in the project area, safety associated risks are not expected for
                      surrounding communities.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      Rehabilitation and expansion of health center, water infrastructure or schools will take place on public owned land;
                      however, roads rehabilitation or income generating activities may require some land acquisition or economic
                      displacement, including disruption of agricultural and economic activities. As most of the sites’ location are not yet
                      defined, the requirements and principles that will guide screenings and Resettlement action plans (RAP) will be
                      integrated into the ESMF, based on the national RFP template for Cote d’Ivoire. RAPs will include livelihood
                      restoration measures as required. According to Annex II of the Interim guidance note on Managing the risk of projects
                      involving protected areas, the project at concept will not induce any restriction of access to protected areas. The
                      project will also favor the mitigation hierarchy and the screening procedure will exclude any intervention not
                      complying with each protected area zoning plan and regulatory requirements.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                 Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is relevant as the project areas include high-biodiversity settings mainly inland wetlands and forest
                      ecosystems (Mounts Samgbé National Park, Nimba Strict Nature Reserve, Tonkpi gazetted Forest, Peko National Park,
                      Taï National Park). The ESS application aims to protect biodiversity and habitats, considering the potential risks from
                      activities such as construction, agriculture, and fisheries. Loss of vegetation and habitat impact are expected to be
                      moderate to substantial due to construction and agricultural pressures. To ensure sustainable natural resource
                      management, ESMF will offer guidance on mitigation hierarchy and precautionary principles in the design and
                      activities implementation. An exclusion list for critical habitats will be included in the ESMF. During implementation,


                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                      robust screening will be conducted for any activity near or in natural habitats. ESIAs will provide mitigation measures
                      to manage risks in natural habitats and maintain their ecosystem services

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not considered relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                      Underserved Traditional Local Communities currently identified in the project area.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      The World Heritage Sites of the Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve and Taï National Park are in the project area, as
                      well as other significant sites listed on national heritage inventories. Project activities will avoid impacts to these
                      known heritage sites. Light earthworks, including excavations for construction/rehabilitation of community
                      infrastructure could lead to the discovery of unknown cultural heritage. The ESMF will confirm, through consultation
                      with the communities and the Cote d'Ivoire cultural heritage office, the existence of tangible or intangible cultural
                      heritage in project areas. If there is any cultural heritage that could be affected, the Borrower will design mitigation
                      measures, in consultation with the relevant national authorities and experts and local communities, to protect it. A
                      Chance Finds procedure will be included in the ESMF, and an associated clause in contractors' contracts if required.
                      This procedure will also be conducted by PIU with communities.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      Project activities will not involve financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           In Part
                       Based on the findings of the Cote-d'Ivoire 2024 country system assessment, the project will partially use the
                       Borrower’s environmental and social Framework.
                       ESS 2: The legal framework of Côte d'Ivoire is largely in line with the requirements of ESS2; however, there are gaps on
                       measures applicable to employees of primary suppliers, subcontractors, and community workers. In addition, the
                       national system does not include sufficient provisions to address the risks related to child labor or forced labor.
                       Therefore, the project will rely on provisions that are consistent with ESS2 and address the gaps in the ESCP.
                       ESS 8: The legal and institutional framework for the protection of cultural heritage is relatively satisfactory and will be
                       fully compliant with institutional support for involvement of the Ivorian Office of Cultural Heritage (OIPC) in
                       consultations aiming to identify projects impacts as well as in monitoring. This need for additional support will be
                       mentioned in the ESCP.



                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)




                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                         No
                       No other financial partner involved.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The Borrower will develop the following documents prior to Board approval:
                     •       Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     •       Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including a Pest Management Plan and
                     ressetlement principles and procedures
                     •       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan(ESCP) including the LMP requirements

                     Actions to be completed prior to Appraisal:

                     •     Advanced draft of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) including LMP requirements to cover
                     gaps
                     •     Advanced draft of the Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     •     Advanced draft of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including a Pest



Public Disclosure
                     Management Plan (PMP) and the RPF requirements


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Julia Lendorfer                     Title:        Senior Social Development Specialist

                      Email:                 jlendorfer@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Maya Boulos                         Job Title:    Social Development Specialist

                      Email:                 mboulos1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                               Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Community And Local Development In Western Côte D'ivoire (P507888)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Julia Lendorfer, Maya Boulos

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Edichi Brigitte Andoh Epse Mobongol

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                Gisele Belem




Public Disclosure




                    Oct 08, 2025                                                                                 Page 9 of 9
