Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDPA00186




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                   Operation Name
Indonesia, Lao People's
                                                                                             Philippines Sustainable
Democratic Republic,
                               EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          P507504                        Agricultural
Philippines, Philippines,
                                                                                             Transformation Program
Viet Nam, Viet Nam
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               24-Mar-2025                    24-Jun-2025                    Agriculture and Food
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Department of Finance          Department of Agriculture

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To improve productivity, diversification, climate resilience and public resource use efficiency in the agrifood systems in
the Philippines.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                       8,402.50

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          8,402.50
    Total Program Cost                                                                                          8,400.00
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                                2.50
  Total Financing                                                                                               8,402.50

  Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00

FINANCING


                                                                                                                      Page 1
        The World Bank
        Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)



    Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                 1,000.00
      World Bank Lending                                                                                             1,000.00
    Total Government Contribution                                                                                    7,402.50


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




 B. Introduction and Context


  Country Context

  1.    The Philippines has been among the most dynamic economies in the East Asia and Pacific (EAP) region. Between
  2010-2019, the economy grew by an average of 6.4 percent per year surpassing that of its peers in the region, including
  Vietnam (6.3 percent), Indonesia and Malaysia (5.4 percent), and Thailand (3.6 percent). Growth was driven by a robust
  domestic economy, anchored on strong private consumption, increasing investment activity, and led mainly by services
  and industry. However, in 2020, the Philippines’ economy saw its worst contraction, shrinking by 9.5 percent due to the
  adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The country has since rebounded strongly, growing by 5.7 percent in 2021,
  7.6 percent in 2022 and 5.5 percent in 2023. This momentum has been sustained, with the economy growing by 5.6
  percent in 2024, placing it among the top growth performers among peers in the region.

  2.     While poverty levels have been dropping they remain relatively high. Poverty levels fell from 23.3 percent in
  2015 to 16.6 percent in 2018. However, this trend was reversed by the effects of the pandemic, with poverty levels
  rising to 23.7 percent in 2021. The poverty rate has since declined, and by 2023 stood at 15.5 percent (Philippines
  Statistics Authority [PSA]). About 17.5 million Filipinos currently live below the poverty line. Despite the country’s overall
  robust growth trajectory, income disparities persist. The top one percent of earners have benefitted from growth,
  capturing 17 percent of the national income, while only 14 percent of national income is obtained by the lowest-earning
  50 percent of the population (ADB). The urban-rural divide in the country is significant. While the incidence of poverty
  in the urban areas stands at 10.2 percent, it is more than double in rural areas at 21.9 percent. Farmers remain the
  poorest segment of society with poverty rates estimated at 30 percent among this segment of population.1

  3.     Food and nutrition security are of significant concern, especially among poor and vulnerable households.
  According to the Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO), about 51 million Filipinos (44.7 percent of the population)
  experienced moderate or severe food insecurity between 2021-2023, the highest in Southeast Asia. Some 29 percent
  of children are affected by stunted growth. Persistent levels of poverty and high food prices have contributed to the

1 Philippines Institute of Development Studies



                                                                                                                           Page 2
        The World Bank
        Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


  existing threats to food and nutrition security (FNS).

  4.    The Government of the Philippines is committed to building on the current growth momentum and supporting
  a program of economic and social transformation to steer the country on an inclusive high-growth path. As elaborated
  in the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2023-2028, the goal is to address the need for job creation and to accelerate
  the pace of poverty reduction. The Plan aims, inter alia, to maintain robust macroeconomic fundamentals to foster
  consumer and investor confidence, fast-track investments in effective resilience-building strategies, promote
  technology and innovation, particularly digital technology, and enhance partnerships with the private sector. It
  emphasizes the transformation of production sectors, including agriculture, industry and services, to generate more
  quality jobs and competitive products.

  Sectoral and Institutional Context

  5.    The agricultural sector in the Philippines has high potential for contributing to the country’s socio-economic
  development agenda. The country’s fertile land, large workforce (of the 48.7 million employed Filipinos, some 22
  percent are in agriculture), including the relatively young population (64 percent aged between 15 and 64 years)2 and
  high adult literacy rate (97 percent in 2020) offer strong opportunities for transforming the sector. While rice cultivation
  dominates the sector there is good potential for growing high-value crops, such as bananas, pineapples, mangoes,
  coconuts, durian, cacao and coffee. Potential also exists for developing the livestock and aquaculture subsectors, and
  from the associated economic opportunity for value addition. Women are extensively involved in the value-added
  segment of all commodity value chains.

  6.    Philippines provides one of the highest levels of support for agriculture (as a share of Gross Domestic Product
  [GDP]). While the level of agricultural support provided by the government is high in international terms (2.3 percent of
  GDP in 2020-22), its growth impact is blunted by the production- and trade-distorting effects of the policy instruments
  used as well as the growing impact of climate hazards.3Ineffective and inefficient sector policies and spending decisions
  have hindered agricultural growth. Public spending is heavily skewed towards input subsidies; over the period 2015-19,
  subsidies consumed 32 percent of the Department of Agriculture (DA) ’s commodity “Banner” Program budgets, with
  another 28 percent going to subsidize machinery. Only 15 percent was allocated for technology transfer (extension)
  and 15 percent for other interventions, of which research and development was 8.6 percent and market development
  0.8 percent. The over-sized allocation of budget resources to subsidies severely limits public investments in growth and
  job creating agricultural programs. Scaling up support in these areas is key to harnessing the potential of Philippines’
  agriculture towards broad-based rural job creation and income growth.

  7.     Agricultural policy has focused mainly on pursuit of self-sufficiency in rice production and stable supplies of
  other key staples. Overall, agricultural production in the Philippines increased by only 0.5 percent per annum (p.a.) on
  average from 2011-20, well below the world average of nearly 2 percent p.a. A large part of this was due to low total
  factor productivity growth (+0.4 percent p.a.) against global average of 1.12 percent p.a. Support for the rice sector
  vividly illustrates the issue. Although around 25 percent of the DA annual budget for its Commodity “Banner” programs
  is allocated for rice production, rice yields have risen only marginally, from an average of 3.4 ton/hectare (ha) in 2003
  to 4.7 ton/ha in 20234. This is well below average yields in Vietnam (6.1 ton/ha)5 and well below the 8 to 10ton/ha

2 Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA 2022-322)
3 Market price support (mainly through tariff protection) and budgetary support (direct payments to producers for various inputs and investments)
4 Based on the 2025 National Expenditure Program (NEP), the rice budget (National Rice Program, RCEP and PhilRice) accounts for about 24% of the

DA Total Budget. But if the NIA budget is included, it goes up to 45% of total budget.
5 https://ipad.fas.usda.gov/countrysummary/Default.aspx?id=VM&crop=Rice



                                                                                                                                             Page 3
        The World Bank
        Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


  demonstrated to be achievable. Policy distortions and productivity constraints (small, fragmented land holdings; low
  levels of mechanization; limited access to modern technologies; ineffective extension system, among others) have also
  contributed to the low levels of productivity. Diversification of food production systems to higher-value products has
  also been slow. The share of high-value crops in terms of overall value added has risen only slightly, from 19.6 to 22.9
  percent in 2000 and 2019 respectively (World Bank 2020). Low returns from agriculture have also discouraged private
  sector investments, which are critical for growth and job creation in the sector.

  8.     Strategic shifts are, however, underway to reinvigorate the transformation of the of the agriculture sector.
  Through the Rice Liberalization Act (RA 11203), extended and amended in 2024, import quotas on rice were abolished,
  opening-up the importation of rice for private traders; an important step towards leveling the playing field for non-rice
  agriculture. The RTL provides transitional support for rice farmers through the Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund
  (RCEF). This is funded through tariffs collected from rice imports. While RCEF was initially established with a a PhP 10
  billion (US$ 172 million) annual appropriation to 2028, this has recently been amended to extend support to 2031, with
  an increased RCEF annual allocation of PhP 30 billion (US$ 515 million) annually. This is to be allocated annually for: (a)
  Rice Farm Machineries and Equipment (PhP 9 billion or US$ 155 million); (b) Rice Seed Development Propagation, and
  Promotion (PhP6 billion or US$ 103 million) and (c) PhP 15 billion (US$ 285 million) for projects promoting productivity,
  resiliency, price shocks etc.

  9.     The lack of well-developed and integrated food chains across the country is reflected in high levels of post-
  harvest losses that have significant implications for food and nutrition security. Agrifood losses average 30 to 60
  percent when accounting for all losses from harvesting, handling, storage and transportation – leading to significant
  income loss and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Post-harvest losses range from 9 to 37 percent for cereals, 27 to 42
  percent for fruits and vegetables and 15 percent for rice.6 Such post-harvest losses are more than twice those recorded
  in Vietnam for rice at 6.2 percent and for vegetables at 8.7 percent.7 Annual rice losses amount to some 343,000 metric
  tons (mt), which is equivalent to around 10 percent of the volume of imported rice (3. 8 million mt in 2023; 3.6 million
  mt in 2023). Some 151,000 mt of corn is lost each year. The country also has low milling efficiency of 50-57 percent
  compared to 62.5 percent in Vietnam. There is also a lack of cold storage facilities, which is critical for diversification
  into high value crops. Currently there is only 37 cubic meters (m3)/1000 residents of cold storage, or total capacity of
  400,000 tons, compared with cold storage capacity of 116 m3/1000 residents in Vietnam.

  10. A complex, fragmented institutional and regulatory system has further stymied sector development and
  disincentivized private sector investments in the country’s agrifood systems. The organizational structure of the DA (8
  bureaus, 10 attached agencies, 7 attached corporations, 15 regional field offices, many of which are commodity specific)
  has resulted in competing strategic objectives and limited budget allocations that are spread thinly across the various
  department entities. Inefficiency also stems from the lack of integration of data between DA agencies and bureaus. On
  the regulatory side, logistical costs for shipping companies, traders, and importers arise from informal fees collected by
  Local Government Units (LGUs), complex road and ship transport licensing requirements, and historical caps on foreign
  equity investment (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD] 2020). Coordination failures, such
  as the non-standardization of produce, also hinder investment in large-scale processing and pricing based on quality. As
  a result, farmers and traders have little incentive to improve product quality due to the small premium paid for higher-
  quality products, especially in traditional markets. Such coordination failures account for the high numbers of market
  players and multiple layers in trading, processing, and distribution which translates into lower profit margins.

6 Mopera, Lotis E. (2016) Journal of Developments in Sustainable Agriculture: Food Loss in the Food Value Chain: The Philippine Agriculture

Scenario. Last accessed September 23, 2024, Food loss and waste Study.pdf
7 Hien, et.al. (2016) Conference Paper: Overview of Rice Post Harvest Situation in Vietnam. Last accessed September 23, 2024, PHarvest_Vietnam-

FText-_PHHienNTNghi.pdf

                                                                                                                                              Page 4
        The World Bank
        Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)



  11. The Philippines is among the most vulnerable countries to climate-related weather events. Ranked 4th among
  the countries most affected by extreme weather events over the past 20 years, the country is exposed to cyclones,
  floods, landslides, severe droughts and heat waves. Up to 60 percent of the surface area and 74 percent of its inhabitants
  will be affected. According to the 6th IPCC assessment report, released in 2021, extreme weather events will continue
  to increase in frequency and intensity until the end of the century.8 For the agriculture sector these impacts frequently
  lead to crop damage, yield losses, and disruptions to food security, particularly affecting smallholder farmers and
  vulnerable communities across the country.9 This is causing economic losses, income instability, and food insecurity.

  12. Recognizing the growing agricultural emissions and land degradation challenges, the Philippines is tackling
  agriculture transformation through adoption of green technologies and sustainable farming practices.10 Two key
  frameworks—the Philippine Action Plan for Sustainable Consumption and Production11 and the Philippine Development
  Plan 2023-202812 – are guiding this sustainable transformation pathway. For the agriculture sector, this focus is on food
  waste management and sustainable food redistribution, climate-driven green public procurement, and promoting
  efficient input use. To reduce GHG emissions, above framework emphasis and focus includes reducing emissions
  intensity of rice production, enhancing efficiency of fertilizer use, reducing on-farm crop spoilage and post-harvest, and
  adoption of low-carbon technologies and practices.

  13. Gender inequality remains pervasive in rural areas. While rural employment accounts for about 30 percent of
  the country’s total employment, the work force is predominantly male, at 78 percent (PSA 2021). However, official data
  may not accurately capture women’s work in agriculture, as it is normally considered an extension of their household
  tasks and is, therefore, not reported as ‘work’. In the rice sector, women have been playing greater roles than men in
  capital sourcing (51.11 percent more) and seeds sourcing (12.59 percent more), while being more involved in post-
  production activities like palay drying (21.48 percent more), milling (27.4 percent more), and marketing (42.22 percent
  more). Gender inequality has contributed to women’s limited access to financial services, technology, and other
  productive resources. As illustrated by 2017 data of the DA, of those benefiting from technical services through regular
  DA programs, only 27 percent were women; a constraint limiting participation in agricultural value chains activities.

  14. Private sector financing remains limited in the agriculture sector. Private sector investments in the agriculture
  sector have contracted by an average of 6 percent annually between 2017-2022 (Philippine Development Report 2023).
  Constraints are multi-facetted and stem from: (a) the high costs of doing business due to taxes and tariffs on imported
  raw materials, cumbersome regulations, permit and documentary requirements imposed at national, provincial and
  even barangay (village) levels of government; (b) the country’s geography which comprises over 7,000 islands; creating
  significant logistical issues, (c) under-investment in critical infrastructure i.e., port facilities, logistics, integrated cool
  storage, etc.; (d) fragmentation of land as a result of the 1988 Philippine Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program,
  which imposed a ceiling of five hectares on land holdings and reallocated agricultural land to landless and smallholders
  with restrictions on transferability for ten years; (e) the impact of legacy policies that enabled farmers to forego loan
  repayments, resulting in the long-standing reluctance of banks to lend to the rural sector; and (f) difficulty in complying


8 https://www.afd.fr/en/actualites/climate-finance-helping-philippines-cope-climate-

change#:~:text=Ranked%204th%20among%20the%20countries,to%20fulfil%20its%20NDC%20objectives.
9 https://www.wfp.org/news/wfp-study-provides-first-ever-look-links-between-climate-change-and-food-security-philippines

 Philippines pledges commitment to sustainable agriculture at 17th Global Forum for Food and Agriculture
11 https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/phi228020.pdf
12 https://pdp.neda.gov.ph/philippine-development-plan-2023-2028/



                                                                                                                             Page 5
       The World Bank
       Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


 with international standards due to lack of accredited laboratories and process constraints which adversely affect the
 competitiveness of the agrifood products in the international market.

 15. In recognition of the challenges facing the agrifood sector, the PDP 2023-2028 emphasizes the critical need for
 transforming the sector. This includes: (i) ensuring food security and nutrition, (ii) accelerate climate action and
 strengthen disaster resilience, (iii) modernization of agriculture and agribusiness and enhancing resilience of value chains.
 These have been embodied in the National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization and Industrialization Plan (NAFMIP)
 2021-2030 which calls for transformative shifts to deliver productive climate resilient agrifood systems through: (i)
 diversifying incomes and employment of smallholder farmers and fisherfolk; (ii) defining the role of urban and peri-urban
 areas in agriculture growth; (iii) optimizing synergistic impacts using a spatial framework to geographically focussed
 investments; and (iv) matching the supply and demand for food.

 16. To operationalize the PDP and NAFMIP, the program PARA SA MASAGANANG BAGONG PILIPINAS 2024-2027
 (MBP)13 has been prepared by the current DA administration- with specific goals and targets for reinvigorating the
 agri-fishery sectors. The MBP is a 4-year, time-bound plan designed as a framework for operationalizing the broad goals
 of NAFMIP, while focusing particularly on the issues that have constrained the desired paradigm shift and actions by
 private and public stakeholders, as envisioned in NAFMIP. The program focuses on the specific actions to achieve the
 food and nutritional needs of the country, and to develop the sectors as profitable industries for farmers, fisherfolk and
 all stakeholders involved in the value chains. The program spans the duration of the current administration (2022-2028)
 and has been designed to address the policy, regulatory, service and investment gaps that have constrained the agrifood
 sectoral modernization efforts.

 PforR Program Scope

 17. The proposed PforR boundary would be nested within the DA’s MBP and NAFMIP. Proposed RAs would be
 limited to those where implementation is within the institutional mandate of the DA, with some exclusions, and would
 be national in scope. The geographical scope excludes the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
 (BARMM) which has a different budgetary and decision-making process. The MBP strategies encompass 10 Action Areas
 of which the proposed PSAT would support all, except action area 10 in Table 1 which aims to achieve “available and
 accessible financial mechanisms that encourage investment and minimize risks”. That would be supported through a
 separate World Bank operation, now under preparation. Likewise, the MBP plan to develop fish ports is also excluded
 as this is being supported by the ADB. Also excluded will be investments supported through ongoing World Bank loans
 and grants, including the PRDP, PRDP-Scale Up and Philippine Fisheries and Coastal Resiliency (FishCore). As the National
 Irrigation Administration (NIA) has recently been transferred to the Office of the President (Executive Order No. 69 series
 2024)23, functions of NIA are not included in the Program as the DA no longer has control over that agency’s investment
 decisions.

                   Table 1. The Government Program- MBP and the PSAT Program Boundary Comparison

 Objectives            Government programs                                        Program supported by PforR
                       The Program Boundary would be the current DA             To promote climate resilient agrifood systems
                       Administration’s Plan: MBP (i.e., For a prosperous New   for increased productivity, enhanced


13 Para sa Masaganang Bagong Pilipinas or “For a Prosperous new Philippines”



                                                                                                                           Page 6
     The World Bank
     Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


Objectives        Government programs                                               Program supported by PforR
                  Philippines), with the objectives of:                           diversification and efficient use of public
                  achieving food security for the Filipino people through         resources in the Philippines.
                  boosting agricultural production to ensure accessibility to
                  affordable and nutritious food, and
                  developing the Agri-Fishery sector as a profitable industry
                  for all stakeholders in the value chain.
                  The MBP is derived from the longer-term NAFMIP, which, as
                  a “whole-of-nation”, “directional plan”, seeks to guide a
                  paradigm shift from the commodity-based approach of the
                  past (primarily rice production), to that which would seek to
                  achieve sustainable diversification, integration of value chain
                  investments, more spatial and economic clustering to
                  achieve economies of scale, and greater focus on
                  digitalization, food and nutrition security.
                  The MBP is a time -bound (4-year), strategic plan. It has
                  been designed as a framework for operationalizing the
                  broad goals of NAFMIP, while focusing particularly on the
                  key issues that have constrained the desired paradigm shift
                  and actions by private and public stakeholders, as envisioned
                  in NAFMIP.
Duration          2024 to 2027 – MBP                                                2025 to 2030
                  2021 to 2030 – NAFMIP
Coverage          Nationwide except BARMM which has a different budget              Nationwide except BARMM which has a
                  source and decision-making process                                different budget source and decision-making
                                                                                    process
Financing         US$ 14.69 billion24                                               US$ 8.40 Billion (PSAT Expenditure
                                                                                    Program)25

                                                                                    Out of which USS 7.4 Billion is government
                                                                                    financing and USS 1 Billion IBRD Financing
Key MBP Actions/ 1.   Expand and improve available agri-fishery areas for           All MBP actions except item no. 10 (see
Result Areas          increased production                                          exclusions below). MBP Actions have been
                 2.   Mechanize and modernize agri-fishery production               grouped into three RAs for the PforR, i.e.,
                      systems                                                       RA 1. Enhanced Production and Incomes in
                 3.   Research for Development and Extension (R4D) to               diversified rice-based farming systems (MBP
                      optimize sector potential                                     actions 1, 2 & 3)
                 4.   Develop and improve postharvest systems and                   RA2. Enhanced efficiency and resilience of
                      infrastructure                                                food value chains (MBP actions 4, 5, 6 & 7)
                 5.   Develop efficient logistics systems for input and             RA3. Enhanced institutional delivery and
                      production output                                             performance. (MBP actions 8 & 9)
                 6.   Improve and expand local and international market             Excluded Actions would be those: (a)
                      access                                                        outside the institutional mandate of DA, (b)
                 7.   Strong partnership with farmers, fisherfolk, private          supported through ongoing World Bank
                      sector and other stakeholders                                 financed projects, and (c) under review for
                 8.   Proper balancing of both the developmental; and               World Bank support through other operations
                      regulatory roles of the DA                                    viz: (a) credit and insurance, (b) development
                 9.   Science and information driven decision making through        of fish ports and (c) NIA, given its recent


                                                                                                                                Page 7
     The World Bank
     Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


Objectives         Government programs                                          Program supported by PforR
                       digitalization                                           transfer to the Office of the President
                   10. Available and accessible financial mechanisms that
                       encourage investment and Minimize Risks



18. Three Result Areas (RAs) gather the results of the support to be provided by the PforR, for the nine identified
action areas of the MBP. These RAs are built on the following considerations: (i) potential to make a strong contribution
to achieving the government’s own targets; (ii) linked to specific, measurable results; and (iii) allow for quick results and
disbursements in early years of the PforR. Actions to be supported under each of the RAs are summarized below:

19. RA 1: Enhanced production and incomes in rice-based farming systems. RA1 consolidates the results of the
transformative support provided through the PforR in six inter-linked action areas relating to enhancing diverse and
climate resilient production. These are to: (i) improve effectiveness of the rice seed program (mainly by revamping seed
support programs to distribute only those approved and registered rice varieties that are suited to the local agro-climatic
conditions); (ii) increase diversification of rice-based farming (mainly through collaboration between the government’s
rice program and other commodity programs); (iii) incentivize and support the use of mechanical direct seeding to
reduce labor costs, efficient use of improved seed, and to reduce GHG emissions; (iv) promote more resource-efficient
production through better use of RCEF supported inputs and assistance by way of a digital Input Management Card
(IMC) that provides legitimate farmer beneficiaries with seamless and transparent access to financial and input support;
(v) enhance productivity and climate resilience through training and support for adoption of climate smart approaches
and technologies; and (vi) improve efficiency of farm operations through incentivizing farmers to cluster into Farmer
Cooperatives and Associations (FCAs) in order to avail of more efficient mechanized production technologies enabling
increased productivity, while also reducing GHG emissions. The RA is aligned with Pillar 1 of the Multi-Phase
Programmatic Approach for Sustainable Agriculture Transformation in East Asia. It is also indirectly aligned with Pillar 2
of the MPA by improving water management and efficiency through CSA technologies.

20. RA 2: Enhanced efficiency and resilience of food value chains. RA2 supports an increase in climate resilient, high
value crop production (primarily vegetables), while also supporting post-harvest and logistics infrastructure to reduce
food losses and increase the quality and quantity of marketable products for increased incomes and resilience for
producers, agro-processors, exporters etc. It would: (i) increase volumes of vegetables produced using modern
technologies that include demonstration of such technologies as tissue culture and use of climate resilient screen-
houses, rain shelters etc.; (ii) increase volumes of perishable commodities being processed through modern, cool
storage facilities, coupled with the promotion of green technology and modular cool-storage designs for wider private
sector uptake; and (iii) provide for regulatory streamlining of key Philippine agricultural commodities, together with
“bench-marking” of importing requirements to “ease costs of doing business” and promote export expansion. The
promotion of CSA together with modern cultivation and on-farm post handling technologies would be supported
through the significant increase in the number of extension agents and farmer training to be supported under RA1 and
through collaboration between the ATI and HVC program. The RA is aligned with the activities under Pillar 1 of the MPA.
It is also indirectly aligned with Pillar 2 of the MPA by promoting climate smart agriculture technologies to aim to
improve water utilization. It is also indirectly aligned with Pillar 2 of the MPA by improving water management and
efficiency through CSA technologies.

21. RA 3: Enhanced institutional delivery and performance. RA3 brings together the results of PforR program support
to overcome structural and institutional impediments, and to enhance systems and capacities to promote a more vibrant
and competitive agri-food economy. The key areas include: (i) enhancement of DA’s institutional policies and

                                                                                                                          Page 8
     The World Bank
     Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


approaches to align with and enable achievement of the MBP agri-fishery sectoral transformative outcomes, (ii)
enhanced DA budgetary processes to improve the efficiency of public expenditure through more programmatic and
results-based processes; (iii) establish and operationalize a data Command Center Platform for the integration, storage
and analysis of multiple data sets across DA agencies, Bureaus and Units to enhance timely, evidence-based decision
making including response to climate related disasters, and (iv) improve utilization efficiency of DA’s budget through
enhanced procurement systems that inter alia would reduce bid evaluation and award times and support the purchase
of goods and services that cause minimal adverse environmental impact, i.e., through “green procurement”. The
enhanced institutional delivery and performance also deliver RA1 and RA 2 and the activities under them. This RA is
aligned with Pillar 3 of the MPA.

22. The Technical Assessment covered the eligible MBP activities under the PforR. The proposed Program Actions
through the DLIs both reinforce as well as incentivize further expansion of the strategies and actions of the
Government’s MBP, as summarized in Table 2.

                                       Table 2. Key Outcomes of DLI supported Actions

              DLI                                                          Key Outcomes
 DLI 1: Rice production area     (a) Strengthen seed registration policies of the National Seed Industry Council (NSIC) and efficiency
 planted with improved and       of DA’s seed distribution under RCEF, (b) Improve farmer incomes and climate resilience, and (c)
 registered varieties adapted    contribute to reducing post-harvest losses of rice in milling processes.
 to local conditions (ha)
 DLI 2: Rice production area     (a) Provide farmers with higher value and more climate resilient sources of income, and (b)
 being diversified through       contribute to the country’s food security through increased production of high value commodities
 production of other             (lowland vegetables, livestock, aquaculture, native chicken etc.).
 commodities (ha)

 DLI 3: Rice production area     (a) Incentivize the uptake of a more efficient and climate smart mechanical seeding technology
 under direct mechanical         not actively promoted in the Philippines, (b) Reduce labor costs, lower committed seeding labor
 seeding (ha)                    time, and increase on-farm climate resilience, and (c) Increase incomes, including that of small-
                                 scale farmers for whom the technology is well suited.
 DLI 4: Farmers using IMCs (e-   (a) Increase transparency and efficiency in use of the substantial funding delivered through RCEF,
 voucher) to access RCEF         (b) Support the shift from legacy policies that have supported input subsidies to support more
 supported inputs and            sustainable productivity and climate resiliency outcomes, (c) Promote more integrated use of
 services (No.)                  complementary inputs (seeds, nutrients, pesticides etc.), further unlocking productivity gains
                                 through inputs/resource-use efficiency, (d) Promote private sector engagement in the provision
                                 of inputs and services, and (e) Provide a pathway for moving away from the inefficiency issues
                                 surrounding DA input procurement and distribution programs.
 DLI 5. Farmers adopting at      (a) Re-establish a core of some 4,000 extension agents in the DA to complement the limited
 least two categories of CSA     support being provided by LGUs, (b) Increase climate resilient production and incomes of farmers,
 technologies and practices      and (c) Provide feedback on the merits of re-establishing a national extension service to help
 (No.)                           resolve the impasse that has limited extension support in the Philippines for some 35 years.
 DLI 6: Farmer Cooperative       (a) Achieve transformative economies of scale in productivity and incomes, (b) Reduce GHG
 and Association production      emissions (though rice stubble incorporation and dry land cultivation), (b) Enhance crop
 area under mechanized           intensification (shortened production cycles), (c) Incentivize farmers to form FCAs to avail
 farming (ha)                    themselves of more efficient mechanized production, and (d) Expand rural commercial activities
                                 and job creation (machinery, servicing, logistics etc.).




                                                                                                                                 Page 9
          The World Bank
          Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


                   DLI                                                           Key Outcomes
      DLI 7: Volume of vegetables      (a) Increase volumes of vegetables produced using modern technologies that include
      produced (tons)                  demonstration for wider uptake of such technologies as propagation through tissue culture and
                                       use of climate resilient screen-houses, rain shelters etc.
      DLI 8: Volume of perishable      (a) Increase volumes of quality fresh vegetables reaching markets, (b) Improve incomes through
      agrifood products being          reduced post-harvest losses and spoilage, (c) Increase rural commercial development associated
      processed through new cold       with expansion of HVC production and exports (i.e., for storage, crating, marketing and logistics),
      storage facilities (cubic        and (e) Expand opportunities for private sector uptake and investment through
      meter)                           demonstration/promotion of innovative green technology for cool storage.
      DLI 9: Number of operational     (a) Ensuring quality standards for agricultural exports through establishment of food safety and
      and capacitated food safety      plant quarantine laboratories
      and plant quarantine
      laboratories providing
      certification for agricultural
      exports (no. of new and
      upgraded laboratories)

      DLI 10: Implementation of DA     (a) bring about the long sought-after budget strengthening in the DA to be programmatic and
      Programs               through   results-based rather than commodity based; and (b) improve efficiency of public expenditure
      expenditure efficient Muti-      which, inter alia would underpin actions under each of the PSAT Result Areas
      year, Results Base Budgeting
      DLI 11. Command Center for       (a) Improve planning and decision making, (b) Leverage analytics more effectively, (c) Provide the
      integrated and                   basis for further digitalization towards the goal of establishing a National Information Network
      comprehensive data               (NIN), or one-stop, publicly accessible platform for all agri-fishery sectoral linkages and data, and
      management developed and         (d) Align climate hazard and risk mapping into wider planning and decision making.
      operationalized (No. of data
      sets integrated into the
      platform)
      DLI 12: Procurement system       (a) More efficient utilization/disbursement of DAs budget (by expediting procurement processes),
      strengthened for improved        (b) Improve resource use efficiency (by enabling “qualitative economic value” not the
      budget utilization efficiency    “quantitative value”); and (c) Include approaches for expanding “green procurement”.

Program Expenditure Framework

     23. The Expenditure Framework Assessment shows that the overall Government's MBP program for CY 2025-2029
     is estimated at US$ 14.69 billion. Of this, it is expected that the proposed Program will spend about US$ 8.40 billion (of
     which IBRD is financing US$1.00 billion) on all related expenditures of the DA. Expenditure framework assessment
     indicates that the program has enough eligible expenditures. It will leverage earmarked capital outlays, personnel
     services and other operating expenses of the DA agencies, bureaus and government owned and controlled corporations.
     Table 3 presents the estimated government expenditures required to achieve the PforR DLIs per expenditure framework
     by RA. The expenditure framework provides an adequate and sustainable budgetary basis for the desired activities to
     achieve the PDO. However, the assessment also showed weaknesses in budget execution, with a 74 percent execution
     rate in CY 202414. Improvement in budget execution is proposed as one of the DLIs under RA3. Additional fiduciary
     mitigation measures are formulated as part of the Program Action Plan.


14
  DA has two categories for budget execution. Obligation rate which is equivalent to commitment rate stands at 84 % while
disbursement rate which is equivalent to execution rate is 74 %.

                                                                                                                                      Page 10
      The World Bank
      Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


            Table 3. Government program expenditure framework (CY2025–2029) by [approximated per RA]

                                               Projected expenditures
                                                                                        Share (%)
                                                 (in thousand US$)
               RA1                                                  5,851,088                         69.7
               RA2                                                  2,394,559                         28.5
               RA3                                                      154,285                        1.8
               Total                                                8,399,932                         100


Program Beneficiaries

 24. The direct project beneficiaries comprise FCAs and individual farmers along with other enterprises engaged
 through joint ventures in providing agri-food service facilities, from input supply, thorough post-harvest handling
 storage and logistics. This includes agri-food producers linked through market agreements with exporters and wide-
 ranging stakeholders involved with various aspects of agrifood value- addition and marketing. The project will directly
 benefit approximately 4 million farmers (mainly rice farmers) registered through the Registry System for Basic Sectors
 in Agriculture (RSBSA), of whom 50 percent will be women.

 C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)



 Program Development Objective(s)

 To promote climate resilient agrifood systems for increased productivity, enhanced diversification and efficient use of
 public resources in the Philippines.

 PDO Level Results Indicators:
  •       Increased rice yields (Percentage).
  •       Increased area of diversified, rice-based farms in MRIDP-supported Provinces (Hectare(Ha)).
  •       Farmers adopting at least 2 categories of CSA technologies and approaches according to commodity and
          spatial climatic conditions (disaggregated by gender) (Number).
  •       DA priority programs implemented through results-based multi-year budgeting (no. of programs)(DLI)


 D. Environmental and Social Effects

 25. The Program's Environmental and Social (E&S) risk is substantial. The implementation of the Program, which
 involves rice-based, livestock and inland aquaculture activities, will have significant and broadly positive E&S outcomes
 in all regions, except BARMM. High-risk activities are excluded: namely, fish port development and those involving
 significant conversion and degradation of critical habitats, legacy pollution, groundwater exploitation, large-scale land
 acquisition and/or conversion; and land pooling or consolidation entailing the redistribution of land rights. Program
 design is not expected to compromise the location’s natural landscape, biodiversity, habitats or ecosystem services.

                                                                                                                     Page 11
       The World Bank
       Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


  Potential E&S adverse effects during construction include dust, noise, agricultural pollution; workers’ and community
  health and safety risks; poor working conditions and exclusion of vulnerable workers (e.g., landless workers, rural
  women and youth, indigenous peoples) as well as incidence of child labor and forced labor. Land requirements are
  minimal, with field trials, new or improved farming practices, mechanization and facilities development occurring in
  existing farmlands or government properties. New facilities will likely involve small civil works or prefabricated
  machinery and equipment readily installed and requiring little space. Due diligence is necessary in case land acquisition
  and/or land donations cause significant risks in the loss of land, structures and livelihoods. During operation, risks include
  threats to biodiversity, contamination of aquatic systems, health hazards from pesticide use, occupational health and
  safety, community health and safety, solid waste and wastewater pollution, and greenhouse gas and air emissions. Social
  risks in the form of exclusion, child and forced labor and SEA/SH risks may worsen without culturally sensitive
  approaches and effective grievance mechanisms. Stakeholder engagement can leverage on consultative approaches
  used by DA and streamlining of grievance redress mechanisms (GRM) is proposed within DA and across RFOs, where no
  standard system is reported. Adverse E&S effects can be identified and readily avoided, minimized, and mitigated
  through meaningful consultations, enhanced designs and implementation of mature technologies, good management
  practices, and a programmed approach to building knowledge on E&S permitting systems and E&S capacity among RFOs
  and FCAs involved in Program implementation. Contextual and political/reputational risks are deemed moderate while
  institutional risks are substantial. Program activities may face extreme and unusual weather events (e.g., successive
  typhoons, drought) and political buy-in of E&S risk management systems and policies may take time. A major
  institutional risk stems from DA whose E&S risk management systems is handled by a small division, the Special Projects
  Coordination and Management Assistance Division (SPCMAD), with experience focused on donor-assisted projects. Its
  E&S management systems are not institutionalized in the RFOs or streamlined in “Banner” programs and activities. As
  of January 2025, the Bank has prepared the draft Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) report. The draft
  ESSA will be disclosed in February 2025 prior to a nationwide public consultation in March 2025.


E. Financing

   26. The PforR Program financing is estimated US$8.40 billion over FY2025/26 – FY2029/30 (linear interpolated
   disbursements of US$ 1.68 billion per year). This would be financed at 88.1 percent by the government and at 11.9
   percent by IBRD (Table 4). The DA budget allocation is heavily lodged under the Office of the Secretary (OSEC), which
   from CY 2022 to CY 2029 captures an average of 86.4 percent of the DA budget.15 The OSEC directly supervises the
   main components of the AFMA, while the DA agencies receive the remaining share in budget for supervising other
   commodity-based services, including research and development, and regulatory and policy formulation. The OSEC
   exercises both staff and line functions through the policy and regulatory bureaus while the regional offices deliver
   front-line services, including coordination with the LGUs. The DA’s attached agencies exercise regulatory functions
   over commodities such as machinery, fiber, coconut, meat, and carabao. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic
   Resources (BFAR) exercises both staff and line functions parallel with the functions of the OSEC.

                                          Table 4. Program Financing: FY2025/26-2028/29




 15 Calculated from MBP and PSAT Expenditure Framework, 2025



                                                                                                                          Page 12
     The World Bank
     Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


                             Source                            Amount (US$, Millions)   % of Total

    Counterpart Funding                                                      7,400.00                88.1%

      National Government                                                    7,400.00                88.1%

    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
                                                                             1,000.00                11.9%
    (IBRD)

                   Total Program Financing                                   8,400.00




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Mio Takada
 Senior Agriculture Economist

 Meeta Sehgal
 Senior Agriculture Specialist

 IJsbrand Harko de Jong
 Lead Water Resources Management Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Department of Finance
 Ralph Recto
 Secretary
 osec@dof.gov.ph

Implementing Agencies
 Department of Agriculture
 Francisco Tiu Laurel
 Secretary
 osec.official@da.gov.ph

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                        Page 13
     The World Bank
     Philippine Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P507504)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Mio Takada, Meeta Sehgal, IJsbrand Harko de Jong

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Paavo Eliste                          18-Feb-2025

Country Director:                       Zafer Mustafaoglu                     24-Apr-2025




                                                                                            Page 14
