Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01375




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                                                                                     Community and Local
                                                         WESTERN AND CENTRAL
                          Cote d'Ivoire                                               P507888                        Development in Western
                                                         AFRICA
                                                                                                                     Côte d'Ivoire
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         02-Mar-2026                  19-May-2026                    Social Protection & Jobs
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Republic of Cote d'Ivoire      Prime Minister's Office

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          To improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services and economic opportunities in Western Côte d’Ivoire.

                          Components
                          Component 1: Resilient and Inclusive Local Development at the Community Level
                          Component 2: Socio-economic Development at the Regional Level
                          Component 3: Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening
                          Component 4: Project Management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                            100.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                 100.00
                                          of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              100.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00



                                                                                                                                                Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                     The World Bank
                                     Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                              DETAILS
                                 World Bank Group Financing
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                          100.00
                                      IDA Credit                                                                                                                        100.00




                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                              Decision
                              The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




_For Official Use Only_
                              Other Decision (as needed)

                              B. Introduction and Context

                          1. Côte d'Ivoire is one of the fastest growing economies in Sub-Saharan Africa, yet most gains in poverty reduction are
                             concentrated in urban areas, with widening rural inequalities that carry significant fragility risks. From 2018 to 2021,
                             the incidence of national poverty dropped from 39 percent to 37 percent. Urban areas led this decline while rural
                             poverty, notably in the regions of the North and West, continues to lag at 54 percent with little improvement since
                             2018.1 Particularly the West remains critically underserved, now accounting for 40 percent of the national population
                             living in poverty, with persistent grievances that feed longstanding conflict dynamics extending across the borders
                             with Liberia and Guinea. The Montagnes District, comprising the three regions of Tonkpi, Guémon, and Cavally, is
                             among the most vulnerable with a poverty incidence of 48 percent - far exceeding the national average of 38 percent.
                             Due to its population size,2 it also hosts the largest number of poor (1.47 million people) (Figure 1.a).

                          2. These spatial patterns and the granular, sub-prefectural disparities that aggregate statistics obscure, are made
                             visible through the project's use of the innovative geospatial methodology, the Project Targeting Index (PTI). By
                             triangulating poverty incidence, access to services, and fragility risks at the sous-prefecture level and cross-validating
                             against national Multidimensional Poverty Index data from ANStat, the PTI provides an unprecedented picture of
                             where deprivation is most acute and where preventive investments can have the highest impact. It is this evidence
                             base that anchors the project's geographic targeting and informs the portfolio of sectoral interventions described
                             below.




                          1
                              The World Bank Group (2023). Côte d’Ivoire Country Partnership Framework (CPF), FY23–FY27.
                          2 Estimated at 3 million in 2021, making it the second most populous district in Côte d'Ivoire after the autonomous district of Abidjan.




                                                                                                                                                                             Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                          3. The Côte d'Ivoire Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA) identifies the West as a critical fragility hotspot, providing
                             the analytical foundation for the projects’ prevention approach as its central operational pillar. Persistent spatial
                             inequalities compounded by a history of political crisis, land tenure insecurity, and cross-border migration pressures
                             are among the primary drivers of Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) identified in the Côte d'Ivoire Risk and
                             Resilience Assessment (RRA).3 The RRA identifies three multi-dimensional drivers of fragility that find specific
                             expression in the Montagnes District: (i) spatial and economic inequalities compounded by centralized governance
                             that leaves local administrators without the resources to respond to local demands; (ii) land and natural resource
                             management challenges, including inadequate land governance, rising food insecurity, and the infiltration of cocoa
                             farms into protected forests; and (iii) external spillovers and migration, with a complex history of internal and cross-
                             border movement from Burkina Faso, Mali, and Liberia intensifying competition over natural resources and fueling
                             tensions with native populations. Côte d'Ivoire's government has taken proactive steps to address FCV risks, most
                             notably through two phases of the Programme Social du Gouvernement (PSGouv), which devoted US$6.7 billion to
                             reducing fragility, but primarily in the North. In support of Government efforts, the Community and Local Development
                             in Western Côte d'Ivoire project (COSO West) is a central pillar of this approach, directly addressing all prevention
                             priorities in the country's most vulnerable region.

                                              Figure 1 The regions of the Montagnes District holds the highest number of poor and the lowest access to water




_For Official Use Only_
                                    a.   Number of poor by region                                  b.   Share of population with improved access to water




                                    Source: World Bank calculations based on EHCVM 2021/22.

                          4. These fragility dynamics play out against a backdrop of acute poverty and multidimensional deprivation in the
                             Montagnes District, where limited economic opportunities, poor connectivity, and chronic gaps in basic service
                             delivery reinforce one another in a self-perpetuating cycle of exclusion. Despite holding most of the country’s
                             agricultural and natural wealth, the District faces deep-seated socio-economic and climate change challenges that
                             limit economic opportunities. Livelihoods are overwhelmingly agricultural, with declining crop prices in recent years
                             impacting 34 percent of households. Men are primarily engaged in cash-crop production (mostly cacao and coffee),
                             while women rely on low-yielding food crops (e.g., rice and maize) and petty trade. Small commerce supplements
                             income, but employment is largely informal. Youth, who make up 70 percent of the Montagnes population are
                             especially vulnerable in this labor market.




                          3 Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA), 2024




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 3



                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                      The World Bank
                                      Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                          5. In this context, insecure land tenure, identity fault lines, and climate change pressures converge to weaken socio-
                             economic resilience. A 2025 survey of 1,000 households in 50 villages across the three regions of the District
                             commissioned to inform project design confirms that land is the dominant source of division, reported by half of
                             respondents. Land tenure insecurity worsens disputes, leaving many groups - especially women - at heightened risk
                             of exclusion. Only 44 percent of households cultivating land report having legal documentation for their plots, and 17
                             percent fear losing land use rights within the next five years. That figure is even lower for women, with only 37 percent
                             of households reporting that women's names appear on land documents.4

                          6. Rural connectivity further constrains opportunity: the district’s mountainous terrain and highly degraded road
                             network increase transport costs, seasonal isolation, and reduce access to markets and services, aggregating
                             transaction costs.5 According to the Road Management Agency (Agence de Gestion des Routes, AGEROUTE), of the
                             6,000 kilometers (km) of road network in the district, 5,000 km require rehabilitation. Addressing these structural
                             bottlenecks through rural infrastructure, value chain development, and income-generating activities (IGA) for women
                             and youth is central to the project's design and directly responds to the RRA's finding that youth unemployment and
                             economic exclusion are primary triggers of instability.

                          7. The Montagnes District has some of the lowest access to basic services in the country, with significant gaps both
                             within the district and compared to national averages - a core dimension of regional disparities. The 2025 household




_For Official Use Only_
                             survey finds that the top service gaps identified by residents are health (23 percent), transport (22 percent), and
                             water/sanitation (21 percent).6 In rural areas, nearly 20 percent of residents must travel over 10 km for a medical
                             consultation, compared with 7 percent in urban areas. These long distances coupled with poor connectivity and
                             frequent financial barriers, worsen health service inequalities across the district.7 Electricity coverage is also low with
                             52 percent lacking access (64 percent in rural areas), much higher than the national average of 23 percent.8

                          8. Access to safe and reliable water remains one of the most persistent development challenges in the Montagnes
                             District, where scarcity and unequal access can weaken social cohesion. A mere 9.5 percent of households have
                             access to running water, versus 40.7 percent nationally and rural Montagnes fares worst at just 0.6 versus 24.7 percent
                             in urban areas. At village level, 20 percent of the District is estimated to have improved access to water (Figure 1.b).9
                             Where water points exist, persistent issues with village management, gaps in operator capacity, and inconsistent
                             tariffs, lead to prolonged outages and abandonment of systems. Aging infrastructure, seasonal aquifer depletion, and
                             water quality concerns further undermine service reliability, pushing households back to unsafe sources.10 The RRA
                             identifies these service delivery gaps as a direct threat to the social contract between citizens and the state, making
                             visible improvements in access to services a critical "dividend of stability" in the region. The Montagnes survey
                             confirms this assessment and reveals shared water points as potential for community tensions: placement and control
                             of pumps often mirror local hierarchies.

                          9. Traditional and formal conflict resolution mechanisms in Montagnes are layered, with families and customary
                             authorities addressing most disputes and formal channels being used sparingly. Village chiefs and traditional leaders
                             are central in conflict mediation: they are named as the first recourse by 30 percent and as a second recourse by 44


                          4
                              IPA (2025)
                          5 ANStat. (2021)
                          6 IPA (2025)
                          7 ANStat. (2021)
                          8 World Bank team calculations using microdata from the ANStat (2021) Enquête Harmonisée sur les Conditions de Vie des Ménages (EHCVM).
                          9 World Bank team calculation based on a random sample of the 2021 population census accessed for poverty mapping purposes.
                          10 Ministry of Hydraulics. (2025). General problems related to the supply of drinking water in rural areas in the Montagnes District and proposed solutions.




                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 4



                                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                               percent of respondents. While nearly three quarters of respondents say conflicts are always or often resolved
                               peacefully, a quarter report unresolved village conflicts and around one in ten report recent violence or serious
                               household-level disputes. Women report weaker inter-group trust and lower confidence in being granted leadership
                               roles than men, indicating gendered barriers to bridging social capital.

                          10. COSO West is also positioned within a broader portfolio of World Bank and government investments in the
                              Montagnes District and the wider West, which together constitute a coordinated response to the region's multi-
                              dimensional development challenges. The proposed operation will replicate the successful Community and Local
                              Development (CLD) approach from the Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project (COSO North -
                              P175043). COSO North operates in lagging, conflict‑affected areas along the border with Mali and Burkina Faso,
                              through village‑level planning with technical support at the regional level. COSO West adopts and improves this model
                              to enhance impact based on lessons learned. The project directly complements the Rural Land Tenure Management
                              Strengthening Program (PRESFOR, P179338) for land governance; the Productive Social Safety Net project (PSSN,
                              P175594) for social protection; the Forest Investment Programs (FIP and FIP2) for forestry and natural resource
                              management; and the Strengthening the Primary Education System Project (PRSEB, P177800) for education. At the
                              same time, it prepares the ground for a set of companion operations across key sectors such as the Water Security
                              and Sanitation Support Program (PASEA, P177118) and the Inclusive Connectivity and Rural Infrastructure Project
                              (PCR/ICRIP, P178362) for transport and rural roads, both currently operational in the North.




_For Official Use Only_
                          11. As mentioned above, the project is aligned with the government's Social Program (PSGOUV3) and National
                              Development Plan and can serve as a platform to leverage donor funding. This will ensure COSO West does not
                              operate in isolation but rather as a catalyst and connector, sequencing community-level investments to maximize
                              synergies, avoid duplication, and lay the institutional groundwork for larger sectoral operations. This approach
                              represents a coherent, multi-actor effort to shift the development trajectory of one of Côte d'Ivoire's most fragile and
                              underserved regions.

                           Climate change impacts
                          12. The Montagnes District is highly vulnerable to climate-induced disasters like floods, droughts and extreme heat.
                              Current projections suggest that the average annual temperature in Montagnes is expected to rise by 1.5 to 2.5 degrees
                              °C by 205011 with precipitation patterns becoming increasingly erratic.12 The region’s dependence on agriculture and
                              forestry coupled with population growth and irregular migration has intensified water scarcity and pressures on natural
                              resources, already impacted by climate change. Over 50 percent of the district’s land area is covered by natural forest,13
                              but the expansion of cocoa and coffee production has led to significant deforestation and degradation, in a vicious
                              cycle that also harms production. Climate change is already remapping the cocoa-growing zones: without adaptation
                              measures, half these zones will no longer be viable by 2050.14 This would affect a major source of income for small-
                              holder farmers and contribute to driving inter-communal conflict.
                          13. The project is consistent with Côte d'Ivoire’s latest Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC 3.0, 2025)15 and the
                              World Bank’s Country Climate and Development Report for Côte d'Ivoire (CCDR, 2023). 16 The NDC explicitly
                              recognizes that climate change exacerbates fragility in rural areas and calls for inclusive governance, participatory local

                          11 World Bank. Think Hazard: Montagnes, Cote d'Ivoire.
                          12 World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Cote d'Ivoire.
                          13 Global Forest Watch. Cote d'Ivoire, Montagnes. https://www.globalforestwatch.org/dashboards/country/CIV/8/
                          14 World Bank. 2023. Country Climate and Development Report: Cote d'Ivoire.
                          15 Côte d'Ivoire, Nationally Determined Contributions, 2025. https://unfccc.int/documents/497390
                          16 World Bank. 2023. Country Climate and Development Report: Cote d'Ivoire.




                                                                                                                                                     Page 5



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                              adaptation planning and conflict-sensitive approaches to land and water management. The CCDR highlights the climate
                              vulnerability of key sectors like cocoa and the potential increase in conflict and migration if land degradation worsens.
                              The project contributes to addressing these vulnerabilities by financing community level climate resilient investments
                              and building capacity of local stakeholders for climate adaptation.

                          Local governance and local development planning
                          14. Côte d’Ivoire has a broad policy and legal framework for local planning, but implementation remains incomplete. A
                              large body of laws and regulations adopted since the 1980s assigns broad responsibilities to local governments. Law
                              2003‑208 defines 16 competencies to be delegated to Local Governments (Collectivités Territoriales, CT) in health,
                              communal roads, water supply and sanitation, and land use. Law 2014‑451 on territorial administration specifies that
                              regions and CTs are the main agents of local governance, mandated to lead local development while ensuring
                              community participation. This mandate falls under the administrative purview of the Ministry of Interior’s (MoI)
                              General Directorate for Decentralization and Local Development (Direction Générale de la Decentralization et du
                              Développement Local, DGDDL) with a reporting line to the Directorate for Public Investment Programing (Direction de
                              la Programmation des Investissements Publics, DPIP) under the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Development
                              (MEPD). The architecture comprises both deconcentrated state administration (regions, departments/prefectures,
                              sous‑prefectures, villages), and decentralized, elected bodies (CT).17
                          15. In practice, the 2022 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) highlights three binding constraints to effective




_For Official Use Only_
                              devolution: (i) contradictory and overlapping mandates, (ii) insufficient, unpredictable intergovernmental transfers
                              and weak own‑source revenues, especially in lagging and rural areas, and (iii) shortages of qualified staff and limited
                              local capacity to recruit, retain, and train senior officials. These constraints leave the statutory missions underfunded
                              and unclear, hampering service delivery and territorial development. As a result, core planning functions remain
                              centralized at the regional level where local competences are with Regional Councils (RC) and sous‑prefectures.
                              National diagnostics emphasize that northern and western territories, and secondary cities like Man, lag in service
                              access and face greater fragility; requiring targeted institutional support. While the legal framework mandates
                              community engagement in local development, implementation is near non-existent, particularly in the west and north
                              where service gaps and poverty are higher.18
                          16. In rural areas, Village Development Committees (Comités de Développement Villageois, CDV) can be an important
                              entry point of community engagement. In past World Bank and government operations, these committees have been
                              established to act as liaisons with communes and Regional Councils (RC) on local development planning at the village
                              level. Their role has typically consisted of mobilizing the community, ensuring citizen engagement at village
                              assemblies; and of channeling village priorities into Local Development Plans (LDP) and Annual Investment Plans (AIP).
                              They have the possibility to be recognized as community institutions under the national associations law (Law 60-356)
                              and their elected committees typically include a president, secretary, treasurer, and auditors.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                           To improve access to inclusive and resilient basic services and economic opportunities in Western Côte d’Ivoire.


                          17 Souleymane (Editor) Coulibaly; Madio (Editor) Fall.2016. Diversified urbanization: The case of Côte d’Ivoire. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
                          18 World Bank. 2022. Côte d’Ivoire. Systematic Country Diagnostic Update: Countdown to 2030.




                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                           Inclusive basic services and economic opportunities refers to services and economic opportunities prioritized by
                           women, youth and vulnerable groups, empowered to actively participate in community decisions. Resilient services and
                           economic opportunities refers to services and economic opportunities which strengthen the ability of communities in
                           the District of Montagnes to withstand, cope with and recover from external risk factors such as climate change,
                           economic shocks, and conflict.19 Improved access to services refers to physical access to improved infrastructure.

                             Key Results

                          The following core PDO indicators will measure progress (disaggregated by age and gender):
                               Number of people benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - [Disaggregated by women and youth]
                               Number of beneficiaries with improved access to economic opportunities - [Disaggregated by women and youth]

                             D. Project Description

                          The project uses a community-driven, multi-sector approach to close critical service gaps and strengthen local resilience
                          in the Montagnes District. It combines bottom-up investments in climate-resilient basic infrastructure and targeted




_For Official Use Only_
                          livelihoods for women and youth with complementary, region-level upgrades and institutional capacity building.

                          Project Beneficiaries

                          17. The project is expected to cover around 620 localities including campements20 in the 35 poorest sous-prefectures
                              in the three regions of the Montagnes District with a total population of 2 million, as direct project beneficiaries.
                              The 35 Ss) were identified out of a total of 73 based on a ranking of the number of rural poor using ANStat’s
                              multidimensional poverty map. This targeting methodology maximizes impact by aligning resources to areas with the
                              greatest need, ensures coverage across all three regions, and includes more than 80 percent of the District’s rural
                              poor. The project will operate in all identified localities and campements within the 35 selected SPs, ensuring inclusive
                              coverage across both officially listed localities and additional settlements identified through local consultations and
                              satellite imagery. A few exclusions apply: (i) areas already covered by the FIP and FIP2; (ii) campements in Protected
                              Areas (PA); 21 and (iii) urban centers not adapted to a rural CLD approach.

                          Project Components

                               Component 1. Resilient and inclusive local development at the community level (US$ 51M)
                          18. Through the CLD approach, Component 1 will finance climate-resilient and inclusive community infrastructure and
                              IGA. Together, these investments will help communities close critical gaps in basic services, develop local economic
                              opportunities and strengthen their capacity to plan, implement and maintain priority investments over time.


                          19 In line with the definition of resilience provided in the Framework for Understanding and Measuring Resilience.
                          20 In this context, a campement is an informal or semi-formal settlement—often smaller than an officially listed locality—where communities reside outside or on the

                          periphery of recognized towns or villages. Campements may be attached to nearby localities or isolated, can host sizable populations, and sometimes have basic
                          community infrastructure (such as schools), but they are not always captured in official administrative lists.
                          21 Individuals living in these areas will not be excluded. They will participate in the local development planning of their closest targeted locality, but no infrastructure

                          will be rehabilitated or constructed within PAs nor will IGAs that rely on natural resources in PAs be financed.


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 7



                                                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                               Subcomponent 1.1. Enhanced access to basic services through resilient, inclusive infrastructure (US$ 40M)
                          19. This subcomponent finances climate-resilient, small-scale community infrastructure that addresses communities’
                              most pressing needs. The CLD approach described below improves the model adopted from COSO North to further
                              strengthen the role of communities in prioritizing, planning, implementing and monitoring local investments.
                                   a. Identification. Investments are identified through a participatory diagnostic in which communities - mobilized
                                      by the CDV and with technical support from community facilitators (Agents du Développement Communautaire,
                                      ADC) - identify service gaps, and priority needs of different community groups, including women, youth, and
                                      other marginalized groups where relevant.22 The CDV then leads a consensus-based consolidation process
                                      where the community votes on its top three priority investments from an open menu of eligible options with a
                                      negative list. At least one of the top three must represent the choice of the aforementioned groups.
                                   b. Selection. The top three priorities of each locality are submitted to the Regional Approval and Monitoring
                                      Commission for Subprojects (Comité Régional d'Approbation de Sous-Projets, CRAS), established by the project.
                                      Community investments are assessed based on prior review by the regional Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
                                      and on eligibility criteria for alignment with regional planning and technical compliance. The CRAS reviews each
                                      community's investment in order of priority and retains the first eligible investment that receives technical
                                      clearance from the competent sector ministry. To strengthen transparency, community engagement and




_For Official Use Only_
                                      inclusion, the project will ensure that CDV members are invited to observe CRAS sessions.
                                   c. Implementation. The CDV, with technical support from the PIU, CRAS and ADCs will participate in the selection
                                      of local firms for the construction or rehabilitation of community investments. Local labor and expertise will be
                                      prioritized with a focus on creating job opportunities. Investments include a range of activities from physical
                                      works, equipment, and mainstreaming climate-proofing standards.23
                                   d. Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). Throughout implementation and until the completion of
                                      investments, the CDV will be responsible for M&E of the construction and operationalization of infrastructures.
                                      A maintenance sub-committee under the CDV will be set-up and capacitated for each infrastructure.
                          20. Allocations, cycles and flow of funds. Each locality will receive one community investment over the life of the project.
                              The average estimated cost per investment is US$63,000, based on unit cost reviews from COSO North. This
                              corresponds to an average envelope of approximately US$1.14 million per SP, allocated across two cycles, with
                              adjustments by population size. Overall, the subcomponent is expected to finance around 620 investments. While
                              funds flow to the RC in line with the country’s decentralization framework, the national PIU remains responsible for
                              procurement, overseeing a participatory process which includes RC and CDVs.
                               Subcomponent 1.2. Increased livelihood opportunities for women and youth (US$ 11 million equivalent)
                          21. This subcomponent aims to advance the economic empowerment of women and youth through IGA at the
                              community level. During the identification phase, the participatory diagnostic will map existing and potential
                              economic groups. Wherever feasible, community savings groups (AVEC) previously established under the PSSN will
                              serve as strategic entry points, as many have been supported for multiple years and are positioned to graduate to

                          22 Local climate risks and vulnerabilities will also be a key aspect of the diagnostics process.
                          23 Investments may include physical works and equipment for schools, literacy centers, health posts, childcare and other facilities to support women’s economic

                          participation. These investments will be built with climate and disaster proofing design (such as reinforcing roofing for buildings and improving natural ventilation to
                          reduce heat exposure) to reduce the impact of climate change-induced flooding, heatwaves and waterborne diseases on the most vulnerable (children and women),
                          ensure service continuity during extreme climate events, thereby strengthening local adaptive capacity.


                                                                                                                                                                                              Page 8



                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                      The World Bank
                                      Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                                  productive activities. Where no economic groups exist, the project will facilitate the establishment of new ones. In the
                                  selection phase, interested community members will receive assistance to (i) organize into groups and (ii) develop
                                  business proposals that define the IGA's nature, scope, and objectives, including a budget specifying their investment
                                  contribution24 and projected returns. A transparent selection process led by a committee comprising the ADCs,
                                  Regional PIU, and technical partner agencies will evaluate proposals based on three criteria: (i) eligibility limited to
                                  women and youth groups; (ii) half of grants allocated to proposals that support relevant value chain development;25
                                  (iii) half of grants allocated to proposals reflecting groups' economic interests and needs, prioritizing inclusion criteria
                                  (diverse membership, vulnerability considerations); and (iv) a commitment to continue or start contributing to an
                                  AVEC savings scheme. Support packages will address diverse needs and may include agricultural and trade assets,
                                  materials, transportation costs, and training.26 IGA groups will receive technical assistance from implementing
                                  partners (government agencies and NGOs) to consolidate viable initiatives, improve market access, and strengthen
                                  group management.

                                  Component 2: Socio-economic development at the regional level (US$ 21 million equivalent)
                          22. This component will support the rehabilitation and development of resilient local economic infrastructure at the
                              regional level, addressing socio-economic needs that require inter-village solutions or top-down planning. It will
                              focus on strengthening Local Economic Development (LED) by improving market access and connectivity between




_For Official Use Only_
                              production areas and economic hubs, promoting job creation, while expanding the provision of safe drinking water in
                              target localities. Collectively, these investments are expected to unlock local economic potential by reducing
                              transaction costs, creating new opportunities, and improving the reliability of essential services. By linking production
                              zones to markets and service centers, the component will catalyze growth for agriculture and other sectors. The
                              resulting expansion in market activity is expected to translate into meaningful job creation—particularly for youth and
                              women.
                          23. Access to Clean Drinking Water. Each locality will be assessed for basic rural water access (water points and public
                              institutions). Findings will guide tailored intervention packages (averaging about US$25,000 per locality, adjusted to
                              needs and population) that prioritize rehabilitation and improvement of existing schemes: repairing pumps and
                              associated structures, replacing outdated components and capacitating pump repair technicians and Village Water
                              Point Management Committees (with 50 percent women members). Where consistent with eligibility and
                              environmental safeguards, systems may be upgraded or built using solar-powered options, and local merchants will
                              be incentivized to supply spare parts. Activities will align with the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MINHAS) and
                              PASEA standards. These investments will primarily rely on groundwater resources in the targeted regions, which are
                              not transboundary in nature. Investments that use or risk polluting international waterways will be excluded in line
                              with the criteria to be reflected in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).27
                          24. Investments in Local Value Chains. Informed by a value chains study, this component will fund value chain and
                              economic infrastructure projects in the Montagnes District, allocating about US$1 million per region to address
                              priority bottlenecks. Investments may include improving rural markets, storage and processing facilities, and key

                          24
                               Between 5-10 percent of the total budget.
                          25 Based on the results of a value chain study to be available before the project effectiveness.
                          26 As most livelihood opportunities are expected to be in agriculture sector, support packages will include training and capacity building on climate-smart agriculture,

                          provision of climate-resilient seeds, support to grow drought-resistant cash crops with extended value chains, integrated soil management, soil and water
                          conservation, and afforestation.
                          27 Water subprojects will be built with climate resilience features identified by the assessment to reduce flood risks and the impact of water scarcity exacerbated by

                          droughts. Areas with high rates of waterborne disease intensified by climate impacts will be targeted.


                                                                                                                                                                                              Page 9



                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                               access roads to support strategic and climate resilient value chains.28 In response to climate change-driven shocks and
                               disruption that intensify food insecurity, these upgrades aim to connect production areas with markets, lower post-
                               harvest losses and costs, boost private sector activity, and strengthen food security. Value chain upgrades are designed
                               with an explicit jobs lens, focusing on youth employment. Short-term employment will be generated through labor-
                               intensive rehabilitation of markets, storage, processing facilities, and small access roads. Moreover, improved
                               connectivity, storage capacity, and processing will reduce losses and increase output, enabling small-scale economic
                               groups to scale and formalize, and creating sustained employment. IGA under subcomponent 1.2 will be linked to
                               these supported value chains and will embed relevant skills-building and training, and labor‑market matching so
                               beneficiaries can expand production, connect to new markets, and sustain income gains over.
                          25. Connectivity. The component will finance preliminary analytical work on local roads and connectivity in all regions of
                              the Montagnes District, with an estimated budget of around US$300,000. The assessment will identify critical missing
                              links, prioritize rehabilitation segments, and define technical standards for all-season rural roads connecting
                              production zones with markets and service centers. Findings will guide small access road investments and inform
                              larger government and partner operations in line with the National and Rural Roads Management and Maintenance
                              strategies and in coordination with PCR and AGEROUTE to ensure technical alignment and avoid duplication.
                               Component 3: Knowledge Generation and Institutional Strengthening (US$ 18 million equivalent)




_For Official Use Only_
                          26. Component 3 will support the institutionalization of the CLD approach and strengthen cooperation between
                              communities and institutions. It will finance analytical work, policy dialogue, targeted social cohesion interventions
                              and capacity building for local actors and government institutions that oversee local development planning. The
                              component will generate evidence on what works, translate it into operational tools and policy recommendations and
                              reinforce local capacities to plan, implement and monitor inclusive investments. The component will also finance an
                              impact evaluation to assess the impact of equitable access to services on last mile service delivery.
                               Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Relations and Mutual Trust Between Communities (US$ 5 million equivalent)
                          27. Communities at increased risk of FCV will be identified in the participatory diagnostic described under Component
                              1. Community grievances, inequities in the use of shared resources or unfair treatment in existing dispute resolution
                              mechanisms at the locality level will be diagnosed to inform social cohesion interventions and identify community
                              investments that can mitigate drivers of conflict.29 Implementing partners will map existing conflict resolution
                              mechanisms, assess capacity gaps and strengthen them where required. Disputes related to land tenure will be
                              referred to PRESFOR.
                          28. In addition, this subcomponent will strengthen equitable, transparent access to shared public services in contexts
                              of intergroup tension. In order to improve equitable access to services, particularly water, which are frequently
                              conditioned by group dynamics, the project will pilot low-cost behavioral interventions co-created with communities
                              (public rules-of-use, equitable rotation schedules, and locally endorsed fair-use charters) alongside support for local
                              mediation.
                               Subcomponent 3.2: Analytical Work and Institutionalization of CLD in Côte d'Ivoire (US$ 1 million equivalent)



                          28 Examples include modernizing market and storage facilities with climate-proofed sheds and adopting energy efficiency technologies where feasible.
                          29 An example of participatory diagnostics is participatory climate risk assessment, which facilitates communities to identify interconnected local climate and conflict

                          risks and develop solutions in an inclusive manner.


                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 10



                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                          29. This subcomponent will finance analytical work, policy dialogue and initial institutionalization measures to support
                              a coordinated and sustainable CLD approach in Côte d’Ivoire. The analysis will review the policy, legal and
                              institutional frameworks, the distribution (or duplication) of roles across central and local institutions, the suitability
                              of existing regulations for CLD, and available human and financial resources. It will examine financial flows and
                              fiduciary systems and identify options for more predictable, decentralized flows within the current context.
                              Concretely, a review of local planning practices will be conducted to align the COSO West participatory approach with
                              national procedures. The analytical and operational work will be discussed through national and regional workshops
                              and will inform practical tools: updated CLD guidelines, standard operating procedures and model legal instruments.
                               Subcomponent 3.3: Capacity building for local stakeholders (US$ 12 million equivalent)
                          30. This sub-component will finance human resources and capacity building of local stakeholders to drive and
                              participate in all stages of the investment cycles. 130 ADCs will be deployed to support localities with local
                              development planning. Local stakeholders (Regional Councils (RC), Sous-Prefectures (SP), and CDV) will benefit from
                              training on inclusive and participatory local development, Environmental and Social norms, local climate adaptation
                              and mitigation, social inclusion, and citizen engagement.30 Trainings will be delivered by the PIU. This subcomponent
                              will also finance the running costs of the RC for project related activities, the CRAS and the CDVs.
                               Component 4: Project Management (US$10 million equivalent)




_For Official Use Only_
                          31. This component will support project management and coordination at the regional, national, and subnational levels
                              by covering the operating costs of planning, implementation, and technical oversight of project activities;
                              Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) management and monitoring; Financial Management (FM) and
                              procurement; preparation of Annual Work-Plans, and Budgets (AWPB), and progress reports, communication and
                              M&E arrangements, including the setup of an Information Management System (IMS) and a project beneficiary
                              feedback mechanism. Coordination activities will support the establishment and operation of the CRAS, the National
                              Steering Committee (NSC), and technical national and subnational committees.




                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                            Legal Operational Policies                                                                                       Triggered?
                            Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                                      No
                            Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                                No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




                          30 Climate change related content will account for around 20 percent of overall training and focus on improving communities’ understanding of climate change

                          impacts such as droughts, floods and extreme heat, and promote climate-adaptive behavioral change such as sustainable land management, climate-smart
                          agriculture, and the use of energy-efficient tools.


                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 11



                                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                          32. The overall environmental and social risk is Substantial, due to the sensitivity of the area and the nature of activities,
                              including construction/rehabilitation and upgrading of infrastructure such as roads, markets, water facilities, schools,
                              and health centers, as well as Income Generating Activities (IGA). The project will not fund small-scale irrigation
                              schemes using boreholes or inland wetlands for agricultural IGAs. The relevant standards are ESS1-ESS6, ESS8, and
                              ESS10. Construction/rehabilitation as well as upgrading may adversely impact the bio-physical environment through
                              dust, noise, wastewater, accidental spills, waste handling, habitat disturbance, and transboundary effects.
                              Occupational and community safety risks include traffic, unsafe worksites, and sanitation issues. Increased use of
                              pesticides raises contamination concerns, but these impacts are expected to be site-specific and reversible with
                              appropriate management measures and controls. Social risks stem from land requirements, potential economic
                              displacement, labor oversight challenges, exclusion of vulnerable groups, and local tensions. Residual security issues
                              require conflict-sensitive and adaptive management. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risk
                              is rated Moderate due to contextual vulnerabilities being limited by the project’s scope and built-in mitigation
                              measures.
                          33. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) outlining inclusive, gender and vulnerability-sensitive engagement,
                              disclosure, feedback loops, and GRM with an SEA/SH component, has been developed, consulted upon and
                              disclosed in country and on the Bank website on 17 February 2026. The client will develop an Environmental and
                              Social Management Framework (ESMF) to establish screening procedures, exclusion criteria for high-risk activities and




_For Official Use Only_
                              activities excluded from project design. The ESMF will include provisions, screening procedures, and templates for site
                              specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP). The ESMF will be approved and disclosed by 20, April 2026. Following the
                              results of the Cote d’Ivoire environmental and social overview assessment conducted in 2024, the Borrower
                              framework will apply for labor and working conditions, apart from the identified gaps that will be mandated through
                              the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). The ESCP has been prepared, setting deliverables, timelines,
                              staffing, training, and reporting requirements. It includes measures applicable to labor and working conditions for
                              community workers and subcontractors. Security risks monitoring will be managed through training and operational
                              protocols, to be detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). Site-specific Environmental and Social Impact
                              Assessments (ESIA) and RAPs will be prepared when sites are known, prior to works, and will include pollution
                              prevention, traffic and emergency plans, waste management, chance-finds procedures. A SEA/SH action plan that
                              includes accountability and response framework, GRM, and codes of conduct, will be prepared within three months
                              of effectiveness. It will be implemented and regularly monitored and reported to the Bank.


                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          34. Implementation arrangements build on the Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project (COSO North,
                              P175043), with strategic oversight provided by a National Steering Committee chaired by the Prime Minister’s
                              Office. Both projects will be led by the same Project Coordinator and will be managed by the same Project
                              Implementation Unit (PIU). Key and support staff will be newly recruited to strengthen the PIU’s capacity. The COSO
                              West PIU will report directly to the Prime Minister’s office. A regional antenna in Man (Tonkpi) with field offices in
                              Guémon and Cavally will be established with regional teams. Regional councils lead planning and validation and
                              manage funds, updating Local Development Plans and Annual Investment Plans and technically reviewing
                              community‑identified subprojects for feasibility and compliance, in coordination with the Ministry of Interior and the

                                                                                                                                                   Page 12



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)


                            Ministry of Economy and Plan. At village level, Village Development Committees, created or revitalized and registered
                            as associations, represent communities, identify and prioritize needs, and participate in procurement for small works
                            after completing a structured capacity‑building program. Citizen engagement is embedded through participatory
                            diagnostics and inclusive community meetings, with a project grievance redress mechanism; Environmental & Social
                            commitments are implemented by the PIU, under the responsibility of the Prime Minister’s Office.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank
                           Julia Lendorfer
                           Senior Social Development Specialist

                           Maya Boulos
                           Social Development Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient




_For Official Use Only_
                           Republic of Cote d'Ivoire

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Prime Minister's Office

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Julia Lendorfer, Maya Boulos

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                Nicolas Perrin                           17-Feb-2026

                          Country/Division Director:               Marie-Chantal Uwanyiligira               12-Mar-2026



                                                                                                                                            Page 13



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                          The World Bank
                          Community and Local Development in Western Côte d'Ivoire (P507888)




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                      Page 14



                                                                                               Official Use Only
