Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 06/29/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04040




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 30, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P507749                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         PREPARE-Samoa                2026

                     Operation Name            Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience - Samoa

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries              Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Samoa                     Samoa                                      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC        Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                       Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                   Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Independent State of      Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Natural   01-Jul-2025                  28-Aug-2025
                     Samoa                     Resources and Environment, Ministry
                                               of Works, Transport and Infrastructure

                     Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     35,280,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To strengthen disaster preparedness and increase resilience to climate and disaster risks, and in case of an eligible crisis
                     or emergency, respond promptly and effectively to it.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project is structured under five components. Component 1: Hazard Monitoring and Early Warning Systems, will
                     invest in global and country-level decision support systems, instrumentation, and capacity and institutional
                     strengthening for multi-hazard early warning systems, supporting both climate-related and geophysical hazards. Sub-
                     components include: i) Early warning delivery systems for monitoring natural and climate related hazards and
                     dissemination of timely, accurate, reliable and impact-based alerts; ii) monitoring and communication equipment such
                     as ICT hardware and software, meteorological, hydrological and volcanic monitoring equipment and technology; and iii)

                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     institutional strengthening and capacity building to ensure that the necessary skills, knowledge, and frameworks are in
                     place to monitor hazards and disseminate early warnings effectively, improving the technical and institutional
                     capabilities of the Government. Component 2 Emergency Preparedness and Response (EP&R), will enhance national and
                     community-level response capacities to better prepare for, and respond to, future disasters. Sub-components include: i)
                     Emergency management infrastructure, to enable whole of government response; ii) Emergency management capacity,
                     to improve Samoa’s EP&R systems to maintain readiness and operational efficiency during emergencies; and iii)
                     Dissemination, education, and outreach, to ensure that first responders and communities are well-informed and
                     equipped to respond to emergencies. Component 3 Resilient Infrastructure - will invest in national and local activities to
                     reduce the exposure and vulnerability of select urban areas to climate and natural-related hazards. Sub-components will
                     include: i) Planning and institutional strengthening, including technical assistance for development of a Sālelologa
                     township plan, SMP, and Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), updating and development of national
                     and subnational planning legislation and policies, and conducting technical studies, feasibility studies and vulnerability
                     assessments; ii) Resilient public facilities, to showcase current disaster and climate resilience, sustainability, and
                     accessibility standards including pilot waterfront upgrading in Sālelologa, combined with coastal protection and
                     community spaces, urban streetscape upgrading, access roads to basic services, stormwater drainage, and coastal
                     protection in urban areas of Samoa, retrofitting and construction of critical government buildings in Savai’i, and
                     multifunctional public spaces, including parks, green spaces, and floodplain management spaces. Component 4: Project
                     Management, will finance support project management and implementation including the recruitment of consultants to
                     support the implementation of all Project activities; technical assistance to support evaluation of the Project at the mid-
                     term point and completion, as well as auditing; and (iii) capacity building and training on project management and
                     implementation. Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC), will support emergency response




Public Disclosure
                     activities under a pre-allocated CERC for quick disbursements to meet the immediate liquidity needs of the Recipient
                     following an eligible disaster event to finance critical imports; or to finance emergency response, recovery and
                     reconstruction works and associated services.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Samoa is a small Polynesian country in the South Pacific with a population of around 218,764 as of 2021, mainly residing
                     on the islands of Upolu and Savai’i, with Apia as its capital. The population is mostly ethnic Samoan. Samoa is prone to
                     natural disasters such as floods, droughts, cyclones, earthquakes, and tsunamis, with significant events including the
                     2009 tsunami and Tropical Cyclone Evan in 2012. Climate change poses further risks with more frequent and severe
                     weather events, sea-level rise, and heat hazards, which threaten infrastructure, livelihoods, and key economic sectors
                     like agriculture, fisheries, and tourism, often employing vulnerable groups.

                     The project typologies include i) hazard monitoring, communication and early warning equipment; ii) emergency
                     management infrastructure (e.g. new metrological facility in Apia, satellite metrological office near Faleolo Airport,
                     Seismic Operations Centre and district-level firehouses) – all on brownfield sites; iii) acquisition of emergency
                     equipment, relief supplies and communication tools; iv) type 3 technical assistance for strengthening the capacity of
                     country-level DRM institutions and support community level DRM through community outreach programs; v) type 2
                     technical assistance for supporting the formulation of urban resilience policies, programs, plans, strategies or legal
                     frameworks including development of a town plan and sustainable management plan for Salelologa; and vi) and
                     investments in resilient public infrastructure such as pilot waterfront upgrading in Saleologa, settlement stormwater


                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     and coastal protection infrastructure and access roads, public/government buildings, and multifunctional public spaces
                     (i.e. parks, greenspaces and floodplain management spaces).

                     Sālelologa is located on the southeastern coast of Savai‘i. As the main urban area on Savai’i, Sālelologa has been subject
                     to land use change and coastal modification, including reclaimed land and built infrastructure. These developments
                     interact with the physical landscape, particularly in terms of drainage, runoff, and coastal processes. A nature reserve
                     rainforest ecosystem exists on the town boundary. Marine ecology is unknown, however high-level assessments
                     indicate a health ecosystem. A multi-hazard risk assessment conducted for Sālelologa in 2024 has highlighted the town’s
                     exposure to natural hazards such as flash floods, strong winds, coastal erosion, and landslides. This analysis will inform
                     town planning and siting and design of project infrastructure investments.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE) and the Ministry of
                     Works, and Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI). The Ministry of Finance (MOF) will act as the Executing Agency
                     Agency. MNRE will manage Components 1 and 2; MWTI will oversee Component 3 and Component 4 and MOF will
                     oversee component 5. MNRE, MWTI and MoF have prior experience around E&S risk management and the
                     Environmental and Social Framework. The day-to-day project management functions, including environmental and
                     social management, will be centralized under the Project Management Division (PMD) of MWTI. The PMD includes a
                     Senior Safeguards Officer. The Centralized Technical Services Support Unit (CTSSU) under MOF, includes an
                     Environmental and Social Specialist who will provide E&S support. E&S capacity strengthening will be supported by the
                     operation. A capacity building plan, aligned with capacity building initiatives on other World Bank financed projects in




Public Disclosure
                     Samoa, will be developed and implemented. This work will also augment other technical assistance being provided to
                     support the strengthening of Samoa’s E&S framework.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     Environmental risk is rated as ‘Substantial’ mainly due to the potential downstream environmental risks and
                     implications such as greenspaces, natural environment, nature conservation and biodiversity, flooding, water quality,
                     land use, and climate change associated with the Sālelologa town planning and pilot waterfront upgrading in
                     Sālelologa, combined with coastal protection and community spaces. Other project typologies described in Section C
                     likely cause moderate temporary and reversible impacts in scale and magnitude. Key environmental risks and impacts
                     of the emergency management infrastructure may be direct, indirect and cumulative and relate to dust, noise,
                     erosion and sedimentation, resource consumption, waste generation, worker safety, and hazardous waste disposal
                     (e.g., contaminated oil and e-waste). However, their potential environmental impacts are site-specific, predictable
                     and manageable through standardized environmental and social risk management or E&S instruments for relevant
                     activities under the World Bank and Samoa's E&S framework. The project is expected to result in long-term positive
                     environmental impacts in targeted areas through an enhanced capacity to respond to and mitigate the effects of
                     climate and natural disaster hazards.




                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risk has been assessed as ‘Substantial’ due to potential for land and livelihood impacts associated with
                     downstream risks and impacts of town planning in Sālelologa and investments in resilient public facilities and
                     proposed investments in emergency management infrastructure. Other social risks include community health and
                     safety risks associated with construction/labor influx (i.e. antisocial behavior, transmissible disease and sexual
                     exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment); and labor and working condition risks. There is also a risk of exclusion
                     of vulnerable groups and inequity in the supply and access to emergency management equipment, emergency relief
                     supplies, and delivery of community-based outreach programs. Social risks are expected to be predictable and readily
                     managed through standard social mitigation measures and rigorous E&S and stakeholder engagement process.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      The E&S risks are rated Substantial due to downstream E&S risks and impacts associated with the Sālelologa town
                      planning activities and pilot waterfront upgrading combining with coastal protection and community spaces. The
                      downstream E&S issues include wastewater and solid waste management challenges and impacts on the receiving
                      environment; stormwater management and flooding; greenspaces and nature conservation and associated ecological
                      impacts; decisions about land use zoning and associated impacts including legacy land issues; and cultural heritage.



Public Disclosure
                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for the project to provide a
                      preliminary assessment of E&S risks and describes the principles, approaches, implementation arrangements, and
                      environmental and social mitigation measures to be followed consistent with the Environmental and Social Standards
                      (ESSs) of the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework and national requirements. The ESMF includes a
                      process for screening, assessing, and managing these risks during project implementation, E&S exclusion list and E&S
                      screening and site selection tool. The ESMF also includes a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF),
                      Labor Management Procedures (LMP) Risks relating to the construction and operation of Infrastructure investments
                      and any associated facilities (i.e. quarries) will be managed through the procedures outlined in the ESMF. Samoa’s
                      environmental permitting process will be used for infrastructure activities which are screened as low or moderate
                      risks – including the preparation of Preliminary Environmental Assessment Reports (PEAR) and/or Comprehensive
                      Environmental Assessment Reports (CEAR). To ensure compliance with ESS1, the scope of these instruments will be
                      broadened to include risks related to project life cycle, associated facilities, primary suppliers, application of
                      mitigation hierarchy and proportionate responses, and strengthening institutional capacity for implementation and
                      monitoring of the foregoing, as well a greater focus on social risks and impacts. The project’s Environment and Social
                      Code of Practice (ESCOP) will be applied for low risk projects that do not require assessment under Samoan law.
                      Infrastructure activities which are screened as substantial risk are required to conduct an Environmental and Social
                      Impact Assessment (ESIA) and/or Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) as per ESS1. Technical
                      Assistance activities will manage risks as per ESS1 paragraphs 14-18 and will incorporate the following principles for
                      defining E&S requirements including integtating E&S objectives into the terms of reference and output of the TA
                      process, promoting transparency through stakeholder participation and public information disclosure, promoting
                      systematic and comprehensive analysis of alternatives for infrastructure and promoting E&S capacity building and


                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                      institutional strengthening. The ESMF provides a scoping level assessment of the environmental, social, and land risks
                      associated with the proposed Sālelologa Township Plan and Sustainable Management Plan activities; and outlines the
                      scope of work for an Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to inform these activities. A draft TOR for
                      all these activities has be prepared based on this work and an extract of the SEAS scope of work is includes in the
                      ESMF. The ESMF outlines the risk of cumulative impacts such as water pollution, habitat fragmentation, and
                      increased pressure on utilities associated with project investments. The cumulative impacts of multiple future
                      developments across the township and surrounding area may result in environmental degradation. The ESMF
                      requires that these cumulative impacts are assessed through the SESA to inform the Sālelologa Township Plan and
                      Sustainable Management Plan activities; and through environmental and social assessments for infrastructure
                      activities in Sālelologa. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) ESMF will be used to address
                      environmental and social E&S risks relating to Component 5 - Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared for the Project. The SEP identifies and analyses key project
                      stakeholders; describes the process and modalities for sharing information on the project activities and seeking and
                      incorporating stakeholder feedback into project design and implementation; outlines strategies for culturally
                      appropriate consultation and information dissemination; and outlines approaches for reporting and disclosure of
                      project documents. The SEP also outlines the Project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) which will enable
                      stakeholders to raise project related concerns, grievances and SEA/SH complaints.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      The project workforce is expected to include i) direct workers consultants employed directly by the implementing
                      agencies; ii) contracted workers employed or engaged through third parties such as contractors and consulting firms;
                      and iii) community workers engaged for community-level DRM activities; and primary supply workers. All project
                      workers will be required to be 18 years of age and over. Labor management procedures have been prepared in
                      accordance with ESS2 and GoS legislation. The LMP identifies key risks for the project workforce and outlines policies
                      and procedures for managing these risks – including specific procedures for managing contractors, primary suppliers
                      and community workers. The LMP also includes a worker grievance redress mechanism which will be implemented
                      during project implementation.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The project will procure and install equipment (e.g., early warning systems) that may generate a small volume of end-
                      of-life waste. The project will incorporate measures for the management of waste (i) as part of ESAs for relevant
                      activities to be prepared in accordance with the ESMF or (ii) as part of bid documents or in procurement process for
                      any equipment procurement activity, as outlined in the ESCP. Where waste generation is unavoidable, ESS3 requires
                      minimizing waste production and promoting the reuse, recycling, and recovery of materials in a manner that is safe
                      for human health and the environment. The ESCP also mandates a hierarchy of mitigation measures in the
                      procurement process and ESAs to promote resource efficiency and pollution prevention, including efforts to conserve
                      water, energy, and raw materials in line with ESS3. Construction materials for the project activities including
                      emergency management infrastructure will be sourced from a sustainable source that already has the necessary




                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                      licenses or permitted facilities. Greenhouse gas emissions are irrelevant due to the small-scale footprint of
                      emergency management equipment and infrastructure construction.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      The project is expected to lead to long-term improvements in community health and safety through improved
                      capacity to mitigate the impacts of natural hazards. The early warning systems equipment and emergency
                      management infrastructure will be designed to relevant national-level climate-resilient design standards. The project
                      will apply the concept of universal access to the design and construction of new buildings and structures. Community
                      health and safety risks associated with the infrastructure investments include community exposure to i) physical
                      hazards on sites; ii) water/vector-borne diseases from poor site management; iii) communicable diseases (e.g.,
                      COVID-19 and HIV/AIDS), anti-social behavior and SEA/SH risks from project workforce; vi) noise, dust and vibration
                      impacts; and vii) health impacts from poor management of hazardous materials (e.g., asbestos). The ESCP requires
                      these risks to be managed, including through sub-project E&S assessments and management plans and the
                      implementation of the project’s SEA/SH action plan.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      Land is an essential input for the upgrade or construction of emergency preparedness and response infrastructure
                      investments and investments in resilient public facilities. Land access for investments in existing or new infrastructure
                      will be confirmed through due diligence, and agreements with landowners (state, freehold or customary) in
                      accordance with Samoan law and ESS5. Where possible state land will be utilized. Land access will be negotiated via




Public Disclosure
                      lease arrangement. Where arrangements cannot be agreed upon, alternative land will be found for project
                      infrastructure. A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) has been prepared for the project in
                      accordance with ESS5 and Samoa’s existing framework. The LARF outlines the principles, objectives, and procedures
                      to manage land access and associated impacts during Project implementation. The Sālelologa town planning activity
                      is also expected to include decisions on land use which may result in downstream impacts. The ESMF includes a
                      preliminary assessment of land and resettlement risks associated with the Sālelologa town planning activities. The
                      SESA will further assessed land and resettlement implications and outline measures for managing these in accordance
                      with ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project is anticipated to require negligible vegetation clearance of biodiversity conservation importance but does
                      have the potential to impact marine ecosystems in the Sālelologa nearshore environment and the biodiversity
                      ecosystems in the proposed nature reserve adjacent to the Township. The project’s exclusion list screens sensitive
                      areas and activities that may cause long term, permanent and/or irreversible (e.g. conversion, degradation or loss of
                      major natural forest or marine ecosystems) adverse impacts. The SESA TOR are integrated with the town planning
                      process and SMP to ensure integration of SESA recommendations. The early infrastructure investments will be guided
                      by sub-project E&S assessment which is integrated into the design process. In short, the SESA and ESAs for relevant
                      project activities in the Sālelologa will include assessment of biodiversity risks and impacts consistent with ESS6. The
                      ESMF requires a choice of appropriate technical design and site selection of the project activities as part of the sitting
                      criteria to avoid investments in sensitive biodiversity or environmental areas.


                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional             Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is not relevant for Samoa. There are no known distinct IP groups that meet the criteria in ESS7 as the vast
                      majority of people are ethnic Samoan (92.6%) with a minority of Europeans and biracial European/Polynesian people.
                      Cultural needs will be managed through culturally appropriate stakeholder engagement informing project design and
                      implementation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                     Relevant

                      ESS 8 is relevant due to the unknown location of activities. Impacts on cultural heritage have been assessed through
                      the ESMF. Cultural heritage aspects have been integrated into the project’s exclusion list and E&S screening process
                      and tools. The ESCP requires contractors to implement Chance Find Procedures or measures to avoid impacts on
                      cultural heritage, including consultation of key sites to avoid inclusion of cultural heritage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS7 is not relevant as the prject actvities do not invovle any finanical intermdeaires.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No



Public Disclosure
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                      In Part
                       Samoa’s environmental and social framework will be partially used. The ESMF includes a gap analysis of the Samoa’s
                       environmental and social framework relevant to project activities and risks against the World Bank ESF. The ESMF and
                       associated instruments have been developed in compliance with the World Bank ESSs and GoS legal requirements.
                       Where relevant, GoS systems and processes have been integrated into the ESMF (including LARF, LMP) and SEP. The
                       Samoan environmental permitting system will be used for activities that involve the design and or construction of
                       infrastructure where risks have been screened as low or moderate - augmented with gap filling measures such as
                       screening, broadening of scope of assessment, and the utilization of the project e to ensure compliance with ESS1.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       NA

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?



                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                   Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                     The following environmental and social instruments have been prepared prior to appraisal and require implementation
                     during project implementation:
                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework including gap analysis of Samoa's ESF against the World Bank’s ESF
                     relevant to project activities and risks; preliminary E&S assessment of proposed project typologies/activities; exclusion
                     list; E&S screening, assessment and management procedures; site and E&S screening tool; labor management
                     procedures; Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework; Chance Find Procedure; and CERC ESMF.
                     - The ESMF provides a preliminary assessment of the environmental, social, and land risks associated with the proposed
                     Sālelologa Township Plan and Sustainable Management Plan activities and outlines the scope of work for an Strategic
                     Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to inform these activities.
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                     -Environmental and Social Commitment Plan which covers actions and measures to be implemented during project
                     implementation, including:
                     - recruitment or appointment of a Social Safeguards Officer within MWTI’s PMD
                     - Development and implementation of an E&S Capacity Building and Training Plan
                     - Implementation of the project’s ESMF
                     - Preparation of sub-project E&S instruments to ensure compliance with ESF and GoS requirements
                     - Preparation of an Environmental and Social Assessment Report (SESA) for the Sālelologa Township Plan and
                     Sustainable Management Plan activities
                     -ToR and outputs of TA activities include assessment and management of E&S risks in accordance with WB ESF and GoS
                     requirements
                     - Implementing the Labor Management Procedure in accordance with Samoan law and ESS2 requirements




Public Disclosure
                     - Implementation of the project’s SEA/SH Action Plan including standard prevention and response measures.
                     - Implementation of measures to manage community health and safety risk in accordance with the ESMF and
                     consistent with ESS4 and GoS requirements.
                     - Implementing project’s Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework for all relevant activities.
                     - Implementation of measures to manage biodiversity risks and impacts in accordance with the ESMF and consistent
                     with ESS6 requirements
                     - implementation of the project’s chance find procedures.
                     - Implementation of the project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan including maintaining and operating the project’s
                     grievance mechanism which is equipped to handle SEA/SH complaints.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Yong Jian Vun                          Title:          Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                 jvun@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Vica Rosario Bogaerts                  Job Title:      Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                    Specialist



                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Pacific Region Preparedness, Adaptation And Resilience - Samoa (P507749)



                      Email:                  vbogaerts@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Jessica Rachel Schmidt               Job Title:      Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  jschmidt@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                      Yong Jian Vun, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Jessica Rachel Schmidt

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:             Bunlong Leng

                     ADM Social Specialist:                    Thomas John Callander




Public Disclosure




                    Jun 30, 2025                                                                                              Page 10 of 10
