Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   United Republic of Tanzania - Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)(P507912)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 02-Oct-2024 | Report No: PIDIC00180




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     United Republic of Tanzania - Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)(P507912)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                            United Republic of Tanzania - Catastrophe Deferred
Tanzania                       P507912
                                                            Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)
Region                         Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                                                       Development Policy
                               28-Mar-2025                  Urban, Resilience and Land
AFRICA                                                                                     Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
United Republic of             Ministry of Finance and
Tanzania                       Planning

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the United Republic of Tanzania’s disaster preparedness and
response systems, enhance infrastructure resilience to climate and disaster risks and strengthen capacity to access
climate finance

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                              200.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             200.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                         200.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate




                                                                                                                      Page 1
        The World Bank
        United Republic of Tanzania - Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)(P507912)



Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

The URT’s disaster and climate risk profile highlights the need for coordinated disaster risk management (DRM) across
sectors and improved multi-hazard risk reduction. Ranked 45th most vulnerable and 34th least ready to adapt to climate
change, Tanzania faces increasing exposure to disasters due to its growing population and economy. Over the past two
decades, the country has experienced over 65 major events, with floods and droughts accounting for 70% of natural
disasters and causing annual economic losses of $170 million. Recent cyclones, such as Kenneth (2019) and Jobo (2021),
along with El-Niño rains and Tropical Cyclone Hidaya (2023-2024), caused 155 deaths, affected over 200,000 people, and
resulted in $368 million in damages. These widespread events strain the government’s response capacity, which remains
limited at the local level.

Climate change is causing major vulnerabilities in Tanzania's key sectors, resulting in economic and infrastructure
challenges. Since 1971, temperatures have risen by 0.24°C per decade, and sea levels have increased by 40-200 mm per
decade since 1955. By the 2050s, temperatures could rise by 1.4 to 2.3°C, and sea levels could increase by 160-300 mm,
leading to more frequent heatwaves, dry spells, and extreme precipitation events, particularly in northeastern Tanzania.
Water resources and hydropower are also at risk, with per capita water availability projected to drop by 76% by 2080.
Hydropower, contributing 37% of Tanzania’s electricity, is vulnerable to droughts and flooding. Dar es Salaam's
infrastructure, valued at $5.3 billion, is increasingly at risk from flooding and sea-level rise. While Tanzania has advanced
its climate policy framework, gaps remain, which the URT aims to address through reforms supported by the Cat DDO.

The macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the proposed Cat DDO. The adequacy of the macroeconomic
framework is assessed on the authorities’ impressive track record for sound macroeconomic management, including
prudent fiscal stance, conservative monetary policy, a sustainable debt outlook, and the commitment to reforms to
improve business environment for private investments1, as well as to promote resilient and inclusive growth. Tanzania has
historically received one of the highest CPIA scores among the SSA countries, especially for macroeconomic management
indicators.

 Relationship to CPF

The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY25-29 seeks to support Tanzania in leveraging its social and economic
progress to achieve more inclusive, private sector-driven, and resilient growth. The proposed operation is aligned with
the CPF, contributing to all three Higher Level Objectives of enhanced human capital, catalyzing private sector-led growth
and enhanced resilience to shocks and climate impacts.



1 This commitment was recently reconfirmed through the approval of the World Bank Financial Access for Sustainable and Transformational

Growth Project (FAST) in the amount of US$ 150 million.

                                                                                                                                          Page 2
         The World Bank
         United Republic of Tanzania - Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)(P507912)


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the United Republic of Tanzania’s disaster preparedness and
response systems, enhance infrastructure resilience to climate and disaster risks and strengthen capacity to access
climate finance

  Key Results

The proposed operation aims to achieve the following results: (i) establishment of operational preparedness and
response teams in key areas; (ii) improved early warning and flood forecasting in critical basins; (iii) systematic monitoring
of aquifers and streams; (iv) annual simulation exercises and response teams within the energy sector; (v) improved spatial
planning to orient risk-informed city development in key cities; (vi) capacitated development control teams to enforce
spatial plans in hazardous areas; (vii) carbon projects developed in alignment with the carbon market regulations to
increase access to climate finance; (viii) stakeholder consultations to review and improve carbon market regulations and
guidelines.

 D. Concept Description

The proposed operation will provide the URT access to immediate liquidity in the aftermath of natural disasters through
an International Development Association (IDA) US$200 million2 Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred
Drawdown Option (Cat DDO). Policy reforms are organized under three pillars. Pillar 1— Strengthening disaster
preparedness and response systems —will support reforms to modernize national systems and strengthen institutional
capacities for disaster risk reduction, preparedness, and response. Pillar 2— Enhancing infrastructure resilience to climate
and disaster risks —will support policy reforms to enhance resilience of the built environment and infrastructure, in the
energy, urban, and water sectors. Pillar 3 – Strengthening capacity to access climate finance – will support reforms to
carbon market access and climate financing.

 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

The proposed actions are expected to moderately impact poverty by reducing household vulnerabilities and
mitigating the effects of future disasters. The most vulnerable populations, primarily dependent on agriculture and
lacking access to basic services like electricity, piped water, and sanitation, will benefit from strengthened disaster risk
management (Pillar A) and improved infrastructure resilience (Pillars B and C). These actions aim to enhance local
government capabilities and address critical public service deficits, while also leveraging carbon markets and climate
finance to enhance economic opportunities for building resilience.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

The proposed policy actions are also likely to have positive environmental impacts by reducing Tanzania's
vulnerability to climate change and promoting low-carbon development. Pillar A focuses on strengthening institutional


2 Funded by 25 percent from the country’s concessional resources (PBA), 25 percent from the Crisis Response Window, and 50 percent from IDA overall resources.




                                                                                                                                                            Page 3
      The World Bank
      United Republic of Tanzania - Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)(P507912)


capacity for disaster management, allowing timely responses to disasters that could damage natural habitats. Pillar B
supports increased resilience in physical infrastructure, particularly in energy, urban, and water sectors, promoting
efficient pollution prevention and ecosystem conservation. Pillar C aims to enhance carbon market access and climate
finance, fostering low-carbon development and protecting biodiversity and ecosystems.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Yohannes Yemane Kesete
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Nicholas James Callender
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  United Republic of Tanzania
  Rished Bade
  Commissioner of External Finance
  rished.bade@hazina.go.tz

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Finance and Planning
  Rished Bade
  External Commissioner for Finance
  rished.bade@hazina.go.tz

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                      Yohannes Yemane Kesete, Nicholas James Callender

 Approved By

                                                                                                                    Page 4
     The World Bank
     United Republic of Tanzania - Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)(P507912)




Practice Manager/Manager:              Catalina Marulanda                   23-Sep-2024

Country Director:                      Milena Petrova Stefanova             02-Oct-2024




                                                                                             Page 5
