Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)



                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



            _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01441




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                                                  Sierra Leone Water
                                                         WESTERN AND CENTRAL
                          Sierra Leone                                               P507588                      Security and WASH Access
                                                         AFRICA
                                                                                                                  Improvement Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         08-May-2025                 25-Sep-2025                  Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Water
                          Republic of Sierra Leone       Resources and Sanitation,
                                                         Ministry of Finance




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Strengthen WASH sector institutions and capacity, improve operational performance of the water supply service
                          provider and promote sanitation in the Western Area of Sierra Leone.

                          Components
                          Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
                          Water Resources Management Improvement
                          Priority Investments in Urban Water Supply
                          Urban Sanitation Service Delivery Improvement
                          Project Management
                          Contingent Emergency Response Component

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                          40.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                               40.00


                                                                                                                                            Page 1
                                The World Bank
                                Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                   40.00
                             Financing Gap                                                                   0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Development Association (IDA)                                  40.00
                                 IDA Grant                                                                  40.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                          Other Decision (as needed)




                                                                                                              Page 2
                                    The World Bank
                                    Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                              B. Introduction and Context
                              Country Context
                              1.      Sierra Leone is highly vulnerable to economic and climate shocks, which have disrupted macroeconomic
                              stability and hindered sustained growth. Over the past decade, Sierra Leone faced crises such as Ebola, commodity price
                              collapses, natural disasters, COVID-19, and geopolitical unrest. These events disrupted growth and caused
                              macroeconomic imbalances. With a GDP per capita of US$542, 24.5 percent of the population lives below the
                              international poverty line1. The country aims to achieve middle-income status by 2039, requiring significant reforms in
                              macroeconomic stability, access to services, human capital development, disaster resilience, and governance.
                              2.      Rising economic pressures in Sierra Leone have led to tough policy measures to prevent a crisis. Recent policy
                              failures, combined with external shocks, threaten stability. By October 2023, inflation hit 54.6 percent, averaging 47.3
                              percent for the year. The currency depreciated by 18 percent, following a 40 percent drop in 2022, and the fiscal deficit
                              exceeded its target. Domestic revenue collection is among the lowest globally at 7.4 percent of GDP. In response, the
                              government tightened fiscal and monetary policies, increasing fuel (by 40 percent) and electricity prices (by 100 percent),
                              raising interest rates (775 basis points), and consolidating expenditures (0.9 percent of GDP). Consequently, year-on-year
                              inflation dropped to 20.2 percent. However, employment remains primarily in subsistence agriculture, which is low-
                              productivity and climate-vulnerable.
                              3.      Climate change impacts are severe in Sierra Leone. Over the past 25 years, the country has experienced more




_For Official Use Only_
                              than 300 disaster events. The Notre Dame Global Adaption Index ranks Sierra Leone 158 out of 182 countries and
                              territories in terms of vulnerability to climate change.2 It is considered the 11th most climate vulnerable country in the
                              world with increasing exposure to recurrent and more extreme flooding, landslides, drought, and wildfire events,
                              particularly in the Western Area. Urban expansion, hillside deforestation, poor drainage, and settlement in floodplains
                              and coastal areas exacerbate flood impacts. Droughts are becoming more frequent because of shifting rainfall patterns,
                              less predictable rainy seasons, and rising temperatures leading to higher evaporation. The World Bank Climate Change
                              Knowledge Portal highlights that the growing number of climate change-exacerbated droughts and floods affects the
                              country’s water resources and related infrastructure, which in turn hinders growth.
                              4.      Water security3 and reliable access to Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) are fundamental to
                              human development and to reducing vulnerability to climate-sensitive public health risks.4 In Sierra Leone’ Human
                              Development Index score of 0.452 falls below the West African average of 0.505, ranking 182 nd out of 189 countries
                              (UNDP, 2022). Poor water quality and WASH cause waterborne diseases such as diarrhea and cholera, thus adversely
                              affecting health, cognitive development, and economic growth. Limited WASH access reduces living standards and
                              hampers economic growth. To meet SDG 6, which calls for universal access to safely managed water and sanitation5 by
                              2030, Sierra Leone must expand basic WASH access6 and invest in service efficiency improvement. These improvements
                              will enhance public health, promote human development, drive poverty eradication, and increase the country’s resilience


                          1
                            World Bank, Macro Poverty Outlook, 2024
                          2
                            Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index (http://index.gain .org/ranking/vulnerability).
                          3 “a society's capacity to have enough water of sufficient quality for survival and to carry out different productive activities. Therefore, a society with water security can

                          reduce poverty and improve living standards.”( Definition from the World Bank Water Security Diagnostic Initiative January 2021.)
                          4 The Sierra Leone Water Supply and Sanitation Diagnostic – 2024: A Paradox of Scarcity in Abundance (The World Bank 2024)
                          5
                            “Safely managed water and sanitation” means “drinking water from an improved source that is accessible on premises, available when needed and free from faecal
                          and priority chemical contamination (WHO)”. “Available when needed” often translates to continuous or near-continuous supply, which JMP classified as water is
                          available on the premises at least 12 hours per day.
                          6 Basic WASH access combines access to basic drinking water, basic sanitation and basic hygiene. “At least basic drinking water” means water from an improved source,

                          provided collection time is not more than 30 minutes for a roundtrip including queuing. “At least basic sanitation” means the use of improved facilities which are not
                          shared with other Households. “Basic hygiene service” includes households with a handwashing facility with soap and water available on-premises. Households that
                          have a facility but lack water or soap will be classified as having a limited hygiene service, to distinguish from households that have no facility at all.


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 3
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                           to current and expected climate change impacts, especially floods and droughts. Strengthening WASH interventions is
                           therefore essential for environmental sustainability, economic resilience, and overall well-being in Sierra Leone.
                              Sectoral and Institutional Context
                           5.     Sierra Leone has abundant water resources yet faces an economic water scarcity challenge. The country receives
                           an average of 2,526 millimeters of rain annually. This is the highest in West Africa. The actual withdrawal rate is only 0.1
                           percent of approximately 160 billion cubic meters of annual renewable water. While it is enough to meet basic domestic
                           needs in absolute terms, these resources are not equitably distributed in space and time and are insufficient to cover
                           agricultural, commercial and industrial needs. This reveals a systemic economic water scarcity problem, which is primarily
                           due to limited water infrastructure, inefficient services, and poor water governance, compounded by climate change.
                           6.      Access to WASH remains stubbornly low hindering human development and exacerbating poverty. Sierra
                           Leone's population doubled between 2000 and 2022, but access to WASH only recorded marginal increases. Access to
                           water supply increased in par with population growth but not sanitation and hygiene. While 63 percent of Sierra Leoneans
                           have access to basic water, only 23 percent have access to improved drinking water sources within premises. Only 32
                           percent of people have access to either safely managed or basic sanitation and 12 percent have access to basic hygiene
                           as illustrated by Figure 1. Sierra Leone's open defecation rate is 25 percent. Human feces and untreated wastewater
                           pollute human settlements and ground- and surface water. A 2022 study found that all tested standpipes and wells in
                           Freetown were contaminated with E. coli.7 Earlier studies reported that 30 to 60 percent of water sources surveyed across
                           the country showed bacteriological contamination.8 Joined UNICEF/WHO/World Bank health indicator monitoring




_For Official Use Only_
                           reports that child mortality in the country is 45 percent higher than Sub-Saharan Africa’s average and over 26 percent of
                           children under 5 are stunted. These statistics highlight the need for improved water management and development
                           strategies to harness the underutilized resources, increase water security for all purposes and improve access to WASH
                           in Sierra Leone.
                           7.     Binding constraints to WASH service delivery. The WASH Poverty Diagnostic (World Bank, 2024) highlights the
                           binding constraints to WASH sector development and service delivery. In addition to poor water resources management,
                           low operational efficiency, rapid and unplanned urbanization, and the impacts of climate change, other aspects that
                           hinder the sector and restrict the operator’s capacity to achieve sustainability and expand access to WASH include:
                               •     The sanitation sector is the least developed in Sierra Leone: The sanitation value chain is almost inexistent. When
                                     people have access to a toilet facility, it is usually not connected to a proper on-site treatment system. There are
                                     vacuum truck operators, but inadequate Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) to handle the sludge they collect.
                                     Freetown has a few kilometers of sewerage network conveying sewage from the central business district and
                                     discharging it untreated into the sea.
                               •     Inadequate sector financing and investment: To meet the SDG 6 targets, Sierra Leone needs to invest about
                                     US$557 per capita, about US$84 million per annum to achieve universal basic access, and US$361 million for safely
                                     managed access to WASH. The budgetary allocation to the water sector is far from these levels. The FY22 WASH
                                     budget was US$19 million, representing 9 percent of the country budget, of which only 27 percent materialized.
                                     The sector depends heavily on external funding and operators are not creditworthy, which prevents them
                                     accessing private capital.
                               •     Poor sector coordination: WASH interventions in Sierra Leone are hindered by a lack of coordination among
                                     stakeholders. There is insufficient collaboration between the government and its development partners, as well



                          7 Kamara et al., 2022 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35682235/)

                          8 Massally et al., 2017; Fileccia, Alie, & Juanah, 2018 (doi:10.4236/jwarp.2017.96040)




                                                                                                                                                     Page 4
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                                 as within government entities. The absence of long-term vision and planning, along with weak implementation
                                 and policy enforcement, creates a constant need for quick fixes and an over-dependence on short-term projects.
                             •   Sector inefficiencies and capacity gaps: Key water utilities in the sector could be more efficient. The Guma Valley
                                 Water Company (GVWC) reports 60 percent Non-Revenue Water (NRW) and 73 percent collection efficiency. This
                                 means that only 29 percent of the water injected into the network generates revenue. The Sierra Leone Water
                                 Company (SALWACO) reports 30 percent NRW. Institutional and human resource capacities are limited, with
                                 insufficient focus on systems strengthening, human resource development, and institutional development to plan,
                                 deliver, and manage WASH services effectively. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems and WASH data
                                 platforms exist, but routine data collection and management need improvement. In addition, WASH emergency
                                 preparedness is essential, learning from the Ebola and COVID 19 outbreaks.
                             •   Institutional weaknesses. The sanitation mandate was transferred from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of
                                 Water Resources (MWRS) in July 2023. This transfer needs to be operationalized, and the institutional capacity of
                                 the MWRS has to be built. The National Water Resources Management Agency (NWRMA), which started its
                                 operations in 2019, also requires extensive capacity building to carry out its mandate effectively. Local councils,
                                 which have a sanitation mandate, are inadequately staffed and have insufficient budget to deliver on it.
                          8.     Recognizing the need for a comprehensive programmatic approach to support the WASH sector, the
                          Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) prepared a National WASH Sector Development Plan 2025-2035 (NWASHSDP). The




_For Official Use Only_
                          NWASHSDP builds on previous efforts and aligns with national, regional, and international commitments, such as the
                          Medium-Term National Development Plan (MTNDP) 2024-2030, SDG 6 and the African Union's Agenda 2063. It presents
                          GoSL’s vision to develop WASH and a roadmap to achieve its goal of universal access to WASH. The vision of the
                          NWASHSDP is “a water-secure and sanitation-safe Sierra Leone through efficient and resilient water institutions by 2035”.
                          By aligning sector interventions with the roadmap, GoSL will strengthen its WASH sector and generalize access to WASH.

                          9.     The Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation (MWRS) has the overall governance mandate for WASH. This
                          entails sector policy and governance, sector oversight, monitoring, evaluation, and collaboration with water supply
                          service providers, local governments responsible for sanitation, regulators, and parallel Ministries to promote WASH
                          sector's development and improvement.


                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                          10.     The overall Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to improve water security and increase access to
                          WAter, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) services in selected areas in Sierra Leone. For the purpose of this program,
                          water security is defined as “securing sufficient water resources to meet WASH needs and improving the institutional
                          and people’s capacity to manage and protect the resource sustainably in a changing climate”.
                          11.     The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) for MPA Phase 1 is to strengthen sector institutions and
                          capacity, improve operational performance of the water supply service provider and promote sanitation in the
                          Western Area of Sierra Leone.
                           Key Results
                          12.    About 5 million people are expected to benefit from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or
                          response, for which 2.5 million female and 1.5 million youth. About 800,000 people are expected to be provided with
                          water, sanitation and/or hygiene in the Western Area as a result of the Project and about 200,000 people are expected
                          to be provided with limited sanitation in public facilities.

                                                                                                                                                Page 5
                                The World Bank
                                Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                          13.    The Project will extend treatment capacity so that about 50,000 cubic meters of fecal sludge a year will be treated
                          at a Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant.
                          14.    About 1,000 people will benefit from strengthened capacity under the Project, of which about 200 female.
                          15.    The National Water Resources Master Plan will be adopted and under implementation by the end of the Project
                           D. Project Description
                          16.     The Project is designed to increase access to water supply and sanitation services, improve the operational
                          performance of water service providers, and enhance water resources management in Sierra Leone. Its components are
                          mutually reinforcing, creating a platform for both immediate service improvements and long‐term capacity building that
                          will drive water security. The proposed Project is structured around six components

                          Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$ 10 million).
                          17.    This component will focus on strengthening the WASH sector Policy, Institutions, Regulation, and the MWRS’ role
                          of coordinating sector stakeholders and their interventions. It will also support the MWRS in operationalizing the
                          sanitation mandate; establish a Donor coordination group involving all sector stakeholders to ensure coordinated
                          approaches and alignment with the Government’s priorities; institutional and staff capacity building of sector agencies;
                          strengthen national water quality monitoring and surveillance; assess PPP options to leverage private sector value
                          addition to improve the quality-of-service delivery and to extend access to WASH services in Sierra Leone; and will




_For Official Use Only_
                          construct a WASH Administrative Center to host the MWRS, NWRMA and SLEWRC.

                          Component 2: Water Resources Management Improvement (US$ 7 million).
                          18.     This component will support activities to improve water resources planning and mobilization and to protect the
                          Western Area Peninsula National Park—the only water resource for the Western Area of Sierra Leone. It will develop a
                          national Water Resources Master Plan, building on updated reporting of water resources, both in quantity and quality. It
                          will also raise awareness of the greenbelt boundaries, building protective barriers to protect the catchment of selected
                          water supply weirs which are under increasing encroachment pressure; and map out areas requiring measures to restore
                          the forest cover of the greenbelt in places where it has been degraded.

                          Component 3: Priority Investments in Urban Water Supply (US$ 30 million).
                          19.      This component will strengthen the Guma Valley Water Company’s (GVWC) operational efficiency, improve water
                          supply service delivery and reduce water losses in the GVWC service area. Activities under this component will include
                          updating GVWC’s commercial processes, improving customer engagement, and expanding metering programs to reduce
                          commercial losses and boost revenue. It will also carry out a comprehensive inspection of the Guma Dam. It will improve
                          service delivery through the construction or rehabilitation of selected critical infrastructure to increase the reliability of
                          water service delivery, and through leak detection and the preparation of performance-based PPPs for NRW reduction.
                          It will also finance studies for priority investments which may be funded in the next phases of the multiphase approach.

                          Component 4: Urban Sanitation Service Delivery Improvement (US$10 million).
                          20.    This component will develop improved toilets facilities with handwashing in selected schools, hospitals/health
                          centers, and possibly major marketplaces and bus stations in the Freetown City Council (FCC) and in the Western Area
                          Rural Development Council (WARDC) area. It will upgrade the existing Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) in the Kingtom
                          area of Freetown and build additional FSTPs in FCC and in WARDC to increase the sludge treatment capacity in the
                          Western Area. It will also develop a City-Wide Inclusive Sanitation plan to structure the sludge management value chain


                                                                                                                                                   Page 6
                                The World Bank
                                Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                          in the Western Area ; and prepare a national behavior change campaign called “Clean Salone” to make Sierra Leone
                          Open-Defecation Free.

                          Component 5: Project Management (US$ 3 million).
                          21.   This component will finance costs related to Project implementation, monitoring and reporting and consultants
                          and/or technical assistance support to the MWRS and implementing agencies. It may also finance the cost of
                          implementation of the Environmental and Social (E&S) framework (ESF), including costs related to resettlement.

                          Component 6: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$ 0 million).
                          22.    Following an eligible crisis or emergency, this component would draw from uncommitted grant resources and
                          allow reallocating Project funds to support emergency response and reconstruction consistent with the PDO.
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                              Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No




_For Official Use Only_
                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          23.     The Project’s E&S risk rating is substantial, based on the information available at this stage. Potential risks emanate
                          from project activities in water infrastructure, pollution, and disease transmission from sewage handling, and weak
                          institutional capacity to manage these risks. MWRS and partners will establish E&S risk management per the ESF.
                          24.     The Project aims to strengthen institutions, develop human capital, improve urban water and sanitation, and
                          eradicate open defecation. It will not finance dam construction but faces risks from sewage handling, civil works,
                          biodiversity impact, and conflicts over barriers in water catchment areas. Construction may cause noise, air, and water
                          pollution, and health and safety risks. Institutions involved have some E&S risk management experience from previous
                          projects but require ESF training. EPASL has a rigorous risk assessment process. Stakeholder consultation and grievance
                          redress mechanisms are prioritized. Risks include social exclusion, involuntary resettlement, and ensuring clean water
                          access in poor and remote areas. Fecal Sludge Treatment Facility construction may require additional land acquisition,
                          and disadvantaged groups must be included in consultations. Civil works could induce labor influx and GBV risks. The
                          Project may cause temporary and permanent land acquisition and displacement. MWRS’s weak E&S capacity necessitates
                          strategic capacity building and technical assistance for design and feasibility studies, ensuring access for the vulnerable.
                          25.     The risk of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) is substantial, with 62% of women in Sierra
                          Leone experiencing violence. The Project will support women’s health, hygiene, and sanitation, contributing to gender
                          equality. An SEA/SH assessment and action plan will be prepared, including recruiting a service provider and GBV/SEA/SH
                          staff. The Project will leverage existing SEA/SH risk action plans and ensure a responsive Grievance Redress Mechanism
                          (GRM), worker training, and an Accountability and Response Framework.
                          26.      Stakeholder engagement will focus on inclusive participation and information disclosure using appropriate
                          language and media. Key stakeholders include MWRS, NWRMA, GVWC, SALWACO, Freetown City Council, and city
                          councils of selected secondary cities. Beneficiaries include communities with access to clean water, schools, health
                          facilities, students, water service providers, maintenance workers, FSTP users, CSO/NGOs, and those adversely affected
                          by the project. An inclusive Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared and implemented, proportional to the


                                                                                                                                                    Page 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                          project's nature, scale, risks, and impacts. The SEP will be disclosed before project appraisal, ensuring consultations are
                          timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible. A documented record of stakeholder engagement will be maintained
                          and publicly disclosed. A project-wide GRM will address concerns, including a confidential channel for GBV issues.
                          27.    Local actors and liaison officers may be designated to coordinate the SEP implementation. When there is adequate
                          information about the Project locations, scope of investment and the corresponding risks, the Project E&S risks will be
                          reassessed based on the scope of Project activities and determine if it needs to upgrade the E&S risk rating at appraisal
                          stage and additional E&S instruments as needed.


                           E. Implementation
                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          28.     The implementing agencies involved include MWRS, NWRMA, GVWC, SALWACO, FCC and WARDC.
                          29.      The MWRS will have overall responsibility for Project implementation and coordination among other
                          implementing agencies. It will create a WASH Project Implementation Team (WASHIT), which will oversee Project
                          implementation and coordination. Each IA will designate a focal point for the Project. The MWRS, through the WASHIT,
                          will directly implement components 1 and 4.3. It will ensure that capacity building activities benefit all IAs, as well as
                          SALWACO and SLEWRC. NWRMA will be the IA for component 2, GVWC for component 3, FCC for component 4.1 and




_For Official Use Only_
                          WARDC for component 4.2. The WASHIT will monitor and ensure that implementation is in accordance with Bank
                          requirements on procurement, accounting and financial management, environmental and social aspects, and monitoring
                          and reporting. The WASHIT will be composed of competitively selected personnel including a WASHIT Coordinator,
                          specialists in Procurement, Financial Management (FM), Environment, Social, Gender, Planning and M&E, Communication
                          and Institutional Development. MWRS will competitively recruit consultants (firm or individual) to join the WASHIT in the
                          first two years with the double role of supporting Project implementation and of building the Project management
                          capability (staff and systems) of the MWRS, the WASHIT and other IAs.
                          30.     With respect to procurement, for their respective components, each IA will prepare bidding documents, then send
                          these to the WASHIT for review, input information into the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) and
                          submit to the World Bank for review if subject to prior review. Upon review and eventual receipt of the Bank’s no
                          objection, the WASHIT will publish the bidding documents. Received bids will be evaluated by a bid evaluation committee
                          chaired by the WASHIT with representatives from the respective IA. Bid evaluation reports and recommendation of
                          contract award will be co-signed by the heads of the relevant IA and of the WASHIT. Contracts will be co-signed by the
                          MWRS and the WASHIT Project coordinator. Upon contract signature, the concerned IA will manage the contract and
                          monitor its implementation. The WASHIT will inform the STEP for all Project activities and will be the entry point for Bank
                          communication on procurement.
                          31.      With respect to financial management, the MWRS will open a Designated Account in United States dollars (US$)
                          dedicated to the Project, which the WASHIT will be entrusted to manage. Each IA will open an account in US$ and an
                          account in Sierra Leonean Leones (SLL) dedicated to the Project. Funds corresponding the management of signed contracts
                          will be transferred from the Designated Account to the Project account of the concerned IA. The exchange from US$ to
                          SLL will be made at the time of payment of invoices in SLL, to minimize the exchange rate risk. Each IA will prepare IUFRs
                          per the agreed frequency and will send them to the WASHIT for consolidation prior to submission to the Bank. One auditor
                          will be hired for the Project and will be responsible to audit all Project related accounts (Designated and Project accounts)
                          and will prepare annually a single audit report.
                          32.    A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will be developed before effectiveness to clarify the roles and
                          responsibility sharing, as well as the flow of documents and funds across all institutions for the various steps of Project
                          implementation.

                                                                                                                                                   Page 8
                                 The World Bank
                                 Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                          33.      A PSC will be established, chaired by the MWRS and composed of high-level representatives of WASH related
                          ministries and all institutions involved in Project implementation. Considering the cross-cutting nature of WASH
                          interventions, the PSC will gather Ministries of Finance, Environment and Climate Change, Lands and Country Planning,
                          Local Government and Community Development, Western Region, Health, Basic and Senior Secondary Education, Gender
                          and Children’s Affairs, Planning and Economic Development, and FCC, WARDC, GVWC, SALWACO, NWRMA, and SLEWRC.
                          The PCS will meet at least every semester to review progress, provide strategic direction, and make high-level decisions
                          that impact Project success. It will also foster partnerships for WASH service improvement in Sierra Leone, including the
                          roll-out of public toilet facilities, the preparation of the national campaign to make Sierra Leone ODF, and to create and
                          enhance synergy on supporting the community awareness campaigns which the Project will finance.
                          34.     The Project will seek to leverage community and Citizen Engagement (CE) to monitor, contribute to operate, and
                          maintain their WASH facilities and to raise awareness of the benefits of sustaining quality service delivery, create coalitions
                          for improved WASH practices and encourage behavior change to make communities ODF. The Project may hire facilitating
                          partners to support communities in organizing themselves to carry out these tasks. The facilitating partners may use the
                          Bank-supported Wan Fambul Framework (WFF) to guide their work. The WFF has supported the GoSL to promote
                          decentralization efforts that enhance rural service delivery through a community-led development approach that
                          emphasizes women’s empowerment and reconciliation/social cohesion. GoSL’s MTNDP 2024-2030 aims to roll out the
                          WFF in 40 percent of Chiefdoms by 2030.




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene
                             Lead Water Specialist

                             Judith Ibiada Warmate
                             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Republic of Sierra Leone

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation

                            Ministry of Finance

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                                                                    Page 9
                               The World Bank
                               Sierra Leone Water Security and WASH Access Improvement Project (P507588)


                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                  Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene, Judith Ibiada Warmate

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:             Anna Cestari                          30-Apr-2025

                          Country Director:                     Abdu Muwonge                          29-Apr-2025




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                     Page 10
