Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         The World Bank
                                                                         Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)




                                                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure _For
                  Authorized          Public Disclosure Authorized




                       Official Use Only_
                                                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

                                                                                      Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01194




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data
                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                          South Africa, South Africa     P508930                      Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure
                          Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
                          EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           08-Sep-2025                  17-Nov-2025                    Finance, Competitiveness
                          AFRICA                                                                                     and Innovation
                          Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
                          Investment Project             National Treasury            National Treasury
                          Financing (IPF)




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The Program Development Objective is to mobilize private capital for sustainable infrastructure.


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                      2,510.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                           2,310.00
                                       of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               210.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                              200.00

                          DETAILS
                            World Bank Group Financing
                             International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                              210.00
                             IFC Own Resources/Mobilization                                                                            100.00
                            Non-World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                                            Page 1



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                                 Commercial Financing                                                                                                       2,000.00
                                    Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                                       2,000.00




                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
                          Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                        Concept Review Decision
                          High                                                                                The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                           B. Introduction and Context

                           1.   South Africa (SA) has ambitious development goals but faces significant economic and social challenges,
                           worsened by climate change. The economy grew by about 1 percent per year over the past decade, much lower than




_For Official Use Only_
                           the 4.1 percent average growth of middle-income countries in 2024. The country remains highly unequal due to
                           entrenched legacies from apartheid, with high levels of poverty and unemployment. In 2024, the poverty rate was
                           about 63 percent, with 37.9 percent being women, and the unemployment rate stood at 32.1 percent in Q3, with many
                           job seekers unemployed for over a year. SA emitted about 436 MtCO2e in 2022, with energy and transport accounting
                           for 75 percent of these emissions. As the highest carbon- and energy-intensive economy in Africa, the seventh largest
                           coal consumer and third largest coal exporter, SA contributes to climate change while being exposed to its risks.

                           2.   A threat to economic growth and development is the poor state of infrastructure which is facing dual
                           challenges. The first is about deteriorating performance, the second is about declining investment. This is leading to a
                           state of crisis in the electricity, transport, and water sectors. The infrastructure crisis magnifies income inequality, by
                           disproportionately affecting vulnerable households and small firms who do not have the means to develop alternatives
                           such as off grid electricity solutions and road transport. Climate change is making the aging infrastructure even more
                           vulnerable.

                           3.   SA is committed to a just transition toward a low-carbon and climate-resilient society which requires substantial
                           investment in infrastructure. The infrastructure financing need is estimated to be between US$ 254 billion and US$
                           329 billion from 2022 to 20301. GSA cannot cover these investment costs with public finance as the fiscal and debt
                           situation is constrained, and private finance cannot bridge the gap as the policy and regulatory risks are perceived as
                           too high. It requires coordinated public and private financing. However, total investment spending has fallen from
                           nearly 30 percent of GDP in the early 1980s to about 15 percent in 2022. GSA is targeting a return to 30 percent of GDP
                           investment by 2030. A fundamental challenge for the just transition is to ensure that its net impact on jobs is positive in
                           both the short-and long-term and receives broad social approval.

                           4.  Substantial Investment in sustainable infrastructure is also critical for SA’s competitiveness. Infrastructure has
                           forward linkages to green industries and backward linkages to renewable energy equipment manufacture and critical
                           minerals, crucial for a just energy transition and maintaining industrial competitiveness and jobs, especially in a context



                          1 Going beyond the infrastructure gap: a South African Perspective (WB/DBSA 2023)




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2



                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                           of a potential ‘trade disruption’ with the United States and the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) of the
                           EU2.

                           5.   SA’s infrastructure sectors face significant financial sustainability challenges that require urgent reforms. GSA,
                           through Operation Vulindlela, has prioritized reforms in the electricity sector, the water sector and freight transport
                           sector, among other, because of their potential high impact on economic growth (Operation Vulindlela 2020; State of
                           Nation 2022).

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                           6.   Critical infrastructure is in a poor state, but the significant financing needs cannot be met by GSA alone. The
                           financial sector could play an important role in mobilizing this private capital and in mitigating foreign exchange risk
                           (hard currency financing). Currently, exposure to infrastructure is well below potential due to a series of shortcomings
                           in the electricity, transport and logistic sector, and water and sanitation sectors that could provide the projects; and in
                           the availability financial instruments to derisk or support the affordability of projects.

                           7.    The electricity sector is opening its markets to private sector investment in generation, storage, and




_For Official Use Only_
                           transmission. The aging coal-based power fleet is highly polluting, negatively impacting people and the economy. The
                           government has increased renewable energy generation through the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer
                           Program (REIPPP), mobilizing around US$11 billion up to 2022, supported by sovereign guarantees3. However,
                           transmission development remains a bottleneck. The Transmission Development Plan (TDP) 2024 estimates ZAR 392
                           billion (US$21 billion) is needed to expand transmission systems with 14.000 km to integrate 56 GW of new generation
                           capacity by 2032. The government plans to issue a Request for Proposal for the first independent power transmission
                           (IPT) with an estimated investment of US$ 500 million in November 2025, which will complement public investment in
                           the transmission grid. Key reforms being implemented include the Electricity Regulation Amendment Act, the
                           unbundling of Eskom, and Independent Private Transmission Regulation to foster competitive markets, allowing
                           Independent Power Purchasers to sell directly to municipalities and other large customers and building private sector
                           confidence to invest in the electricity sector. These reforms take place in the context of South Africa’s membership of
                           the Southern African Power Pool, which enables it to supply and procure renewable and other energy in a competitive
                           cross-border market, if there is adequate transmission capacity. This is essential for the optimization of renewable
                           energy for South Africa and the rest of the region.

                           8.   The transport- and logistics sector is liberalizing to allow for private sector investment in its rails network and
                           ports. The transport sector faced a severe crisis in 2023, losing 20 percent of its export capacity due to a failure in the
                           railway network and port congestion. In December 2023, the Cabinet approved the Freight Logistics Reform Roadmap.
                           In early 2024, to aid reform implementation, the government established the National Logistics Crisis Committee to
                           oversee the preparation of the Transport Economic Regulator Bill and the new rail policy enabling unbundling Transnet
                           and liberalizing the rail network.


                          2 CBAM could penalize about half of South Africa’s current exports, potentially reducing its GDP by about one percent, with associated job losses in the steel industry,

                          automobile manufacture and other sectors.
                           3 GSA was very successful in mobilizing private capital into renewable energy generation. GSA has increased renewable energy generation through the REIPPP,

                           mobilizing around US$11 billion up to 2022, supported by Sovereign Guarantees of the National Treasury. Most of the private financing was raised from local
                           commercial banks in local currency, allowing this important private investment to eliminate the foreign exchange risk that has haunted IPPs in other middle-income
                           countries (i.e., Mexico post 1994, Indonesia post 1997, etc.). Unfortunately, due to fiscal space constraints in the foreseeable future, the GSA will be limited as to the
                           increased amount of contingent liabilities in their portfolio limiting the issuance of sovereign guarantees for electricity as well as other infrastructure sectors.



                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                           9.   The water and sanitation sector also started reforms that allow for private sector participation. The water sector
                           is under severe pressure in terms of access to safely managed water and sanitation. 46 percent of households lack
                           safely managed water and 49 percent of households live without safely managed sanitation. These problems are most
                           pressing in informal settlements and rural areas. Further, there is a 41 percent non-revenue water loss. This has let, for
                           instance, to the ‘day zero’ crisis in Capetown where severe drought from 2015 to 2018 drastically reduced water levels
                           in the city highlight key issues such as water scarcity, aging infrastructure, high consumption and climate change. GSA
                           through the Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) developed a National Water Program in 2022, which allowed
                           for Water Partnership Office (WPO), which once operational will initiate large infrastructure programs (e.g. Non-
                           Revenue Water Program, and Water Reuse Program). GSA is also preparing critical legal and institutional reforms e.g.
                           National Water Amendment Bill, Water Service Amendment Bill, South African National Water Resource Infrastructure
                           Agency (SANWRIA) and Economic Regulator.
                           10. SA has a sophisticated and large domestic financial sector (approximately 300 percent of GDP), with a deep
                           institutional investor base, that could mobilize private capital for infrastructure. Banks account for about 130 percent
                           of GDP, with the five largest banks accounting for almost 90 percent of banking sector assets. Institutional investors
                           represent around 160 percent of GDP, split between pension funds (92 percent of GDP) and insurance companies (68
                           percent of GDP)4. However, their assets are mostly invested in government debt, listed equities, and in the case of




_For Official Use Only_
                           pension funds up to 40 percent of Assets Under management (AUM) in foreign assets due to the scarcity of long-term
                           domestic assets with investable risk-return profile. Exposure of SA’s institutional investors to domestic infrastructure
                           assets is on average around 5-7 percent of AUM. Despite the fact, that matching long-term infrastructure projects with
                           long-term investment returns of institutional investors aligns duration of funding with the life span of the projects,
                           optimizing returns and minimizing risks. The exposure of around 5-7 percent of AUM is also well below peer countries
                           exposure of around 35 percent (e.g. Colombia. Chile, Malaysia).

                           11. However, the financial sector lacks the appropriate instruments to derisk infrastructure projects outside the
                           existing model of sovereign guarantees on the public off-taker. A new approach to derisk and improve the
                           affordability of infrastructure projects, less reliant on the GSA support through sovereign guarantees, would enable
                           GSA to mobilize private capital through SA’s deep financial markets into strategic infrastructure for economic growth
                           and development, while limiting its fiscal impact. As in many other middle-income countries (e.g., Chile, Colombia,
                           Mexico and more recently Nigeria), issuance of credit guarantees could play a capital market development role enticing
                           institutional investors – discouraged by infrastructure related risks – to increase their portfolio allocation to the
                           infrastructure asset class (i.e., project revenue bonds, asset backed securities, recycling commercial bank loans, etc.).
                           This effort needs to be accompanied by reforms in the target real economy sectors to ensure the sustainability of
                           projects and, eventually, the phasing out of derisking instruments

                           Relationship to CPF
                           12. This Operation is aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF FY22–26), Performance
                           and Learning Review (PLR FY25) and core analytics. First, Focus Area 3 of the CPF FY22-26 (CPF P167262) aims at
                           improving infrastructure investment framework and selected infrastructure services. Second, the South African Climate
                           Change and Development Report (WB 2022) outlines a strategy for achieving a just transition toward a low-carbon and
                           climate resilient society. It emphasizes the need for investment to mitigate the impact of climate change and create
                           new job opportunities. Third, the South African Drivers of Growth Report (WB 2025) outlines that SA’s growth is driven
                           by delivering high-quality and affordable infrastructure services, among other drivers. Fourth, the ‘Institutional Reforms
                           for Strengthening Strategic Infrastructure Delivery in SA (WBG/NDB June 2024) underlines the importance of

                          4 The World Bank FSAP Capital Markets Technical Note (January 2022) is the source of financial sector figures.




                                                                                                                                                   Page 4



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                      The World Bank
                                      Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                              consolidating the institutional set-up. Fifth, the Financial Sector Development Program / Joint Capital Markets /
                              Sustainable Finance Facility (funded by State Secretariat for Economic Affairs of Switzerland (SECO)) has been
                              instrumental in developing the Credit Guarantee Vehicle.

                              13. This Operation is also working in conjunction with a range of complementary instruments. First, the
                              Infrastructure Modernization Development Policy Loan, approved on June 5, 2025 by the Board of the World Bank,
                              supports GSA efforts to: (i) advance the restructuring of the power sector to enhance long-term energy supply; (ii)
                              initiate the restructuring of the transport and logistics sector (with a focus on freight); and (iii) promote a transition to a
                              low carbon economy. Second, the Metro Trading Services Program for Results expected to be approved on June 30,
                              2025, aims to improve the performance of water and sanitation, electricity and solid waste management trading
                              services in SA’s metropolitan municipalities. Lastly, the Eskom Just Energy Transition Project Investment Project Finance
                              aims to support Eskom in piloting the decommissioning of coal-fired power generation, repurposing the project areas
                              with clean energy sources and creating opportunities for workers and communities.

                              C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                               14. The Proposed Development Objective is to mobilize private capital for sustainable infrastructure. MPA through




_For Official Use Only_
                               mobilizing private capital for sustainable infrastructure seeks the following high-level objectives: (i) deliver
                               infrastructure services; (ii) reduce carbon emissions; and (iii) create jobs.
                                 I.     Delivery of infrastructure services: the electricity sector, water and sanitation sector and transport and logistic
                                        sector are in a poor state and need significant investment to reach all its citizens and businesses.
                                II.     Reduction of carbon emissions: building sustainable infrastructure will reduce carbon emission by expansion
                                        of the electricity grid to transmit renewable energy, transition from road to rail, and increase energy
                                        efficiency of water infrastructure projects.
                               III.     Creation of jobs: investment in infrastructure will create direct jobs as a result of the construction,
                                        maintenance and operationalization of the infrastructure (services), and is also expected to create long-term
                                        jobs indirectly as business productivity will increase. This is expected to lead to more economic growth.

                               15. In the first phase of the MPA the Operation will establish a Credit Guarantee Vehicle through an Investment
                               Project Finance (IPF). The MPA will be implemented in potentially 4 phases with expected total duration of 10 years.
                               It will seek to mobilize private capital by establishing a Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure. MPA
                               phase 1 – 2 will start with the establishment and scaling of a Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV). MPA phase 3 may
                               develop or support additional instruments to mobilize private capital to bridge the infrastructure finance gap such as
                               viability gap fund, revenue bonds, and long-term assets funds. MPA phase 4 may support priorities of a potential
                               country platform5 that is being contemplated by GSA. Although MPA phase 1 and 2 will be implemented sequential;
                               phase 3 and 4 may be implemented in simultaneous.




                          5
                            Country platforms have emerged as ‘instruments for national governments to advance specific transformational goals in priority areas with international support’
                          (Gilmour 2024). The G20 and Multilateral Development Banks agreed to enhance collaboration through supporting the development of CPs. The process of developing
                          a CP follows 5 steps: (i) Initial engagement on national priorities; (ii) setting organization, policy and technical underpinning of platform; (iii) formulate investment
                          program; (iv) mobilize finance from public and private, local and external financing sources; and (v) implementation.


                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 5



                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                     The World Bank
                                     Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                              Key Results (From PCN)

                              16. The success of the Program will be measured at three levels of outcome.

                               I.    The first level outcome of the MPA is the mobilization of private capital through capitalization of financial
                                     vehicles under the Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure e.g. Credit Guarantee Vehicle,
                                     Viability Gap Fund, Revenue Bonds, and Long-Term Asset Fund.
                               II.   The second level outcome of the MPA is the award and construction of infrastructure (related) projects with
                                     related private capital mobilization and job creation.
                              III.   The third level outcome is that completed infrastructure (related) projects will: (i) deliver infrastructure services
                                     for its citizens and businesses; (ii) reduce carbon emissions; (iii) increase business productivity and create jobs;
                                     and (iv) increase SA’s economic growth and competitiveness.


                              D. Concept Description

                              17. The objective of the MPA Phase 1 is to establish a Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV) to mobilize private capital for




_For Official Use Only_
                              sustainable infrastructure. The CGV is a non-life insurance company structured as a private corporation, with the GSA
                              as a relevant but minority shareholder, that will offer partial credit guarantees required to mobilize private capital in
                              support of infrastructure development in SA6. The CGV will be run on a commercially viable basis by independent
                              professional management appointed by its Board (i.e., guarantees will be priced to beneficiaries). The CGV will be
                              domiciled in SA and in compliance with relevant domestic regulations from the Prudential Authorities and the South
                              African Reserve Bank, among other. The CGV will initially focus exclusively on the local currency markets, seeking for
                              this purpose a capital structure and corporate governance that can provide the company an AAA rating in the local
                              currency scale. The CGV will be developed as a multi-sector institution supporting private capital mobilization to those
                              sectors where long-term policy development supports and allows private participation, both on national and sub-
                              national level. The CGV’s business plan proposes to focus initially on the provision of de-risking instruments to facilitate
                              private sector participation in the Transmission Development Plan (TDP), extending the offering to other relevant
                              sectors (when ready) in the Vehicle’s ramp-up period for risk diversification purposes. The CGV will incorporate, as part
                              of its private sector type of corporate governance, a sound and robust risk management practice.

                          18. The Project will have 2 components.

                              19. Component 1; CGV Capitalization (US$200 million). This component will fund the GSA equity participation via the
                              National Treasury in the CGV (assumed to be US$200 million of the total of US$ 500 million). The CGV’s capital
                              structure will be structured as follows: (a) tier of junior capital (first loss) for up to 40% of the total (up to US$ 200
                              million), (b) tier of senior capital for up to 30% of the total (up to US$ 150 million), and (c) tier of callable capital for up
                              to 30% (up to US$ 150 million). The GSA participation via the National Treasury cover for the junior capital tier (first
                              loss) unless the project will mobilize concessional sources that could finance the junior tranche. The remaining part of
                              the initial capital (60% US$ 300 million) is expected to be subscribed by domestic, regional, and international
                              development financial institutions (DFIs), specialized development funds, and philanthropic funds. The proposed capital
                              structure is still indicative and subject to further revision during project preparation.



                          6
                           Since the credit guarantees will have a price for the beneficiary (“premium”), the extent of the % coverage will depend upon the needs of specific transactions (i.e.,
                          partiality), since there will be incentives to pay only for the coverage that the market requires.


                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 6



                                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                     The World Bank
                                     Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                           20. Component 2 Technical Assistance and Project Pipeline Development (US$ 10 million). This component will
                           finance two major activities, namely i) initial start-up cost of the CGV, including hiring and developing a professional
                           management team and other associated expenses until revenue streams of guarantee coverages are established; ii)
                           pipeline development cost, particularly at the initial stage, including client engagement, preliminary risk assessment,
                           and other related expense; This component will finance activities at the beginning of operationalizing CGV, with the
                           expectation that the cost in later years will be covered by guarantee fee revenue to the CGV.

                           21. The CGV will initiate operations in its first phase with a capital structure of US$ 500 million (of which IBRD will
                           finance US$ 200 million), mobilizing up to US$ 2 billion of private capital to finance infrastructure projects. The CGV is
                           estimated to initiate activities in mid-2026. The leverage of the CGV itself (i.e., the amount of credit guarantees it can
                           underwrite with a given capital structure) is a function of the probabilities of default – credit risk – of the underlying
                           portfolio and the time length of the credit guarantee7. Also, the use of re-insurance lines increases the leverage of the
                           CGV, by risk sharing some of the risks underwritten in the underlying projects8. The experience in emerging markets in
                           the leveraging of these types of vehicles ranges from 2:1 (limited leverage) to 10:1 (high leverage of unfunded
                           products)9. Leverage of the CGV in its first years could allow the issuance of credit guarantees for a conservative
                           estimate of 4 times the capital base, which will enable US$ 2 billion of credit guarantees to mobilize private capital to




_For Official Use Only_
                           finance infrastructure projects. It is expected that the CGV after several years will be able to mobilize USD 10 billion of
                           private capital. The CGV in SA has been inspired by experiences from Nigeria, Indonesia, and India, and tailored to the
                           South African context10.


                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
                          Legal Operational Policies
                                                          Policies                                                                           Triggered?
                            Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                                           No
                            Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                                     No



                            Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          The environmental and social category under OP4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities is
                          Category A (High risk). The risk rating has been assigned due to the anticipated downstream financial exposure
                          associated with the large infrastructure developments, facilitated by guarantees from the CGV, that have a potential to
                          cause significant adverse environmental and social risks and impacts that are considered diverse and irreversible if not
                          properly mitigated.



                          7 The capital at risk in each guarantee is a function of the probability of default of the underlying project underwritten and the time length (i.e., depending on the

                          project events of default only materializes after certain period of time).
                          8 MIGA is currently working on the offering of a re-insurance line to the CGV. The CGV will also be open to work with other reinsurers.
                          9 Infracredit, a recent experience in Nigeria developed by the Nigerian Investment Authority and the Private Infrastructure Development Group (PIDG), after 7 years of

                          operation has a leverage ratio of 6 to 1.
                          10
                               WB (2023): Institutional Investors and Sustainable Infrastructure – A global review of case studies to finance the infrastructure gap


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                          The multi-phased project (MPA) aims to establish a Blended Finance Platform to mobilize private capital, deliver
                          infrastructure services, reduce carbon emissions, and create jobs. The first phase, through an Investment Project
                          Finance (IPF) will support establishing a Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV) to demonstrate effective leverage and
                          mobilization of private capital for critical infrastructure including in the electricity, transport, water and social sectors,
                          while subsequent phases will support upscaling of the CGV. Component 1 of the IPF (first phase of the MPA) will support
                          the capitalization of the CGV through NT. Component 2 will support technical assistance were needed and further
                          development of the project pipeline implemented by private sector.

                          Key environmental and social risks associated with the downstream project pipeline activities supported by CGV include:
                          (i) capacity of private and public sector to assess and manage environmental, health and safety (EHS) risks and impacts,
                          (ii) complex contractor and supply chain EHS management, (iii) poor compliance and enforcement of EHS requirements
                          project developers and contactors, (iv) loss of biodiversity and natural habitats (marine and terrestrial), (v) increased air
                          emissions including greenhouse gasses, (vi) soil and water pollution, (vii) generation of large quantities of hazardous and
                          non-hazardous waste, (viii) fatalities and disabling injuries due to construction related occupational health and safety
                          hazards and (ix) community health and safety risks including traffic related incidents, exposure to construction hazards




_For Official Use Only_
                          such as dust, noise, hazardous substances, (x) life and fire safety risks due poor structural integrity and public space
                          safety considerations, (xi) poor emergency preparedness and response planning,(xii) labor influx; (xiii) excluding
                          vulnerable groups from the decision-making processes; (xiv) challenges in ensuring adequate stakeholder engagement
                          and grievance redress mechanism; and (xv) SEA/SH risks.

                          Risk associated with the initial phases of the project will largely relate to labor and working conditions for members of
                          the Project Implementing Unit (PIU) that will be established under the National Treasury. The PIU will be staffed with an
                          environmental and a social specialist. Labor and working requirements in line with ESS2 as relevant to the PIU will be set
                          out in an Environment and Social Commitments Plan (ESCP). To manage CGV portfolio risk, an Environmental and Social
                          Management System (ESMS) will be prepared to the satisfaction of the Bank and in the timeframe stipulated in the
                          Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP). The ESMS will be prepared in line with national requirements and those of
                          PS1 and will contain the following elements (a) environmental and social policy; (b) clearly defined procedures for
                          identification, assessment and management of portfolio E&S risks and impacts; (c) organizational structure and capacity;
                          (d) procedures for monitoring and review of portfolio E&S risks and impacts and (d) an external communications
                          mechanism in line with PS1. A draft CGV E&S Policy and a summary of the ESMS will be disclosed during project
                          implementation and prior to issuing guarantees. The Bank will conduct prior review for an initial set of subprojects of
                          CGV thereafter conduct supervision spot checks for a number of sub-projects. The details of prior and post review will
                          be described in the POM and main requirements included in the Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP).




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate


                                                                                                                                                    Page 8



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure(P508930)


                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank
                           Hermanus Johannes Marc Schrijver
                           Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                           Joonkyung Seong
                           Senior Energy Economist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           National Treasury
                           Wanga Cibi
                           Chief Director
                           wanga.cibi@treasury.gov.za




_For Official Use Only_
                          Implementing Agencies
                           National Treasury
                           Jeffrey Quvane
                           Chief Director
                           jeffrey.quvane@treasury.gov.za

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Hermanus Johannes Marc Schrijver, Joonkyung Seong

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Consolate K. Rusagara               05-May-2025

                          Country Director:                       Feyifolu Adeyosola Boroffice        20-Jun-2025




                                                                                                                              Page 9



                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
