Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/13/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04767




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 26, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508124                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       WISE MPA                    2025

                     Operation Name            Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Armenia                   Armenia                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                        ASIA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                      Republic of Armenia      Ministry of Territorial Administration   16-Apr-2025                 25-Jun-2025
                                               and Infrastructure

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     04-Feb-2025               175,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide improved access to efficient and financially sustainable irrigation
                     and rural WSS services in selected areas of Armenia.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed program is aimed at providing improved access to efficient and financially sustainable irrigation and rural
                     WSS services in selected areas of Armenia through a partnership involving the Government of Armenia, the World Bank,
                     and other development partners. Recognizing that the goals of this program cannot be addressed through a single
                     operation, it will be operationalized through a Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) to facilitate sustainable
                     transformation. The phases are progressive, and each phase maintains a similar structure and builds towards the
                     achievement of the overall program development objective. The structure of the MPA is uninterrupted to ensure that
                     the Program's activities continue without a gap in the implementation of the key activities. The MPA includes (i) a six-

                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     year Phase 1 (2025-2031) with focused investments in enhancing the institutional capacity of critical water sector
                     entities, revision to the methodology and structure of irrigation and WSS tariffs, completing core water sector
                     strategies, finalizing all infrastructure investment feasibility and design stage documents for all proposed investments in
                     irrigation and RWSS, civil works to modernize 2-3 irrigation schemes, and construction/rehabilitation of selected
                     settlements for rural WSS on a pilot basis using performance-based conditions; and (ii) a six-year Phase 2 (2029-2035) to
                     scale-up and expand infrastructure investments in all remaining irrigation schemes and priority settlements for rural
                     WSS with a focus on operational and financial efficiency, and climate adaptation. The second phase will place a strong
                     emphasis on institutionalization and widespread uptake of the policies, plans, strategies, and tools developed under the
                     previous phase. The Phase 1 project, using the Investment Project Financing (IPF) lending instrument with performance-
                     based conditions (PBCs), aims to enhance climate-resilient access, efficiency, and financial sustainability of irrigation and
                     rural water supply and sanitation (WSS) in selected areas of Armenia. It will focus on four components: (i) Component 1
                     – Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening for Reliable and Sustainable Irrigation Services: This component
                     will focus on strengthening national water resources policy and planning through development of a comprehensive
                     national water strategy, a ten-year national irrigation strategy, a WSS national strategy, an irrigation master plan, and
                     legal and regulatory reform. It will furthermore improve irrigation sector management and service delivery through a
                     review of tariffs and subsidies, transformation of the Water Supply Agency into an efficient and customer-oriented
                     irrigation service provider, strengthening of the Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure (MTAI) and the
                     Water Committee (WC), and establishing a National Irrigation Center of Excellence for training and research. (ii)
                     Component 2 – Public Sector Capacity Development and Enhancement of Rural WSS Infrastructure: This component will
                     first focus on institutional strengthening, capacity building, and investment planning of rural WSS services through
                     development of rural WSS sector policies, a roadmap, tariff reform, and strengthening management capacities at the




Public Disclosure
                     national and local levels. Furthermore, it will support investment planning, including the preparation of feasibility
                     studies for priority rural WSS investments for both MPA phases. Lastly, it will support the construction of WSS
                     infrastructure in selected underserved settlements. (iii) Component 3 – Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System
                     Management: This component will focus on financing rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation systems at
                     main, secondary, and tertiary canal levels. Activities include rehabilitation and modernization of headworks, main
                     canals, and secondary and tertiary network levels currently managed jointly by WSA at the large main canal and
                     reservoirs level and by WUAs at the secondary and tertiary distributary level. It will further focus on rehabilitating some
                     critical infrastructure under the responsibility of the WSA to ensure continuous provision of irrigation water to WUAs in
                     priority command areas. (iv) Component 4 – Project Management: This component will support project
                     implementation, including procurement and financial management (FM) related to implementation of civil works,
                     compliance with agreed environmental and social management measures, and project monitoring and evaluation
                     (M&E). This component will finance staff costs; coordination of the project-financed activities with other ongoing
                     International Financial Institution (IFI) projects in the water sector; and design, implementation, and reporting of
                     baseline and project completion surveys.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Project has shortlisted nine irrigation schemes for potential financing, with two/three schemes to be selected for
                     implementation under Phase 1 from the potential list. The schemes are located across Kotayk/Lori marzes in Armenia,
                     with canals flowing through agricultural zones to support irrigation for farmlands. Some sections may pass near or
                     within the protective zones of designated natural areas or buffers. The current infrastructure is generally ageing as they
                     were built during the Soviet times. Insufficient night storage, connectivity, and poor water control result in high

                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     operational losses from the headworks to the tertiary networks. Rural communities in the target irrigation schemes
                     mostly depend on small-scale farming for food security and income. Beyond agriculture, those rural areas often lack
                     diverse employment opportunities, exacerbating poverty and social inequities. Those rural areas often have a high
                     proportion of vulnerable populations, such as low-income households (HH), elderly individuals, women-headed HHs,
                     and communities with limited access to essential services. On the WSSs, the project will target rural settlements that
                     are currently underserved. Rural sanitation is underdeveloped, with most households relying on pit latrines and very
                     few settlements connected to partially functioning wastewater treatment plants. According to assessments, water
                     quality is worsening, with 29% of surface water and 7% of groundwater bodies 'at risk,' mainly due to untreated
                     wastewater, agricultural runoff, and waste. Vulnerable and marginalized groups, such as elderly, low-income families,
                     ethnic minorities or individuals with disabilities, women-headed households, often face greater barriers to accessing
                     water services and participating in community decision-making. The required level of irrigation modernization and WSS
                     investments will be determined during the feasibility and detailed design phase with environmental and social impacts
                     being considered.




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure (MTAI) in collaboration with the Water Committee (WC)
                     with Interim project coordination team (PCT) under the WC will be responsible for implementation of the project
                     activities. A longer-term project management structure will be established by government while development of
                     strategies will be carried out under the leadership of the Deputy Prime Minister’s office and executed by the MTAI and




Public Disclosure
                     the WC. Since the PCT will be a new established unit, the institutional capacity on environmental and social
                     management is expected to be limited. Neither the WC nor the PCT have experience implementing the World Bank
                     Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and environmental and social standards (ESSs), implying substantial efforts
                     for capacity building will be needed. The role of the WUAs is expected to be critical to deliver social outcomes during
                     implementation including community engagement and mobilization and ensuring measures to promote equitable
                     access to water services. However, their capacity in general is also limited, particularly following the earlier merger
                     which expands their geographical catchment areas. In anticipation of these capacity constraints, the project is required
                     to hire a team of E&S specialists, with expertise in E&S risk management, stakeholder engagement (SE), grievance
                     management, land acquisition, and occupational and community health and safety (HS). Future needs for additional
                     experts and personnel shall be assessed as the project is being implemented as well as in view of emerging risks on the
                     ground. Further, the PCT shall establish a clear coordination arrangement between the E&S and the technical teams to
                     ensure incorporation of risk management in the design measures and shall organize thematic capacity building on E&S
                     management to relevant personnel involved in project. These requirements will be established in the project's
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial




                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     The environmental risk is assessed as substantial due to the risks and impacts associated with Components 1, 2, and 3
                     under Phase 1. Key risks/impacts include: i) enhancing and expanding rural WSSs, to improve rural quality of life,
                     which could increase nutrient and pollutant concentrations at discharge points, negatively affecting surface and
                     groundwater quality in natural aquifers; ii) increased water uptake from surface or groundwater sources, which may
                     cause environmental impacts, including competition for water use, resulting in moderate to substantial long-term
                     consequences on ecosystem balance, depending on the source and volume of water extracted. iii); medium-scale
                     rehabilitation/construction activities, including the construction of small-scale reservoirs under Components 2 and 3
                     may generate construction, hazardous, and organic waste (e.g., from vegetation clearing in existing WSSs and ISs),
                     noise, dust, sedimentation, Occupational and Community Health and Safety risks for communities due to
                     vehicle/machinery movement. National strategies for water, WSS and irrigation under the Project component 1 may
                     have broad environmental implications: i) disruption of water balance and alteration of ecosystems and habitats; ii)
                     pollution from insufficiently treated wastewater near discharge points; iii) lack of resilience in the irrigation sector to
                     climate change impacts. The long-term E&S outcomes will depend on how effectively these risks are addressed during
                     the development of the strategies and managed by the preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social
                     Assessment (SESA). The WC has no prior experience with the ESF triggered projects, will hire designated E&S staff to
                     prepare E&S instruments and manage E&S aspects of the Project during preparation and implementation.
                     Considering the above risks, including the institutional capacity constraints and the potential complexity of managing
                     such risks, the environmental risk is rated as substantial.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social rating for the project is proposed to be substantial to reflect the scope of Phase 1 of the MPA. While the




Public Disclosure
                     project will result in positive social outcomes, there could be residual social impacts due to the quality of project
                     implementation and institutional capacity. Key social aspects to potentially result in adverse impacts include i) poor
                     design, implementation and quality of infrastructure with potential implications on community HS, such as spread of
                     water-borne diseases; ii) perceived and/or real inequitable access to water resources and benefits, including
                     reduction in access to water supplies resulting in conflicts and community tension; iii) lack of inclusive and meaningful
                     stakeholder engagement and exclusion of vulnerable groups from the project's benefits, including the development
                     of national strategies and capacity strengthening; iv) potential tension due to perception of unequal benefits or from
                     having to pay for water, that was previously unmetered that could include reduced access to water supply services
                     due to tariff increase; and v) impacts on private lands, including land acquisition and restrictions on land use in the
                     context of regulating reservoir construction, irrigation network re-alignment and/or widening as well as pipe laying.
                     The extent of land acquisition will be determined by appraisal. However, the project aims to minimize adverse
                     impacts by prioritizing the use of public land with no conflicting land use, thereby avoiding physical and economic
                     displacement as much as possible. For both the irrigation and WSS infrastructure, temporary disruptions in water
                     services and access restrictions on land uses during construction may generate adverse impacts. While labor influx is
                     not anticipated since the project does not involve major scale civil works and require a large workforce, civil works
                     may involve low-skilled migrant workers who could be more exposed to risks of exploitation and discrimination.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards




                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      Civil works will generate construction debris, asbestos-containing materials, organic waste, dust, and noise, impacting
                      local communities and habitats. While improved irrigation and water services boost productivity, they may strain
                      aquifers and increase waterborne disease risks if mismanaged. Since sub-projects will be defined during
                      implementation, a framework approach will guide E&S risk management. The project inherits the framework
                      instruments from an earlier project that was dropped (P180733). Hence, the earlier Environmental and Social
                      Management Framework (ESMF) will be finalized before appraisal, outlining risk mitigation in line with ESSs, including
                      Technical Assistance (TA) and a SESA for policy development. Significant impacts will require Environmental and
                      Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and corresponding Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), while
                      smaller projects may follow ESMP checklists or codes of practices.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      Interested and affected stakeholders include agencies and associated organizations, academic and research
                      organizations, CSOs, local communities, community-based organizations, HHs, including private sector water users,
                      fisheries, farmers directly affected or stand to benefit from the water management decisions . A Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) will be required prior to project appraisal to guide disclosure of information, engagement,
                      consultations, grievance handling along with institutional responsibilities and resourcing for all project activities,
                      covering infrastructure and TA activities. Draft SEP will be prepared at an early stage of project preparation
                      addressing also consultations during preparation. To promote development benefits, the SEP will explore measures
                      to enhance participation and access to benefits in terms of access to water and water services for women and



Public Disclosure
                      vulnerable groups, including but not limited to poor HHs, the elderly, and people with disabilities.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      Project workers may include i) direct workers (i.e., government staff seconded to the project, consultants and experts
                      hired by the WC); ii) contracted workers (i.e., workers hired by contractors, sub-contractors, and consultant firms for
                      design and supervision) and iii) primary supply workers (i.e., workers of suppliers, who on an ongoing basis, provide
                      directly to the project goods and materials essential for the core functions of the project activities), and iv)
                      community workers. The types of project workers will be confirmed prior to the appraisal. Armenia’s Labor Code
                      (2004) and its by laws are generally consistent with the ESS2 and hence, use of the Borrower Framework will be
                      explored during project preparation. Lesson learned in Armenia is that OHS risks may be substantial even in projects
                      that invest predominantly in the rehabilitation/reconstruction of existing infrastructure and hence, the project will
                      include actions to enhance OHS practices during project implementation.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      The rehabilitation/modernization of water supply and irrigation systems will generate construction waste, including
                      ACMs from replaced pipes and organic waste from silt and vegetation removal. Waste management and disposal will
                      comply with national regulations, World Bank Group (WBG) Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) guidelines/EU
                      standards on ACMs. Construction activities may generate dusts, noise, and vibration and will be addressed through
                      application of the existing norms. While improved WSSs will reduce infection risks, untreated sewage discharge could
                      pollute natural water bodies, and increased groundwater abstraction from aquifers, which has been increasingly
                      exacerbated by climate change impacts. Additionally, intensified agriculture may cause soil and water pollution from

                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      agrochemical misuse. These impacts, including sedimentation affects related to small reservoir construction, will be
                      assessed during Project preparation, mitigation measures to be outlined in the ESMF.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                 Relevant

                      Irrigation and WSS systems are typically located in or near settlements, posing risks during rehabilitation,
                      reconstruction, or extension works. Activities like construction vehicle movement, excavation, and temporary
                      material storage can lead to accidents involving local residents. To mitigate these risks, site-specific ESMPs will
                      include measures such as traffic management, dust control through area watering, prohibiting engine idling, and
                      agreeing on contractors' working hours with affected communities. Dam safety requirements will be assessed prior to
                      appraisal in light of the potential investments to finance small-scale regulating reservoirs. Community health and
                      safety risks related to WSS services, such as inadequate treatment of drinking water or non-compliant wastewater
                      discharges, will also be addressed. These measures aim to ensure compliance with regulatory standards and promote
                      residents' well-being as part of the project’s design and ongoing monitoring.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                     Relevant

                      The extent of land acquisition will be determined by appraisal. Phase 1 includes brownfield rehabilitation and
                      greenfield activities, such as small-scale regulating reservoirs. The project will prioritize public land with no conflicting
                      use, but some impacts on private land or informal structures may occur, particularly for linear infrastructure like canal
                      rehabilitation. Alternative engineering solutions will be explored to minimize physical and economic displacement.
                      Underground water pipelines will operate under servitude contracts, avoiding acquisition. Construction may cause




Public Disclosure
                      temporary water disruptions, crop damage, or restricted access. Land may be needed for retrofitting irrigation
                      infrastructure, given the project's focus on rehabilitation. Acquisition modalities may include willing buyer-seller
                      agreements or easements. A draft Resettlement Framework (RF) will be prepared before appraisal to outline
                      requirements for site-specific Resettlement Plans (RPs) when necessary.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                      Relevant
                      Resources

                      Project physical activities under Components 2 and 3, including civil works for rural WSS sanitation enhancements
                      and irrigation upgrades, may involve land clearing, vegetation removal, and temporary work bases, potentially
                      disrupting ecosystems and altering habitats. Water abstraction for irrigation or supply could deplete natural water
                      sources, impact aquatic ecosystems, and threaten biodiversity. Improper waste disposal, construction material
                      storage, and irresponsible wastewater discharge may further pollute and degrade natural habitats. To address these
                      risks, the ESMF will incorporate screening and selection procedures to avoid biodiversity impacts, especially in critical
                      habitats and protected zones. Site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs will detail mitigation measures, sustainable resource
                      management practices, and compliance with ESS6, ensuring alignment with good international industry practices
                      (GIIPs).

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                  Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities




                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                           Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      This standard is not relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples, who meet the definition of this standard, in
                      Armenia.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant

                      Project activities are not expected to affect any known historical/cultural monuments and intangible cultural
                      heritage. However, there is a possibility of unintentional impact on cultural heritage, particularly in areas where
                      excavation works will take place. Chance finds procedure will be developed and included in the ESMF as a
                      precautionary measure, in case artifacts of archaeologic importance are encountered during excavation works. No
                      impacts on intangible cultural heritage are anticipated. No major land acquisition, large scale civil works, physical
                      displacement and/or commercialization of such heritage will be included in the project’s scope.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      None of the project activities will involve financial intermediation activities nor establishment of a Financial
                      Intermediary to deliver project investments, as such this standard is not relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No



Public Disclosure
                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               TBD
                       Use of the Borrower Framework on ESS2 will be explored, building on Armenia's Overview Assessment findings and
                       recommendations. At appraisal, the scope of the use of the Borrower’s Framework will be further clarified including
                       any gap filling measures on specific ESSs in the ESCP.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                    No
                       To be confirmed

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Draft versions of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Framework (RF), and
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) shall be prepared prior to
                     appraisal and will be finalized, incorporating stakeholders’ feedback, within one month following effectiveness.
                     Whether a standalone Labor Management Procedures will be required will be determined during the project
                     preparation since the project is currently exploring use of the Borrower's Framework for the ESS2. The ESCP will include
                     capacity-building initiatives for project implementers, organized by the PIU with support from the World Bank.


                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                          Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)




                     During project implementation, SESA, site-specific impact assessments, including management plans (i.e., ESMPs, RPs)
                     shall be prepared prior to procurement of civil works. Environment and social monitoring report shall be prepared for
                     the World Bank’s review on a bi-annual basis, outlining key issues as well as non-compliances with remedial measures.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Ranu Sinha                            Title:        Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                  RSinha1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Arusyak Alaverdyan                    Job Title:    Sr Agricultural Spec.

                      Email:                  aalaverdyan@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Poolad Karimi                         Job Title:    Senior Irrigation Specialist

                      Email:                  pkarimi@worldbank.org



Public Disclosure    IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Ranu Sinha, Arusyak Alaverdyan, Poolad Karimi

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Lusine Gevorgyan

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Fajar Argo Djati




                    Feb 26, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 9
