Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01173




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
Pakistan, Pakistan,            P508034                        Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply,
Pakistan, Pakistan, Pakistan                                  Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
SOUTH ASIA                     27-Oct-2025                    26-Jan-2026                  Water
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Islamic Republic of Pakistan   Goverment of Sindh
Financing (IPF)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The STAR-WASH-1 Project Development Objective is to increase access to safely managed water supply, sanitation,
and hygiene services in selected rural areas of the Sindh Province.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            450.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                 450.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                300.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                300.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                              300.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                     Page 1
       The World Bank
       Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


     Other Sources                                                                                                   100.00
       Asian Development Bank                                                                                        100.00
     Counterpart Funding                                                                                              50.00
       Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                      50.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                       Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                        The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.        Pakistan has made recent progress towards macroeconomic stabilization, but risks remain high, and faster,
sustained growth will require substantial reform. At the beginning of fiscal year (FY) 2024, following the COVID-19 crisis,
the 2022 catastrophic floods that hit the country, and rising global commodity prices, Pakistan's economy faced a severe
crisis in the context of political uncertainty, global monetary policy tightening, and fiscal and external imbalances that led
to pressures on domestic prices and foreign reserves. Measures to manage imports and capital outflows were introduced,
which disrupted local supply chains and economic activity and exacerbated inflationary pressures. Under the interim
government, an International Monetary Fund (IMF) Stand-By Arrangement was approved in July 2023. Consequently,
exchange rate flexibility was restored, import controls were relaxed, and steps were taken to contain the fiscal deficit.
Political uncertainty also diminished. Coupled with favorable weather conditions and easing external conditions, the
economy began recovering in FY24 and inflation was brought down significantly. Growth of real gross domestic product
(GDP) is estimated to have risen to 2.5 percent year-over-year in FY24, after contracting by 0.2 percent in FY23. However,
downside risks remain high, with the outlook predicated on the new IMF Extended Fund Facility program remaining on
track, continued fiscal restraint, and additional external financing. Heavy banking sector exposure to sovereign debt,
domestic policy uncertainty, and geopolitical factors pose significant risks to the outlook. Robust economic recovery over
the medium term will require the steadfast implementation of fiscal, energy, trade, and other economic reforms.

    2. Pakistan’s high vulnerability to climate change is a risk multiplier, compounding its human and economic
development challenges. It consistently ranks among the top 10 countries most affected by climate change worldwide.
More frequent extreme weather events adversely impact ecosystems, people, and infrastructure. Droughts, floods, and
heat waves are prevalent risks, which could further aggravate Pakistan’s economic fragility by reducing annual GDP by 18
to 20 percent per year by 2050.

    3. The country’s progress on human development is lagging, with prevailing child stunting rates amongst the




                                                                                                                          Page 2
          The World Bank
          Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


highest in the world. Pakistan ranks 141 out of 174 countries on the Human Capital Index.1 About 40 percent of children
under five are stunted, hence at risk of cognitive and physical limitations that can last a lifetime, underscoring a severe
public health crisis linked to chronic malnutrition. It is reported that Pakistan’s stunting rate is higher than South Asia’s
average of 31 percent and close to double the global average of 22 percent. In rural Sindh, two out of three children under
five are stunted, the highest in Pakistan. About 75 percent of the prevalence of stunting in Pakistan is attributable to
inadequate access to safely managed water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services, compounding issues of poor
nutrition, undiversified diets, and inadequate healthcare. Addressing WASH challenges in rural areas is critical to breaking
the cycle of malnutrition and improving child health and socioeconomic development outcomes.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

     4. Whereas most of the rural population in Pakistan has access to an improved source of drinking water, water
quality poses a significant public health concern. The provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), Punjab, and Sindh are home
to an estimated over 90 percent of Pakistan’s rural population (100 million out of 148 million living in rural areas). While
most of the rural population in Pakistan has access to improved drinking water, only 13, 48, and 29 percent in KP, Punjab,
and Sindh have access to safely managed water services, respectively. Water quality remains a major concern in Pakistan,
particularly in rural areas. Poor water quality is linked to stunting in children due to the spread of waterborne diseases
that cause malnutrition and stunted growth. Most rural households in Pakistan are at risk of fecal contamination based
on the number of E. coli detected in household drinking water, with alarming levels in the KP and Sindh provinces. Drinking
water contaminated with E. coli leads to permanent and irreversible damage to the intestinal villi of children, which
hinders their ability to digest nutrients and their long-term life and growth prospects. In addition, self-supply from highly
saline, contaminated groundwater, a prevalent water source in rural Pakistan (78 percent of Sindh rural households rely
on it), further exposes households to heavy metal contamination. Some research suggests that over 14 and 10 percent of
the groundwater sources in Punjab and Sindh, respectively, contain levels of arsenic above World Health Organization
(WHO) guidelines (10 mg/liter). There are no water quality surveillance systems in place, and entities in charge of service
delivery have limited capacity to regulate and monitor water quality regularly.

    5. Access to an improved sanitation facility is still low across rural Pakistan, and fecal waste and wastewater are
generally not safely disposed of or treated. Approximately 70 percent of rural households in Pakistan have access to an
improved sanitation facility, mainly through self-provision, with little attention to latrine quality. Less than 5 percent of
rural households have their on-site sanitation facilities emptied, and sludge treated. Given the absence of regulatory
oversight and any enforcement of design standards, septic tank toilets (mostly soak pits) in rural Pakistan are typically
poorly designed and manually emptied. Consequently, raw sludge or wastewater often leaks into groundwater or is
disposed of near drains, water bodies, or open spaces, adversely impacting ecological systems and human health. The lack
of properly engineered sanitation systems is a significant concern in Sindh, where more than 50 percent of the land is
waterlogged; hence, traditional latrines do not provide a safe solution due to high water tables. Open defecation continues
to be a significant concern.

    6. There is limited removal and treatment of sludge and wastewater. Virtually no public investment has been made
in collecting and treating fecal waste and wastewater, which is disposed of in situ or through open public drains, prevalent
across rural Pakistan, generating stagnant pools of sewage near dwelling areas in villages. The limited collection and
treatment of sludge/wastewater also undermines water security by polluting waterways and reducing the quantity of
available freshwater. Even though good data on desludging providers and the operational status of sludge and wastewater
treatment plants is limited, household surveys estimated that only 2 percent of the population in rural Punjab and Sindh


1
    The Human Capita Index quantifies the contribution of health and education to the productivity of the next generation of workers.

                                                                                                                                  Page 3
       The World Bank
       Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


have access to safely managed sanitation services.

    7. Inadequate hygiene practices (including handwashing) are common. In rural Punjab and Sindh, for example, in a
World Bank study soap was found near the handwashing area in only a quarter of households, no respondents washed
their hands with soap before feeding their children, and only seven percent of household members washed their hands
with soap after cleaning their latrines.

     8. Several factors explain the poor results in access to safely managed water supply and sanitation services and
hygiene practices in rural Pakistan. In addition to inadequate monitoring and limited data to inform decision-making
(particularly sequencing of investments), the institutional setup has prioritized the development of water supply schemes
without consideration for sustainability, and clear responsibilities assigned to post-completion operation and
maintenance (O&M) and behavioral change promotion. In addition, rural areas have been significantly left behind in
budget allocation for sector development, mainly sanitation services (on-site sanitation, sludge removal and treatment,
and wastewater collection and treatment). Limited end-user contributions and no contributions from local government
to finance service provision are the norm in Pakistan’s rural areas.

    9. The sustainability of rural water and sanitation schemes is jeopardized by an institutional framework geared
towards asset creation, with no incentive for performance. Provincial departments, such as the Public Health Engineering
Department (PHED) and Local Government, have traditionally engaged in developing water supply schemes, open drains
to evacuate household wastewater, and, to a limited extent, on-site sanitation facilities and fecal sludge/wastewater
management. The prevailing design philosophy in these schemes places limited attention on the ground conditions (such
as freshwater and groundwater availability and quality, population density, and socioeconomic profile), responds to
budget availability rather than population needs, tends to result in overdesigned and over-costed schemes, and does not
account for the O&M requirements (capacity, cost, availability of spare parts and inputs). For O&M, the provincial
departments transfer the schemes to the communities, which lack asset ownership and technical capacity, and face limited
financial and human resources. The separation between the responsibilities for asset development and O&M has resulted
in high rates of dysfunctional water schemes (52 percent in Sindh and 25 percent in Punjab). The rural water sector in
Pakistan is broadly unfamiliar with professional water service delivery, lacks community mobilization, and critical
regulatory functions are still to be defined -including scheme performance, minimum services standards, water quality
monitoring, and tariff setting, review and adjustment, and hygiene promotion is forgotten.

    10. In the past decades, the rural WASH sector has suffered from a lack of programmatic planning and massive
under-investment. A lack of strategic investment planning in infrastructure development and service delivery has led to
largely unmet investment and massive funding needs to achieve universal access to safely managed services in Pakistan’s
rural areas. Investments are not targeted and are made in an ad-hoc and fragmented manner without accounting for O&M
costs, technologies adapted to water and sanitation challenges, and behavior change. Limited annual budget allocations
are insufficient to achieve the provinces’ goals, with an estimated annual allocation for the FY starting in July 2024 of
US$119 million in Punjab and US$35 million in Sindh, the highest in a decade. To achieve universal access to safely
managed water and sanitation services, annual estimates indicate a yearly spending gap of US$1.7 billion in Punjab and
US$0.6 billion in Sindh to cover capital expansion, rehabilitation, and maintenance.

    11. A new generation of emerging provincial programs promotes professionalized service delivery and financial
sustainability. The enactment of the Water Acts by the Governments of Punjab (2019) and KP (2020) represents a critical
step in advancing regulatory oversight and enabling the delivery of safely managed water supply and sanitation services.
The Punjab Rural Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation Project (PRSWSSP) established a professionalized service
delivery Company -the Punjab Rural Municipal Services Company (PRMSC)- to provide WSS services and improved hygiene
practices in selected rural areas in Punjab, emphasizing long-term financial sustainability by delivering safely managed

                                                                                                                     Page 4
          The World Bank
          Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


water supply and sanitation services backed up by robust water quality monitoring, behavioral change interventions, and
financial contributions from end-users to sustain O&M cost-recovery. Similarly, the Government of Sindh (GoS) has revived
its commitment and ambition to improve rural WASH outcomes, as demonstrated by placing water as one of the three
top priorities for the GoS in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Framework for Sindh as per the 2023 Sindh Water
Policy 2023, including placing a significant emphasis on improving water quality by reducing pollution, minimizing the
release of hazardous chemicals and materials, and halving the proportion of untreated wastewater; to protect and restore
water-related ecosystems to achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water and adequate
and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying particular attention to the needs of women
and girls and those in vulnerable situations. The GoS has also prioritized expanding access to improved WASH in rural areas
to abate stunting levels and has pledged to increase investments in the sector, including a budget allocation for O&M.

    Relationship to CPF

    12. The Pakistan Rural WASH MPA and STAR WASH-1 (Rural WASH MPA Phase 1) are aligned with the World Bank
Group (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for FY26-35. Where it will be
co-located with other operations in Sindh (e.g. National Health Support Program, Sindh Integrated Health and Population
Project, Strengthening Social Protection Delivery System in Sindh), the Rural WASH MPA is expected to be a key
contributor to achieving the CPF Outcome 1 (Reduced child stunting). It will do so by improving access to water and
sanitation services and strengthening hygiene for an estimated 6.7 million people. It is also expected to contribute to the
CPF Outcome 4 (Cleaner energy and better air quality), as most water supply and sanitation schemes built under the MPA
Phases are envisioned to rely on solar energy as a primary energy source.

    C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

        13. The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to provide safely managed water supply, sanitation, and hygiene
    services in rural areas in selected provinces of Pakistan.


     Key Results (From PCN)

    14. The PrDO result indicator is “people provided with water, sanitation, and hygiene, of which (%) is safely
managed.”2 The end-MPA target at the concept note stage is 6.7 million people benefiting from WASH services, which will
be refined during preparation based on identifying the beneficiaries of each MPA phase.

    D. Concept Description

    15. The proposed MPA is comprised of four mutually reinforcing pillars: (a) sector governance, (b) access to water
supply services, (c) access to sanitation, and (d) behavioral change for strengthened hygiene. Subsequent phases of the
MPA will customize the theory of change (ToC) based on their needs, priorities, available resources, and capabilities,
provided these are aligned with the PrDO.

    16. The proposed MPA at the concept stage comprises four overlapping phases. Its total estimated envelope is
US$2.15 billion, which is expected to be financed through IDA/IBRD funds, counterpart funding, and co-financing from
other development partners. The implementation timeframe will be from FY26 to FY35, coinciding with the CPF’s
timeframe. It encompasses the Sindh, KP, and Punjab provinces, with the potential to add Balochistan province based on

2
    New World Bank Group Score Card, FY24-FY30. Driving Actions into Results. Updated on April 9th, 2024.

                                                                                                                       Page 5
       The World Bank
       Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


client demand.

    17. The proposed MPA Phase 1, STAR-WASH-1 Project, focuses on building the pillars for a sustainable service
delivery model in rural Sindh with a proposed indicative IBRD/IDA financing amount of $300 million and an indicative
counterpart/co-financing amount of $150 million. At concept stage it is being prepared as a 7-year implementation perio,
which could be adjusted during preparation. Learning from the country and other global experiences and supported by
Performance Based Conditions (PBCs), the STAR-WASH-1 Project will lay the foundations for accelerating and scaling up
access to water supply and sanitation services and strengthened hygiene practices in Sindh rural areas, after more than
two decades of absence of a major multilateral institution in the rural space. As such, the Project is expected to benefit
1.3 million people with safely managed water supply and sanitation services, and strengthened hygiene practices. Enabling
mechanisms for solid waste management will be explored. A key feature of the STAR-WASH-1 Project is the support to
the development of a transformational delivery model, comprised of a rural WASH policy and regulatory framework to
guide action in the medium to long term; the engagement of a professionalized company to lead investment planning,
development, and O&M; and the definition of financing mechanisms to support long-term sustainability, including
recurrent, predictable budget allocations for investment and O&M, and users contributions. Recognizing the magnitude
of investment needs, through analytical work and sector dialogue, the STAR-WASH-1 will identify potential water and
sanitation investments that could be financed by other development partners and the private sector and is envisioned to
fund project preparation packages – including feasibility studies, bidding documents, and environmental and social
assessments – to ensure readiness for investment.

    18. The proposed MPA Phases two, three, and four will build on the expected maturity of the sector by using
provincial systems to accelerate results. A critical element will be consolidating the service delivery models adopted under
PRSWSS-1 and STAR-WASH-1, strengthening sector governance and accountability through improved regulations,
innovative pricing mechanisms, and regular publicly available performance reporting. Given the strong pillars established
under PRSWSS-1 and STAR-WASH-1, the proposed MPA Phases will focus in part on expanding access to safely managed
services across the provinces, potentially aiming to reach last-mile dispersed populations in locations with limited water
availability and potentially aiming to crowd in the private sector to develop and manage selected schemes across some of
the provinces’ locations. For example, a viability gap fund could be added to these Phases to enhance the bankability of
water and sanitation investments involving the private sector.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



   19. At the concept stage, the environmental and social risk ratings area are assessed as Substantial. The Project will
reduce the risk of (a) consuming contaminated water, (b) over-exploitation of groundwater by supporting the
development of surface water schemes, and (c) groundwater contamination. Water schemes developed or rehabilitated

                                                                                                                        Page 6
       The World Bank
       Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


under the STAR-WASH will have adequate treatment facilities for heavy metals, chemicals, and bacteriological
contaminants. The schemes will rely on surface water, mainly from the canals, given the high levels of groundwater
contamination, and hence, will reduce the pressure on these resources. Finally, on-site sanitation facilities, fecal sludge
management, and wastewater (when needed and economically viable) will reduce the potential contamination from
leaching toilets and inadequate disposal and treatment of sludge/wastewater. All the construction interventions will be
accompanied by social and community mobilization activities to ensure community engagement and ownership.

     20. Despite the significant benefits the Project will bring to improve groundwater resource management, several
Project-related environmental risks require adequate mitigation measures. Household pipe water connections are likely
to increase the volumes of wastewater. Hence, the Project must co-locate water intervention with adequate sanitation
interventions to avoid sewage disposal in open drains. Improperly constructed household latrines and water systems in
Sindh can contaminate groundwater, deplete water sources, pollute soil and surface water, and increase disease risks;
therefore, the Project shall develop minimum standards for latrine construction. Potential improper handling and disposal
of the sludge once septic tanks are cleaned will be minimized by the implementation of fecal sludge management
interventions, including regulations to ensure that sludge trucks dispose of their content in fecal sludge treatment plants.
Likely adverse environmental impacts from construction include: construction waste generation, noise, air pollution, and
health and safety issues. The use of solar panels will result in battery waste and other e-waste. Besides these, there are
pre-exisitng environmental conditions in the project area, including potentially contaminated water sources and lack of
sanitation facilities. The project also intends to finance fecal sludge treatment plants catering to multiple beneficiary
villages within each thesil. Exact design and location of such FSTPs is not yet identified; an environment and social
assessment for each such facility will be conducted once the design and location are finalized. Envisaged operational risks
from handling of wastewater and sludge pertain to infection prevention and control, and disease vectors emanating from
potentially stagnant wastewater ponds and FSTPs.While the civil works-related environmental risks are minor to moderate
and localized in nature at the household level, these risks may exacerbate in case of design failure of sanitation services,
inadequate operations and maintenance, and if the project does not effectively integrate community engagement,
behavior change, and communication strategies into project design. Furthermore, risks related to the operations of FSTPs
are substantial due to the hazardous nature of the sludge. The limited capacity to manage E&S risks at the counterpart
Government departments further accentuates the environmental risks.

      21. Social risks related to the Project are mainly associated with social conflicts over water distribution among
communities, due diligence of voluntary land donation for minor land parcels required for water supply and sanitation
schemes, and risk of access to services for marginalized and vulnerable groups, particularly ethnic groups and minorities.
It is anticipated that the Voluntary Land Donation procedure will be adopted to fulfill small-scale land requirements for
the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure where government-owned or communal lands are not available.
The risk of encountering squatters/encroachers at government or communal lands is substantial. There is a possibility that
religious and ethnic groups, as well as other vulnerable and marginalized communities, including persons with different
abilities, will not be able to access project interventions and improved water supply and sanitation services. Moderate
SEA/SH risks are associated with the presence of construction labor within the villages and interaction of staff from firms
conducting behavior change and awareness activities with women and children. All the construction interventions will be
accompanied by social and community mobilization activities to ensure community engagement and ownership, as well
as the acceptability of fees/tariffs associated with the delivery of water supply and sanitation services.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT



                                                                                                                        Page 7
     The World Bank
     Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services Project (P508034)


World Bank
 Carolina Dominguez Torres
 Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Implementing Agencies
 Goverment of Sindh
 Najam Shah
 Chairman, Planning and Development Board
 shah.najam@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Carolina Dominguez Torres

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Josses Mugabi                         17-Apr-2025

Country Director:                        Gailius J. Draugelis                  09-May-2025




                                                                                                                Page 8
