Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          Banco do Brasil (BB)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest
                               Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture
                                                 Project
                                                P508202




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
                                     COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                            Draft for Appraisal
                                               09/18/2025




                                                                        Official Use Only
                         ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN



1. The Banco do Brasil – BB (the Borrower) will implement the Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest
   Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project P508202 (the Project) as set out in the Loan
   Agreement (the Agreement). The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the Bank)
   has agreed to provide financing for the Project, as set out in the Agreement.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the Environmental and
   Social Standards (ESSs) and this Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), in a manner
   acceptable to the Bank. The ESCP is a part of the Agreement. Unless otherwise defined in this ESCP,
   capitalized terms used in this ESCP have the meanings ascribed to them in the Agreement.

3. Without limitation to the foregoing, this ESCP sets out material measures and actions that the
   Borrower shall carry out or cause to be carried out, including, as applicable, their respective
   timeframes; institutional, staffing, training, monitoring and reporting arrangements; and grievance
   management. The ESCP also sets out the environmental and social (E&S) documents that shall be
   prepared or updated, consulted, disclosed and implemented under the Project, consistent with the
   ESSs, in form and substance acceptable to the Bank. Said E&S documents may be revised from time
   to time with prior written agreement by the Bank. As provided for under the referred Agreement, the
   Borrower shall ensure that there are sufficient funds available to cover the costs of implementing the
   ESCP.

4. As agreed by the Bank and the Borrower, this ESCP will be revised from time to time, if necessary, to
   reflect adaptive management of Project changes or unforeseen circumstances or in response to
   Project performance. In such circumstances, the Bank and the Borrower agree to update the ESCP to
   reflect these changes through an exchange of letters signed between the Bank and the Borrower’s
   Representative specified in the Agreement. The Borrower shall promptly disclose the updated ESCP.

5. The subsection on “Indicators for Implementation Readiness” below identifies the actions and
   measures to be monitored to assess Project readiness to begin implementation in accordance with
   this ESCP. Nevertheless, all actions and measures in this ESCP shall be implemented as set out in the
   “Timeframe” column below irrespective of whether they are listed in the referred subsection.




                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                 TIMEFRAME                   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS AND CAPACITY SUPPORT
 A     ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
             a.   Maintain an organizational capacity and competency for implementing i) the ESMS and ii)          a. Throughout Project                   BB
                  the Project-Specific Environmental and Social Management Manual (action 1.2, below) with         implementation.
                  clearly defined roles and responsibilities.
                                                                                                                   b. and c. No later than 30 days after
             b.   Designate a senior management representative to have overall accountability for
                                                                                                                   the Effective Date of the Loan
                  environmental and social performance of FI subprojects that receive support from the
                                                                                                                   Agreement.
                  Project.
             c.   Designate 1 (one) staff member, as part of the Project Management Unit (PMU), to act as a
                  focal point for the E&S aspects of the Project and to be responsible for internal coordination
                  and liaison regarding compliance with the actions of this ESCP.
 B      TRAINING AND CAPACITY BUILDING
        Provide periodical training to the environmental and social staff of the institution, including the        Periodically, throughout Project        BB
        Project’s focal points and other relevant parties, on the relevant E&S risk management procedures          implementation. At least annually.
        as part of BB ESMS capacity building and training programs, including, inter alia:

             •    E&S and Climate Policy (PRSAC)
             •    Risk assessment and screening procedures
             •    Monitoring and reporting
             •    GRM management
             •    Occupational Health and Safety
             •    Measures to prevent SEA/SH
             •    Workers’ Code of Conduct




                                                                                                                                                                                3


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                TIMEFRAME                   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 MONITORING AND REPORTING
 C    REGULAR REPORTING
        Prepare and submit to the Bank regular monitoring reports on the environmental, social, health and         Bi-annually, commencing after          BB
        safety (ESHS) performance of the Project. The reports shall include, inter alia:                           Project Effectiveness and no later
                                                                                                                   than 60 days after the end of each
             •   Summary of the FI subprojects financed through the Project, and the overall portfolio risk,
                                                                                                                   reporting period.
                 profiled by sector.
             •   Description of material measures taken to ensure that the management of environmental
                 and social risks of FI subprojects is conducted in a manner consistent with the objectives and
                 requirements of the relevant ESSs.
             •   Status of FI sub-borrowers’ performance on the management of E&S risks of subprojects and
                 fulfillment of conditions required under their environmental licenses.
             •   Summary of stakeholder engagement activities carried out by FI sub-borrowers.
             •   Complaints submitted to the grievance mechanism and progress made in facilitating their
                 resolution.
             •   Number and status of resolution of incidents and accidents reported under action D below.
             •   Other information as further defined in the Project’s POM and ESMM.

   D    INCIDENTS AND ACCIDENTS
        Promptly notify the Bank relevant incident or accident related to a) workers directly engaged by BB        Notify the Bank no later than 5        BB
        to work specifically in relation to the Project and b) the subprojects that has, or is likely to have, a   business days after receiving
        significant adverse effect on the environment, local communities, workers’ health and safety               written notification about the
        conditions, including those resulting in death or significant injury to workers or the public as well as   incident or accident. Incident or
        cases of sexual exploitation or abuse (SEA), or sexual harassment (SH). Thereafter, provide available      accident report and CAP will be
        details of the incident or accident to the Bank upon request, including the incident or accident           provided in an acceptable
        report and the Corrective Action Plan (CAP) in an acceptable timeframe agreed with the Bank.               timeframe agreed with the Bank.
 ESS 1: ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS
  1.1    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT MANUAL
        Develop a Project-specific Environmental and Social Management Manual (ESMM), as part of the               Develop and disclose in BB website     BB
        Project’s POM, based on: i) BB’s existing Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS); ii)           the ESMM no later than 30 days
        the Project-specific Exclusion List (action 1.3, below); iii) the requirements of the ESCP. The Manual     after the Effective Date of the Loan
        shall set the Project-specific E&S criteria to validate the eligible expenditure submitted for             Agreement and thereafter apply
        reimbursement, in line with the Loan Agreement and exclusion list.                                         the Manual throughout Project
                                                                                                                   implementation.




                                                                                                                                                                               4


                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                              TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 1.2  ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
        a.   Submit for prior review and no-objection by the Bank the first three proposals to provide Sub-       Throughout Project                   BB
             loans for Eligible SMEs and rural producers.                                                         implementation.
        b.   Submit for prior review and no-objection by the Bank all proposals to provide Sub-loans for
             subprojects to be implemented within indigenous lands and/or collective traditional territories
             by representative organizations of indigenous and traditional peoples.
        c.   Screen each proposed subproject against the Project Exclusion List and eligibility criteria set in
             the Project-specific ESMM as a condition for granting financing.
        d.   Facilitate the Bank in periodically carrying out implementation support and reviews (on a random
             basis) of financed subprojects, including visits to Banco do Brasil and selected subprojects.
  1.3   EXCLUSION LIST
        Screen all proposed FI subprojects against BB existing exclusion, restriction and alert list, including   Throughout Project                   BB
        any other particular conditions as determined in this ESCP. Additionally, BB shall not grant financing    implementation
        to subprojects:

             •   High and substantial risk per Bank’s criteria. Above “D” (medium level) per BB ESMS.
             •   Involved with sexual exploitation of minors or child labor; degrading labor practices or
                 conditions analogous to slavery; unresolved lawsuits from local populations over
                 significant E&S issues.
             •   Operating subprojects in critical habitats or converting/degrading natural habitats, or
                 IBAMA’s embargoed area.
             •   That may lead to:
                      o Adverse impacts on land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or
                           under customary use or occupation and/or their cultural heritage, relocation of
                           Indigenous Peoples.
                      o Commercial use of Indigenous Peoples’ cultural heritage. Proposals of subprojects
                           on forest restoration and bioeconomy development submitted by Indigenous
                           Peoples and Traditional Communities that are based on the use of their traditional
                           knowledge will be allowed.
                      o Forced eviction or land acquisition causing physical and/or economic
                           displacement.
                      o Forest clearing (habitat conversion or loss) of primary or secondary forest under
                           advanced or middle stage of regeneration, according to the Brazilian legislation
                           (potential critical habitats per ESS6).


                                                                                                                                                                            5


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                 TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
                  o Adverse impacts on areas that – due to their biodiversity, conservation value, or
                       ecosystem services – are protected by the State, unless evidence is provided that
                       shows the activity does not interfere with the protection purposes.
                  o Intentionally introduce new alien species (not currently established in the country
                       or the Project area).
                  o Significant adverse impacts on tangible and intangible cultural heritage as well as
                       on community health and safety.
          • Subprojects that require land acquisition through expropriation or other compulsory
             procedures, or through negotiated settlements in which failure to reach settlement would
             result in expropriation or other compulsory procedures, or forced eviction.
          • Subprojects located in or in the buffer zones of Indigenous Lands and Traditional
             Territories unless proposed by representative organizations of the population of these
             areas.
 1.4  MANAGEMENT OF CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS
        Cause FI sub-borrowers to: a) incorporate the relevant E&S Obligations (as per BB ESMS) into the            Throughout Project                    BB
        E&S specifications of the procurement documents and contracts with contractors and suppliers,               implementation
        including those related to the compliance with the applicable ESSs requirements as describe in this
        ESCP and, thereafter; b) take measures to ensure that the contractors comply with and require their
        subcontractors to comply with the E&S specifications of their respective contracts, as applicable.
  1.5   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
        Ensure that the consultancies, studies (including feasibility studies, if applicable), capacity building,   The technical assistance activities   BB
        training, and any other technical assistance activities under the Project are carried out in                are carried out consistent with the
        accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the Bank, that are consistent with the ESSs.               ESSs throughout Project
        Thereafter ensure that the outputs of such activities comply with the terms of reference and are            implementation.
        consistent with the ESSs.
  1.6   ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO RETROACTIVE FINANCING
        Submit to the Bank a report providing evidence that the sub-projects have been screened against             As a condition for disbursement of    BB
        the Project’s exclusion list and eligibility criteria and there are no issues in non-compliance with the    retroactive expenditure.
        requirements set in the Project-specific ESMM and this ESCP. The POM will further define the
        content and format of the corresponding report.




                                                                                                                                                                               6


                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                               TIMEFRAME                 RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 ESS 2: LABOR AND WORKING CONDITIONS
  2.1    LABOR MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                 a. Throughout Project
             a.   Ensure through the screening of subprojects carried out according to the ESMS and the                                                BB
                                                                                                                 implementation, and as a condition
                  Project-specific Environmental and Social Management Manual that each beneficiary SME
                                                                                                                 for grant the financing to
                  and/or rural producer and/or association is in compliance with the Brazilian national law,
                                                                                                                 subprojects.
                  BB’s ESMS and the requirements of this ESS with regards to provisions on working
                  conditions, management of workers relationships, occupational health and safety
                  (including personal protective equipment, and emergency preparedness and response),            b. As part of the regular reporting
                  code of conduct (including relating to SEA and SH), forced labor, child labor, and grievance   (same timeframe as action A,
                  arrangements for Project workers.                                                              above)
             b.   Provide evidence through the reports mentioned in action A (above) that the sub-
                  borrowers are in compliance with the Brazilian labor legislation (including with respect to
                  child and forced labor).
  2.2   CODE OF CONDUCT
        Provide information, carry out awareness raising campaigns, and cause direct and contracted              Throughout Project                    BB
        Project workers (i.e., those who are employed or engaged to perform works that are essential for a       implementation
        specific Project activity and without which the Project cannot continue, regardless of location -
        employees of Banco do Brasil, outsourced workers and workers hired by contractors and
        consultancy firms) to abide by the standards of behavior to combat discrimination, moral and
        sexual harassment, abuse, and exploitation, and all forms of gender-based violence, as state in the
        Code of Ethics and Integrity of Banco do Brasil and the country legislation.
  2.3   GRIEVANCE MECHANISM FOR PROJECT WORKERS
                                                                                                                 a. Throughout Project
             a.   Inform all direct and contracted Project workers (employees of Banco do Brasil and                                                   BB
                                                                                                                 implementation
                  outsourced workers directly involved in Project supported activities) about the grievance
                                                                                                                 b. Same timeframe as action A,
                  mechanism Banco do Brasil has in place to raise concerns about workplace conditions.
                                                                                                                 above.
             b.   Annually report to the World Bank about concerns and complaints raised by Project
                  workers about workplace conditions and their resolution.




                                                                                                                                                                            7


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                               TIMEFRAME                        RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 ESS 3: RESOURCE EFFICIENCY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT
  3.1    RESOURCE EFFICIENCY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT
          Incorporate in the sub-loan agreements E&S Obligations causing the FI Sub-borrowers (their                            Throughout Project                          BB
          contractors and subcontractors) to adopt in their subprojects and monitor the implementation of                       implementation
          the material measures to: ensure efficient use of raw materials, optimization of energy and water
          use, ensure the safe management of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, and chemicals, proper
          treatment of wastewater, among other, as applicable, as required by the Brazilian environmental
          legislation and ESS 3.
 ESS 4: COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY
  4.1    COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY RISKS
               a.   Provide evidence through the reports mentioned in Action A (above) that the sub-                            a. Throughout Project                       BB
                    borrowers whose subprojects may cause adverse risks and impacts on community health                         implementation, according to the
                    and safety1, as identified through the screening procedures set in the Project ESMM, have                   timeframe set in Action A (above).
                    in place mitigation measures to address such risks.
                                                                                                                                b. Throughout Project
               b.   Ensure firms directly contracted to carry out core activities of the project that involve face-             implementation.
                    to-face interactions with sub-borrowers, rural producers and local communities take
                    measures to i) preventing the spread of communicable diseases and ensuring the health of
                    project workers, and ii) training on and requiring their workers to follow proper behavioral
                    standards and respect distinct cultural values and beliefs.
  4.2     SEA AND SH RISKS
               a.   Broadly disseminate the Code of Ethics and Integrity of Banco do Brasil among direct and                    Throughout Project                          BB
                    contracted Project workers.                                                                                 implementation.
               b.   Ensure firms directly contracted to carry out core activities of the project that involve face-
                    to-face interactions with sub-borrowers, rural producers and local communities take
                    measures to training on and requiring their workers to follow proper behavioral standards
                    and do not condone with SEA/SH and any other form of gender-based violence.
               c.   Do not grant financing to sub-borrowers who are convicted of moral or sexual harassment.




1 Such as exposure to odors, to excessive lighting, to significant noise or dust and to disease vectors or increased risk of disease spread; risks of fires and explosions; movement or storage of toxic
materials that may generate contamination of the environment; use of machinery and equipment that can lead to accidents; increased risk of traffic accidents; transport of hazardous or unhealthy
materials that can lead to accidents).

                                                                                                                                                                                                           8


                                                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                 TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 4.3  SECURITY PERSONNEL OVERSIGHT
        Provide evidence through the Reports mentioned in Action C (above) that sub-borrowers whose                Throughout Project                     BB
        subprojects retain security workers to protect their properties and personnel: a) exclusively hire         implementation, according to the
        security personnel services from companies that are authorized to operate on this sector, and; b)          timeframe set in Action A.
        provide adequate training in the use of force and appropriate conduct toward citizens as required
        by the country’s law.
 ESS 5: LAND ACQUISITION, RESTRICTIONS ON LAND USE AND INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT
 This standard is considered not relevant at the time of Appraisal.
 ESS 6: BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF LIVING NATURAL RESOURCES
  6.1    USE OF BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF LIVING NATURAL
         RESOURCES BORROWER’S FRAMEWORK
                                                                                                                   Throughout Project                     BB
             a.   Do not grant financing to subprojects/companies whose activities are listed in BB existing       implementation according to the
                  exclusion list, and other financing restrictions, including any other particular conditions as   timeframe set in Actions C and 1.3
                  determined in the Project’s Exclusion List (Action 1.3).                                         (above)
             b.   Incorporate in the sub-loan agreements E&S Obligations causing the FI Sub-borrowers to
                  adopt and implement the material measures to protect and conserve biodiversity and
                  habitats and; support livelihoods of local communities and inclusive economic
                  development, through the adoption of practices that integrate conservation needs and
                  development priorities, required by the environmental legislation and the E&S risk
                  assessment carried out by BB, as applicable.
 ESS 7: INDIGENOUS PEOPLES/SUB-SAHARAN AFRICAN HISTORICALLY UNDERSERVED TRADITIONAL LOCAL COMMUNITIES
  7.1    PROCEDURES TO ENSURE INDIGENOUS PEOPLES BENEFIT FROM THE PROJECT
             a.   Provide information on the Project to local and regional Indigenous Peoples’ and traditional     a. Throughout Project                  BB
                  communities’ (IPTCs) representative organizations and governmental and civil society             Implementation, starting prior the
                  agencies working with these social groups in the focus area of the Project to ensure equal       selection of subprojects.
                  access to Project opportunities by distinct Indigenous Peoples.
                                                                                                                   b-d. Prior to granting the financing
             b.   Ensure that the potential impacts of subprojects directly proposed by IPTCs organizations on     for the subprojects.
                  beneficiary communities have been assessed, consulted with them and ensured
                                                                                                                   e. As part of the hiring process.
                  participation in decision-making in a culturally appropriate manner, and obtained their
                  collective support prior to grant financing.                                                     f. Throughout Project
                                                                                                                   Implementation
                                                                                                                   g. Annually as part of the Report
                                                                                                                   mentioned in Action A (above).


                                                                                                                                                                               9


                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                           TIMEFRAME                     RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
          c. Ensure that these subprojects address the goals and preferences of the beneficiary IPTCs
             (including improving their standard of living and livelihoods in a culturally appropriate
             manner, and to foster the long-term sustainability of the natural resources on which they
             depend) prior to grant financing.
             d.   Ensure that the proposal of each subproject incorporates a practicable mechanism for the
                  determination and effective delivery and distribution of shared benefits to the involved
                  IPTCs, taking into account their institutions, rules and customs.
             e.   Ensure consultancy firms hired to provide technical assistance (Component 3) propose and
                  implement a strategy for working with Indigenous Peoples and traditional communities in a
                  culturally adequate manner.
             f.   Submit to no-objection by the World Bank i) all proposals submitted by representative
                  organizations of indigenous peoples/traditional communities to finance subprojects that will
                  be implemented within indigenous lands and/or collective traditional territories and the
                  evidence mentioned in b, c, and d (above) prior to grant financing and ii) the Terms of
                  Reference for hiring the Technical Assistance firms to implement Component 3 prior to their
                  selection.
             g.   Report to the World Bank on the E&S performance of subprojects implemented within
                  indigenous lands and/or collective traditional territories by representative organizations of
                  indigenous peoples/traditional communities as a condition of disbursements.
             h.   Include in all sub-loan agreements a clause for extraordinary early maturity in cases of non-
                  compliance with laws and norms related to Human Rights, including respect for traditional
                  peoples and communities (such as Indigenous Peoples, quilombolas, rubber tappers, and
                  riverside dwellers).




                                                                                                                                                                            10


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                               TIMEFRAME                 RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 ESS 8: CULTURAL HERITAGE
  8.1    CULTURAL HERITAGE PROTECTION
        a.   Screen subproject proposals to check whether subprojects will (i) be located in, or in the vicinity   Throughout Project                  BB
             of, recognized cultural heritage sites, legally protected areas or legally defined buffer zones, or   implementation.
             (ii) may involve excavations, demolition, movement of earth, flooding or other changes in the
             physical environment.
        b.   Ensure – in such situations – that sub-borrowers shall commit to complying with the National
             Legislation on Cultural Heritage, by incorporating in the sub-loan agreements, as applicable, E&S
             Obligations causing the FI Sub-borrowers to i) comply with the country’s framework on cultural
             heritage protection (both tangible and intangible) and the relevant requirements of ESS 8 and ii)
             adopt and implement the material measures required by the Project-specific Environmental and
             Social Management Manual.
        c.   Do not grant financing to subprojects that may involve the commercial use of traditional
             knowledge held by Indigenous Peoples and Traditional Communities (IPTCs) unless they are
             proposed by IPTCs who (according to the national law) hold the traditional knowledge and
             evidence has been provided that: i) beneficiary IPTCs are informed and aware of their rights
             under national law, the scope, the nature and the potential consequences of the proposed
             commercial development; ii) have participated in the proposal’s decision-making and affected
             IPTCs have reached (through a culturally appropriate process) collective support for the project
             activities that affect them (as required by the country’s law); and iii) the subproject has
             incorporated practicable mechanisms that enable IPTCs to share equitably in the benefits to be
             derived from commercial development of such cultural heritage in a manner consistent with
             their customs and traditions.
 ESS 9: FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES
  9.1    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
             a.   Maintain the existing Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) to identify,             Throughout Project                  BB
                  assess, manage, and monitor the environmental and social risks and impacts of FI                 implementation
                  subprojects that receive support from the Project. The ESMS shall include, inter alia, the
                  following elements:

                  •   An Environmental and Social policy endorsed by BB senior management.
                  •   Clearly defined procedures for the identification, assessment and management of the
                      environmental and social risks and impacts of FI subprojects.
                  •   Exclusion list with the activities that are not eligible for financing.



                                                                                                                                                                            11


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                             TIMEFRAME                   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
             • An organizational capacity and competency for implementing the ESMS with clearly
                 defined roles and responsibilities.
             • Monitoring and reporting of environmental and social performance of FI subprojects
                 and the effectiveness of the ESMS.
             • Incidents and accidents notification and subsequent reporting requirements.
             • An external communications mechanism, including measures to respond to public
                 enquiries and concerns in a timely manner.

             b.   ESMS Documentation: Maintain the key elements of the existing BB ESMS (E&S policy, risk
                  screening, assessment and monitoring procedures, external communication channels, and
                  organizational structure) and the Project-specific ESMM disclosed on BB’s website.
             c.   Promptly notify the Bank of: i) relevant changes to the BB ESMS that may materially and
                  adversely affect the Borrower’s capacity to screen, identify, classify and monitoring FI
                  subproject’s environmental and social risks as well as in the national environmental, social
                  and labor regulatory framework that the World Bank has accepted to use to manage
                  environmental and social risks and impacts of FI subprojects.
             d.   Agree with the World Bank on measures to be taken to address said changes and to be
                  inserted in an updated ESCP to ensure FI subprojects’ environmental and social risks are
                  managed in a manner consistent with the objectives and requirements of the relevant ESSs.
             e.   Immediately update the ESCP to reflect such agreed actions.
 ESS 10: STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
 10.1 DISCLOSURE OF PROJECT RELATED INFORMATION
             a.   Disclose and permit, in writing, the Bank to disclose at the Bank’s external website the       No later than 30 days after the       BB
                  Project-specific Environmental and Social Management Manual (Action 1.1, above).               Effective Date of the Loan
                                                                                                                 Agreement and thereafter
             b.   Develop a communication strategy to disclose relevant information on the Project, its
                                                                                                                 throughout Project implementation
                  exclusion list, eligibility criteria, supported subprojects and outcomes in a culturally
                  appropriate manner to reach out the diversity of key stakeholders.
             c. Keep a channel to collect feedback from citizens and stakeholders on environmental and
                  social issues associated with the Project.




                                                                                                                                                                            12


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP) – Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)

 MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                            TIMEFRAME                    RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
 10.2 PROJECT GRIEVANCE MECHANISM
         Disclose information on and operate its Grievance Mechanism to facilitate in a timely manner           No later than 30 days after the        BB
         resolution of concerns and grievances related to the Project.                                          Effective Date and thereafter
                                                                                                                throughout Project implementation
 10.3    SUBBORROWERS’ STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
                                                                                                                Throughout Project
         BB shall require the sub-borrowers to:                                                                                                        BB
                                                                                                                implementation
                a.   Disclose information and conduct stakeholder engagement in a manner proportionate to
                     the risks and impacts of their subprojects and as required under the country’s licensing
                     legislation and permits.
                b.   Establish and maintain a grievance mechanism if the sub-project in question has adverse
                     impacts on Affected Communities as identified by BB’s E&S risk screening procedures.
 INDICATORS FOR IMPLEMENTATION READINESS
 The following actions are indicators for implementation readiness:
     •    A
     •    1.1
     •    9.1
     •    10.1




                                                                                                                                                                            13


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
