Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Azerigas Gas Leak Detection And Repair Facility (P508792)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 04/16/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04862




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 29, 2026                                                                          Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Azerigas Gas Leak Detection And Repair Facility (P508792)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508792                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        AZ GAS LDAR                2026

                     Operation Name            Azerigas Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Azerbaijan                Azerbaijan                               EUROPE AND CENTRAL          Energy & Extractives
                                                                                        ASIA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Azerigas, Azerigas        State Oil Company of the Republic of     23-Mar-2026                 23-Apr-2026
                                               Azerbaijan (SOCAR)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     20-Jan-2026               15,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The development objective is to reduce fugitive methane emissions from the gas distribution network operated by
                     Azerigas, and to strengthen Azerigas' asset management capacity.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Azerigas is a ring-fenced business unit of the State Oil Company of the republic of Azerbaijan (SOCAR), with unbundled
                     accounts, responsible for distribution and sales of natural gas to the domestic market in Azerbaijan. The company is
                     experiencing significant gas leaks (fugitive methane emissions) from its legacy assets, most of which are more than fifty
                     years old, estimated at 160 million m3/year (107 kilotonnes per annum (ktpa) CH4). Analysis suggests that around
                     eighty percent by volume of these gas leaks can be repaired with straightforward and cost-effective interventions within
                     a 7-year time period. Using a global warming potential (GWP) factor of 28, this would result in greenhouse gas (GHG)
                     abatement of 2.4 million metric tonnes per annum (mmtpa) CO2e. The project will establish a recipient-executed

                    Jan 29, 2026                                                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Azerigas Gas Leak Detection And Repair Facility (P508792)



                     financial Facility for gas leak detection and repair (LDAR) in the gas distribution system operated by Azerigas. The Facility
                     will be launched with an initial grant from the GFMR trust fund. SOCAR will be the Recipient of the grant and the holder
                     of grant and Facility accounts, and Azerigas will be the sole beneficiary of the grant and the implementing entity
                     responsible for day-to-day implementation and project management. The money will be reallocated from SOCAR to
                     Azerigas for agreed leak detection and repair activities to reduce fugitive emissions of methane on a rolling basis. The
                     project will build on learnings from Azerigas’ pilot gas leak baseline program in Baku. Repair activities will be proposed
                     and implemented by Azerigas according to preliminary agreed eligibility criteria. Proposed activities will be prioritized
                     based on cost, complexity, impact, and other relevant criteria to maximize the amount of emissions reduced per US$
                     deployed. In order to guarantee a longer term impact, a key aspect of the proposed financial Facility will be that
                     majority of financial benefits resulting from gas savings as a consequence of leak repair will be re-invested into the
                     Facility, so as to mobilize additional capital to further rehabilitate Azerigas assets. Furthermore, the GFMR-funds initially
                     and the Facility subsequently will be used to build capacity within Azerigas to carry out monitoring, reporting and
                     verification (MRV) of emissions in line with the OGMP 2.0 standard. GFMR grant funding will enable activities that
                     would otherwise not take place due to the strained and constrained financial situation of Azerigas, unlocking methane
                     emission abatement action within the current decade.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Azerigas is responsible for construction, operation and maintenance of natural gas distribution network, and for
                     managing gas sales to domestic markets. The existing network is outdated and experiencing significant gas leaks
                     estimated as 158 mln. m3 of methane emissions per year. The project will support repair works to fix the detected leaks



Public Disclosure
                     in the existing gas distribution network. It is believed that about 80% of the methane emissions can be captured through
                     cost-effective interventions, which would result in an abatement plateau of 5.275 mln. tonnes per year within a 7-year
                     time span. The project will be implemented countrywide. Specific sites will be determined in the course of the project
                     implementation, and might be located in the urban, peri-urban and rural areas, as well as within naturally and culturally
                     protected areas. The network is predominantly located on state owned lands, and some segments might pass by or
                     slightly encroach agricultural lands.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the state company Azerigas, which is the second largest company within the State
                     Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) group. Azerigas has strong Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) systems
                     in place, aligned with national requirements and international standards. The headquarters and 10 regional offices have
                     up to 70 Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) staff who regularly monitor the emissions, ensure that employees have
                     the necessary Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and safety arrangements in place. New developments are subject to
                     the environmental due diligence in line with national regulations which address, inter alia, potential impacts on air,
                     water and soil, as well as any risks to biodiversity, natural and cultural resources. Azerigas also has a functioning
                     grievance mechanism with multiple intake channels. It operates a hotline, as well as the site and social network pages.
                     The employees of Azerigas undergo regular compulsory medical check-ups and health insured. Azerigas has already
                     mobilized potential staff who will serve as Environmental and Social Specialists, together with other staff members.
                     However, these staff members have no previous experience in Bank E&S policies. The Bank team has provided an initial
                     introduction to Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). Further ESF trainings will be provided through PIU Academy
                     sessions and customized training sessions will be supported by the project. For the development of the project ESF
                     instruments, Azerigas intends to engage with external consultancy services. The project will support the establishment

                    Jan 29, 2026                                                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Azerigas Gas Leak Detection And Repair Facility (P508792)



                     of a recipient-executed financial Facility under SOCAR for gas leak detection and repair in the distribution system
                     operated by Azerigas. In doing so, the project will help to build the capacity of the financial Facility to manage E&S risks.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Moderate
                     The environmental risk is assessed as Moderate at the concept stage. The overall long-term environmental impact is
                     expected to be positive, as the project will lead to considerable reduction of methane emissions and minimize risks to
                     community safety by capturing gas leaks. The anticipated adverse risks and impacts will be due to the implementation
                     of physical works. These can be associated with generation of small amount of wastes, temporary disturbance to
                     traffic safety, nuisances caused to neighboring communities and habitats due to temporary noise, fumes and
                     vibration, and labor safety related risks. The scale of physical works required to fix detected leaks will vary from small
                     to medium. The repair of selected segments of the existing gas distribution network is expected to be within limited
                     footprint of the original right of way (ROW) of the pipeline. The anticipated impacts will be site-specific, limited in
                     space and time and easy to address by application of pre-defined mitigation measures. While the implementing
                     agency has no previous knowledge of ESF ESS standards, there is an existing HSE capacity within Azerigas. The staff
                     assigned to work on the project has received an initial ESF introduction by the Bank team, and will attend further
                     training sessions within PIU Academy and through customized targeted training sessions. For undertaking project ESF
                     due diligence, Azerigas will hire environmental and social consultants.



Public Disclosure
                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is assessed as Moderate at the concept stage mainly due to the community health and safety
                     considerations, as well as the safety of the labor. While the repair works envisaged under the Project are anticipated
                     to be minor, activities such as welding gas pipes might entail small risk of explosion. Any social impacts associated
                     with repair works will be short-lived and localized. Due to the limited nature of the repair works, significant impacts
                     on traditional lifestyles or local demographics are not anticipated. Resettlement impact and forced displacement is
                     not expected. Azerigas has the necessary experience, qualified staff and systems in place to address potential risks.
                     The company already has satisfactory stakeholder engagement processes, in line with ISO 10002 on Complaint
                     Handling in Customer Satisfaction.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      Since specific project sites and interventions will be determined during the implementation, the client will prepare
                      the ESMF which will define processes and procedures for managing site-specific E&S risks, including E&S risk
                      screening, development, disclosure, consultations and implementation of site-specific ESF instruments, and
                      procedures for the E&S monitoring of mitigation measures. The activities rated as High or Substantial E&S risk, will
                      not be eligible for the project support. The ESMF will be underpinned by the provisions of WBG EHSGs, and shall be

                    Jan 29, 2026                                                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Azerigas Gas Leak Detection And Repair Facility (P508792)



                      prepared, disclosed and consulted by the appraisal. Depending on the risk and proposed physical interventions, site-
                      specific ESF instruments will include ESMPs or ESMP Checklists. These site specific ESF instruments will be prepared,
                      disclosed and consulted prior to the issuance of bidding documents for respective civil works. The project will build
                      E&S capacity at the financial Facility to be established with project's support.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      AzeriGas has established stakeholder engagement processes in line with ISO 10002 on Complaint Handling in
                      Customer Satisfaction. Specifically, the company operates a functioning grievance mechanism with multiple intake
                      channels. This includes a hotline, as well as a website and social network pages. According to the information
                      provided by AzeriGas, there are monthly meetings in local communities about the planned works of the company and
                      the concerns of the community, The information about potential works that might disrupt gas distribution is
                      delivered to the citizens via text messages, as well as posted on the website and social media pages. AzeriGas will
                      prepare Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) in line with the ESF requirements, which will be disclosed and consulted
                      by the project appraisal, together with project components in general The key stakeholders include the AzeriGas user
                      entities, local governments, and other interested parties.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      The project will include direct workers and employees of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at AzeriGas. Repair
                      works envisioned under the project will be carried out by AzeriGas employees who already routinely perform such
                      activities. Labor Management Procedures (LMP) for the project will be integrated in the Project Operation Manual




Public Disclosure
                      (POM) to be prepared before project’s Effective date. These will include a description of the grievance mechanism
                      available to all project workers to raise employment-related complaints in a safe and confidential manner. Labor and
                      OHS risks are relatively low as the project will only involve minor repair works. The labor requirements under the
                      project will also include measures to address SEA/SH measures for workers.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      Overall, the project will lead to improved efficiency of the use of natural gas resources, and to the considerable
                      reduction of air pollution due to gas leaks capturing and prevention of future leaks. However, the implementation of
                      physical works will be associated with electricity and water consumption, and generation of some amounts of wastes.
                      The risks resulting from the project activities will be managed through the introduction of respective resources
                      efficiency and risk mitigation measures that will be stipulated in the site-specific ESMPs or ESMP Checklists.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Overall, the project will lead to improved community safety, due to capturing of gas leaks in the existing network. The
                      implementation of physical works may cause some temporary disturbance to communities, and may pose safety risks
                      if relevant safety measures are not properly followed. The measures to minimize nuisance to neighboring
                      communities and address potential safety risks, Life and Fire Safety measures, will be incorporated into site-specific
                      ESMPs or ESMP Checklists.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                  Not Currently Relevant



                    Jan 29, 2026                                                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Azerigas Gas Leak Detection And Repair Facility (P508792)



                      Under the project, only minor works will be covered and hence the impacts will be small and limited in time. The gas
                      network is located on state property, and access to private properties is not expected to be restricted. However,
                      there will be a screening form to screen out any significant resettlement impact and restrictions on land use. In case
                      any mitigation measure is needed, it will be addressed through an ESMP.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project will be implemented countrywide, including infrastructure located in rural and protected areas. The
                      implementation of physical works might be associated with some temporary disturbance to flora and fauna, which
                      will be managed by application of mitigation measures specified in site-specific ESMPs and or ESMP Checklists.
                      Permissions form relevant environmental authorities will be obtained prior to start of civil works.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The standard is not relevant because no Indigenous People are known to reside in Azerbaijan

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      The sites where gas leaks will be detected and need fixing might be located close to cultural or historical objects/sites.
                      Measures to manage any risks to cultural and historical objects/sites will be incorporated into site-specific ESMPs or
                      ESMP Checklists. Permissions from relevant authorities will be obtained prior to start of civil works.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      No Financial Intermediaries are envisaged under the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No
                       The project will not use Borrower's ES Framework. AzeriGas has established systems and personnel to mitigate the
                       potential risks that are in line with the national requirements and also include a sizable Environmental, Health and
                       Safety team and a functioning grievance mechanism with multiple intake channels. This includes a hotline, as well as a
                       website and social network pages. However, on risk mitigation and monitoring measures, AzeriGas replies on the
                       mandate of respective agencies, whose capacity might not be sufficient to ensure enforcement, and has not worked
                       with ESF or the requirements of the other International Financial Institutions. While the entity relies on some of the
                       relevant ISOs, the national legislation of Azerbaijan is not fully aligned with international best practices and ESF. Thus,
                       the borrower framework will not be possible to use.


                    Jan 29, 2026                                                                                                         Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Azerigas Gas Leak Detection And Repair Facility (P508792)




                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                       No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     ESMF, SEP, LMP as part of POM, ESCP by appraisal
                     Site-specific ESMPs or ESMP Checklists during implementation.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Sandu Ghidirim                         Title:       Senior Energy Specialist

                      Email:                  Sghidirim@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Robert Van Der Geest                   Job Title:   Senior Gas Specialist




Public Disclosure
                      Email:                  rvandergeest@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Sandu Ghidirim, Robert Van Der Geest

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Darejan Kapanadze

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                David Jijelava




                    Jan 29, 2026                                                                                             Page 7 of 7
