Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 09/25/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04477




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 26, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508094                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)    PICP                         2026

                     Operation Name            Punjab Inclusive Cities Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                 MID EAST,NORTH               Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                        AFRICA,AFG,PAK               Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Islamic Republic of       Local Government and Community           29-Sep-2025                  13-Nov-2025
                     Pakistan                  Development Department,
                                               Government of Punjab

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     16-Jun-2025               780,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Program Development Objective is to provide safely managed water, sanitation and basic hygiene services and to
                     improve the institutional and financial performance of selected urban local governments in Punjab


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed PforR Program will support a subset of the GoPunjab’s program in selected cities focusing on two result
                     areas: (i) Safely managed water, sanitation and drainage and basic hygiene services; (ii) Institutional strengthening and
                     financial sustainability. Infrastructure investments through Program funds will include: (i) integrated water supply
                     networks; (ii) sewerage networks and wastewater treatment facilities; (iii) stormwater drainage networks and storage
                     facilities; and (iv) SWM reforms and a pilot for material recovery and sanitary disposal. The IPF Component will assist
                     GoPunjab to further develop its sector policy, strategy, and programs; strengthen its institutions and systems; and

                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     provide technical support to key provincial departments and urban agencies to deliver on Program targets and Program-
                     related technical, fiduciary, social and environment management aspects.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed Program will support 16 cities of the Punjab province under the Government’s Go Punjab Program, i.e.,
                     Chiniot, Jatoi, Shuja Abad, Sadiqabad, Kasur, Jampur, Rajanpur, Ahmad Pur East, Khanpur, Sammundari, Chistian,
                     Pakpattan, Haroonabad, Arifwala, Mandi Bahauddin and Chakwal. Punjab is Pakistan's second largest province having an
                     area of 205,344 km2. It is located at 31.17° N and 72.70° E, at the north-western edge of the geologic Indian plate in
                     South Asia.

                     The province of Punjab is estimated to have, in total, about 70 million parcels of land, about 60 percent of which is
                     cultivated area, while a further 6 percent or so is built up area. Extensive Piedmont Plains have developed between the
                     Indus River and the Suleiman-Kirthar mountains. These plains are dominated by alluvial fans. The Potowar Plateau
                     typically consists of dry, sparsely vegetated plains intersected by streams and rivers that cut valleys and gorges into the
                     sandstone, siltstone, and shale. The lower slopes of the hilly areas are covered with forests that supply valuable timber.
                     The hilly areas provide natural pasture lands that provide fodder for cattle. According to the Punjab Spatial Strategy,
                     there are 194 notified urban areas in the province. Generally, no high-biodiversity settings have been identified within
                     Punjab's intermediate cities and the biodiversity hotspots are not as prominent as in some other regions of the country,
                     but they still hold important ecological and conservation value. The most notable areas near these cities include the
                     riverine ecosystems of the Indus River, which support significant biodiversity including freshwater fish, amphibians, and



Public Disclosure
                     riparian flora. Punjab’s scrub forests and plains provide habitat for species such as the Punjab Urial and various
                     migratory birds that depend on these habitats for breeding and feeding. However, overgrazing, deforestation, and
                     urban expansion pose serious threats to biodiversity in these regions.

                     The land use in Punjab has been shifting from agricultural to residential and built-up structures. Urban centers
                     predominantly feature fixed and permanent structures, while the suburbs and outer rims exhibit a mixed disposition of
                     land use. Agriculture remains a significant land use in Punjab, with extensive areas dedicated to crop production.
                     However, the increasing urbanization is gradually encroaching upon agricultural lands. The primary vegetation in Punjab
                     include crops such as wheat, rice, sugarcane, and cotton. These crops dominate the landscape, especially in rural areas.
                     Natural vegetation includes patches of forests, grasslands, and shrublands. However, these areas are limited and often
                     fragmented due to agricultural expansion and urban development.

                     Punjab's wildlife includes various species of mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. However, the natural habitats for
                     these species are under pressure due to land use changes and habitat fragmentation.

                     Punjab has experienced a warming trend, with temperature increases of 0.91°C to 1.12°C in recent decades. This
                     warming is accompanied by more frequent heavy rainfall events, leading to floods. The province is projected to face a
                     decrease in living standards due to temperature increases and precipitation variability by 2050. Water demand is
                     expected to rise by about 60% by 2047 under a 3-degree warming scenario. Urban areas in Punjab are particularly
                     affected by climate change due to rapid and unplanned urban sprawl. The lack of climate-resilient land-use planning
                     increases the vulnerability of urban populations to extreme weather events. Efforts to improve disaster risk resilience
                     and response capacity are crucial for mitigating these impacts. Current SWM systems in Punjab exhibit critical

                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     inefficiencies across the entire value chain, from inadequate collection to the absence of engineered disposal facilities.
                     Urban collection rates stand at only 39%—substantially below the 71% average for lower-middle-income countries
                     globally. Collected waste is typically deposited in uncontrolled dumpsites, openly burned within settlements, or
                     discarded into waterways and drainage networks, exacerbating flood risks and contaminating surface water resources.
                     Methane emissions from decomposing waste at dumpsites constitute a major source of urban greenhouse gas
                     emissions and; combustion of waste contributes significantly to atmospheric pollution, with the waste sector
                     responsible for 11% of Punjab’s ambient PM2.5 concentrations. These practices have resulted in clogged drainage
                     systems (worsening urban flooding) and persistent soil/water contamination.

                     Punjab is the most populus province, home to over half the population of Pakistan. Punjab has the highest Human
                     Development Index out of all of Pakistan's provinces at 0.550. Punjab is Pakistan's most industrialized province, with the
                     industrial sector comprising 24 percent of the province's gross domestic product. It is known for its relative prosperity
                     and has the lowest rate of poverty among all Pakistani provinces. However, a clear divide is present between the
                     northern and southern regions of the province; with northern Punjab being relatively more developed than south
                     Punjab. Punjab is also one of the most urbanized regions of South Asia, with approximately 40 percent of its population
                     being concentrated in urban areas.

                     The social dynamics in Punjab’s cities are diverse, with various ethnic groups and minorities. Punjabis are the largest
                     ethnic group in the province, speaking the Punjabi language, which, despite its prevalence, does not have official
                     recognition at the national level. Punjabis themselves are a heterogeneous group comprising various tribes, clans, and
                     communities, often linked to traditional occupations such as blacksmiths or artisans. The Siraiki-speaking population is




Public Disclosure
                     another significant ethnic group in Punjab, primarily residing in the southern regions of the province. They have a
                     distinct cultural and linguistic identity. Hindkowan and Kashmiris are smaller in number but contribute to the cultural
                     diversity of the region.

                     Social organization in Punjab's intermediate cities is strongly based on the Biradari (brotherhood) system, where various
                     castes and extended families maintain strong interactions and prefer intra-tribal marriages. Many families live in joint
                     family systems, sharing resources such as income, manpower for agricultural practices, and basic amenities like water,
                     electricity, housing, and food.

                     The majority of the population in intermediate/secondary cities is Muslim, with a small percentage of Christians and
                     other minorities. The social status of women is generally lower compared to men, reflecting a patriarchal society where
                     men dominate decision-making processes. Women's public participation is minimal, and they often require male
                     consent for activities. However, elderly women may have some influence over family or household affairs.

                     Community conflicts, both political and social, are typically resolved through reconciliation meetings led by family heads
                     or village notables, including Union Council Nazim and Naib Nazim.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The TA component will support the following departments:




                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     a.       The Local Government and Community Development Department (LG&CDD) to manage verification, provide
                     guidance to Local Governments (LGs) in areas such as infrastructure design and maintenance specifications, Public
                     Private Partnerships (PPPs), and implementation of Suthra Punjab Program.
                     b.       The Punjab Municipal Development Funds Company (PMDFC) through comprehensive technical assistance on
                     management of design and supervision firms contract and to develop operational guidelines, provide on-the job
                     training, and monitor Urban Local Governments (ULGs) in asset management planning; financial management and
                     audit; support Own Source Revenue (OSR) mobilization; advise on tariff and cost recovery, procurement and contract
                     management; infrastructure delivery and maintenance; accountability, transparency, and complaint handling;
                     environmental and social management; and monitoring service delivery outcomes.
                     c.       The Faisalabad Waste Management Company (FWMC) in the areas of engineering, environmental and social
                     management, and implementation of waste recovey and disposal investments.
                     d.       The Excise, Taxation and Narcotics Control Department (ET&NCD) to upgrade an integrated MIS-GIS database.

                     A Program Steering Committee (PSC) will ensure efficient cooperation and strategic oversight of the Punjab Inclusive
                     Cities Program (PICP)’s activities across all relevant core and line departments. The PSC will be chaired by the Secretary
                     Planning/LG&CDD, and will include leadership from PMDFC, Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), Excise,
                     Finance and Planning. The LG&CDD, with assistance from the PMDFC, will have overall responsibility for Program
                     reporting, administering the Third-Party Validation (TPV) contract, results monitoring and evaluation, regulation setting,
                     and coordination. The Finance Department (FD) will be responsible for managing and transferring funds to LG&CDD and
                     Program ULGs and will oversee ULG finances through a Financial Monitoring & Reporting dashboard (linked to the
                     Computerized Financial Management Systems in ULGs) established under PCP.




Public Disclosure
                     A Program Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established at PMDFC to provide capacity-building support and technical
                     assistance to selected ULGs in investment planning, designing, contracting, and implementing infrastructure
                     investments, environment and social management; and assist with Program reporting and coordination. An Investment
                     Management Unit (IMU) will be set up at FWMC to coordinate interventions with LG&CDD and lead the delivery of
                     waste recovery and sanitary disposal infrastructure and dumpsite closure works in a selected site. The independent
                     verification agency (IVA) will review the results and reports transmitted by the FWMC through APAs.

                     The current arrangements under PMDFC to manage environmental and social (E&S) risks will be followed. The PMDFC
                     will form an E&S Management Team, including a Senior Program Officer (E&S), a Program Officer (Social), and a Gender
                     Specialist. Additionally, in the Southern and Northern zones, there will be one Deputy Program Officer (Environment)
                     and one Deputy Program Officer (Social) per zone, totaling four positions. Extra resources will be provided to assess and
                     manage environmental, social, health, and safety risks throughout the program, including interns. An Environment and
                     Social Specialist will be included in WATSAN (Water and Sanitation) services units which will be notified in participating
                     ULGs. PMDFC will also collaborate with urban local governments (ULGs) participating in the Program by designating
                     Focal Persons in each ULG: a Municipal Officer Infrastructure (MOI) for environment and a Municipal Officer Planning
                     (MOP) for social management to oversee program risks. These focal points will remain in place until the E&S specialists
                     in WATSAN units are hired. Similarly, the FWMC will also engage environmental and social management experts in its
                     implementation team. An Environmental Specialist and a Social Management Specialist will be engaged by the FWMC.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS



                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     The Environmental Risk Rating for the Program is assessed as Substantial during appraisal vis-à-vis the indirect and
                     collective environmental implications of its outputs, despite the program not financing any civil works directly. These
                     include but not limited to feasibility and engineering studies, that without the integration of adequate environmental
                     and climate resilience considerations may lead to future infrastructure investments that increase environmental
                     degradation or climate vulnerability. Inadequate integration of waste minimization, recycling, and resource efficiency
                     principles in the planning phase could lead to greater volumes of unmanaged waste and inefficient use of urban land.
                     Furthermore, climate risks such as flooding, extreme rainfall events, and heatwaves must be considered in WASH and
                     SWM system designs to ensure long-term sustainability and resilience. To mitigate these risks, the project will
                     develop and apply environmental screening criteria and risk mitigation guidelines during the preparation of all TA
                     deliverables. The project will prepare and implement the Environmental and Social Compliance Framework (ESCF) by
                     updating the Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) originally prepared under Punjab Cities Program (PCP), to
                     guide the integration of environmental considerations in all studies. All TA outputs will include climate and disaster
                     risk screening, with recommendations for incorporating nature-based solutions, green infrastructure, and circular
                     economy principles in WASH and SWM systems in accordance with the ESF policy requirements. Additionally,
                     institutional strengthening under the program will include training for ULGs, LG&CDD, PMDFC, and waste
                     management companies on environmental management, regulatory compliance, and climate resilience planning. The
                     technical support for MIS-GIS platforms will incorporate environmental performance monitoring tools, including
                     dashboards for tracking emissions, pollution hotspots, and service delivery metrics. The program will also ensure that



Public Disclosure
                     stakeholder engagement processes—guided by the program's Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)—enable early
                     identification of site-specific environmental concerns, including those raised by communities located near proposed
                     SWM and WASH infrastructure. The Grievance Mechanism (GM), adapted from systems developed under the PCP,
                     will allow communities to register and resolve environment-related complaints in a timely and transparent manner.
                     By embedding environmental due diligence into all TA-supported outputs and ensuring capacity-building for
                     regulatory and municipal agencies, the project aims to guide environmentally responsible and climate-resilient urban
                     infrastructure development in Punjab’s secondary cities.
                                                                                                                                   Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social Risk Rating is Substantial, even though the Program will not directly finance physical works. The technical
                     assistance (TA) component—comprising feasibility studies, tariff and cost recovery studies, institutional
                     strengthening, and capacity-building—has the potential to deliver considerable social benefits. These include support
                     for climate-resilient urban infrastructure, improved governance, revenue enhancement, and more equitable access to
                     essential services such as water supply, sanitation, and SWM. These upstream activities can positively influence the
                     design and implementation of future urban investments, particularly benefiting vulnerable and marginalized
                     communities, and strengthening overall urban resilience in participating cities. However, the TA may also generate
                     downstream social risks. Planning and design activities may eventually lead to physical infrastructure development
                     that involves land acquisition, resulting in loss of land-based assets or displacement, affecting livelihoods. Risks to
                     informal waste workers are particularly relevant in relation to the planned sanitary landfill and material recovery
                     facility in Jhang, where they may face exclusion or loss of income if not meaningfully engaged or integrated into
                     formal systems. Moreover, tariff and cost recovery studies pose additional social risks. Although these studies will not


                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     directly implement pricing reforms, they may shape future policies and pricing structures that impact the affordability
                     and accessibility of WASH and SWM services. Poorly designed tariff frameworks risk excluding low-income
                     households—such as those in Katchi Abadis, daily wage earners, renters, and other disadvantaged populations—by
                     prioritizing financial sustainability without adequate social safeguards. To mitigate these risks, the project has
                     prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which maps and desribed mechanisms to engage all relevant
                     stakeholders, including project-affected parties (e.g., ULGs, LG&CDD, PMDFC, farmers, communities), interested
                     groups (e.g., CSOs, NGOs, academia, relevant departments), and vulnerable populations (e.g., religious minorities,
                     informal settlers, transgender persons). Stakeholders will be consulted meaningfully and early in the development of
                     policies, engineering designs, feasibility studies, and tariff recommendations. Their feedback, including perspectives
                     on affordability, willingness to pay, and service expectations, will be systematically reflected in the TA deliverables.
                     Particular attention will be paid to gender and social inclusion, ensuring that the future design and implementation of
                     urban services do not marginalize or exclude underserved groups. In parallel, the program’s grievance mechanism
                     (GM), building on the system developed under the PCP, will be strengthened to ensure it is transparent, accessible,
                     and responsive, including the capacity to handle issues related to pricing, service quality, and social exclusion. It will
                     also incorporate specific protocols for addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risks
                     associated with training and consultation activities. While digitization and monitoring tools developed under the TA
                     could improve transparency and service oversight, they must be inclusive and user-friendly, especially for groups with
                     limited digital literacy or access. The delivery of capacity-building activities should also account for health-related
                     risks, including the potential spread of communicable diseases such as Monkeypox, especially during in-person
                     engagements. In alignment with the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) the TA outputs will
                     embed social risk assessments and mitigation measures. The program will aim to ensure that all policy guidance,




Public Disclosure
                     infrastructure recommendations, and pricing frameworks developed through the TA are not only technically sound
                     and financially sustainable, but also socially inclusive and equitable.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The program is expected to support Type 2 and 3 TAs. The E&S risk rating for the IPF
                      Windows is currently Substantial due to support to the preparation of the engineering design/feasibility studies and
                      development of E&S risk management instruments of potential waste treatment and disposal investments, including
                      one sanitary landfill. These activities could generate adverse environmental and social risks and impacts such as the
                      risk of contamination of soil and water, risks due to disposal of hazardous waste, exclusion of certain vulnerable
                      groups including women, youth, religious and rural communities, in consultation processes, and their risks of lack of
                      access to project benefits, impacts on informal waste pickers and on their livelihoods, impacts on vulnerable groups
                      due to changes in tarrifs, resource efficiency and pollution prevention and management (incorporation of design
                      elements for avoidance of stressing local water sources and increasing the energy burden for treatment and pumping
                      operations), sensitive habitat fragmentation and land use change and any issues related to SEA/SH. Terms of
                      References (TORs) will be developed for environmental and social studies proportionate to the E&S risks of the
                      proposed activity. The TORs, work plans or other documents defining the scope and outputs of technical assistance
                      activities will be reviewed to ensure that E&S and SEA/SH inputs are included consistent with ESSs1–10, with the


                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                      caveat that the activities implemented by the Implementing Agencies (IAs)/GoPb following the completion of the
                      project that are not financed by the Bank, or activities that are not directly related to the technical assistance, will not
                      to be subject to the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework Policy for Investment Project Financing.
                      Training on E&S risk management will be a key element which will be integrated in the TORs. The E&S risks
                      management instruments will also be reviewed and cleared by the Bank. The risk for other IPF-supported activities is
                      expected to be moderate, which include the formulation of rules, regulations, policies and strategies, and
                      strengthening capacity and systems of urban agencies. E&S inputs will be provided in the TORs to ensure that E&S
                      aspects are covered during preparation of these rules, regulations, policies, and strategies.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      This ESS is relevant. The program has prepared a Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP), which delineates the mapping
                      of all relevant stakeholders including but not limited to: i) program affected parties such as local communities and
                      authorities, farmers, pastoralists, ULGs, LG&CD, PMDFC, ET&NCD and related Waste Management Company; ii)
                      interested parties such as academia, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs),
                      Climate Change Ministry, Planning and Development Department; as well as iii) the disadvantaged and vulnerable
                      groups including religious minorities, residents of Katchi Abadis, transgender persons. Given the nature of the TA
                      activities (feasibility/technical studies, formulation of policies, plans and feasibility studies), the program will ensure
                      that the relevant stakeholders are consulted upon early on and their inputs will be reflected as part of the project
                      development process, within a timeframe that enables meaningful consultations with stakeholders. The GM will build
                      on existing systems developed under PCP and shall be transparent and accessible to key stakeholders and will include
                      provisions to address SEA/SH issues. The coverage of complaints has been enhanced under the PCP GM to include



Public Disclosure
                      transparency, accountability, exclusion of marginalized groups from development priorities, and labor issues. The GM
                      is more gender responsive, with clearly defined timelines for redress. Mobile applications were also developed for
                      GM. The GM has been implemented and working well in the 16 cities covered under PCP. This will be adopted for
                      PICP.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                Relevant

                      TA window involves multiple agencies, with dedicated teams who would be associated with the subject program
                      activities. These would include Government and contracted workers, wherein, ESS2 will require ensuring fair
                      treatment, non-discrimination, and equal opportunity for all workers. This will involve provision of clear and
                      reasonable contracts outlining workers' rights and obligations and the establishment of a GRM for all workers to raise
                      workplace concerns without fear of retaliation. Labor Management Procedures (LMP) embedded in ESCP have been
                      developed and will be implemented, outlining the management of labor issues, including recruitment, working
                      conditions, and worker rights, while ensuring compliance with national labor laws and regulations. A code of conduct
                      for workers will be required, which will also include measures to prevent and respond to SEA/SH cases.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                 Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The requirements of this standard will be integrated into the TORs and reflected in the
                      design of the subject investments. The TORs of the feasibility, technical and engineering studies will be reviewed, to
                      ensure principles of resource efficiency, pollution minimization and emissions generation, in accordance with the
                      principles of mitigation hierarchy, are adequately covered/reflected. The proposed measured will have to be viable in


                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                         Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                      terms of commercially available skills, equipment, and materials, while taking into consideration prevailing local
                      factors such as climate, geography, demography, infrastructure, capacity, and operational reliability and as relevant
                      and appropriate to the nature of the risks and impacts. These measures will be covered in the ESIAs/ESMPs and other
                      related instruments, prepared under the IPF Window.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      TA will support the planning, design, institutional strengthening, and future implementation of water, sewerage, and
                      drainage infrastructure across 16 secondary cities in Punjab. In addition, the TA will support the design of SWM
                      investments including the development of a sanitary landfill site and material recovery facility (MRF) as well as the
                      closure of an existing dumpsite in tehsil Jhang. The water and sewerage infrastructure covered includes distribution
                      networks, trunk sewers, water mains, tube wells, pumping stations, wastewater disposal and treatment stations
                      (such as settlement basins), underground stormwater retention tanks, and stormwater drains. These infrastructure
                      elements are critical for improving urban resilience, public health, and service delivery but carry inherent community
                      health and safety (CHS) risks that require careful management. Although the project does not directly finance civil
                      works under the TA window, the preparation of technical studies, feasibility assessments, and institutional capacity-
                      building activities supported by TA under IPF component will significantly influence downstream infrastructure
                      delivery and maintenance. The IPF window will finance technical assistance to relevant officials from Local
                      Government and Community Development Department and waste management companies in Punjab in the areas of
                      advanced waste management technologies and environmentally and socially sustainable waste management
                      practices. In addition, the IPF window will also support engineering and environmental & social consulting services to
                      the Faisalabad Waste Management Company (FWMC) for the sanitary landfill, MRF, and dump closure investments in



Public Disclosure
                      Jhang. The total budget for SWM sector interventions will be USD 3 million. To ensure comprehensive integration of
                      CHS risk management, all TORs for technical and environmental-social assessments will include explicit requirements
                      to evaluate potential health and safety impacts, including indirect, cumulative, and long-term effects. These
                      assessments will consider projected urban growth, climate change scenarios (such as increased flooding or drought),
                      and vulnerable groups’ needs, ensuring resilience and inclusiveness. Thus, while direct civil works are not financed
                      under the TA, the project’s support for the design, policy, and institutional frameworks that shape urban
                      infrastructure development necessitates proactive and integrated management of community health and safety risks.
                      Through early assessment, inclusive stakeholder engagement, capacity building, and robust grievance redress, the
                      project will ensure that future water, sewerage, drainage, and SWM investments are safe, resilient, equitable, and
                      socially sustainable, fully aligned with ESS4 requirements.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      Though TA itself will involve studies, designs, and policy recommendations rather than direct implementation, the
                      outcomes of the TA (i.e., infrastructure projects and urban development) may have impacts related to land
                      acquisition and resettlement. These impacts may include loss of land and land-based assets (land, trees, crops,
                      structures and others) and loss of income and livelihood disturbance due to involuntary land acquisition. The TA stage
                      will have to anticipate the potential impacts of the future infrastructure projects to be supported under this Program.
                      The TORs of these studies will be reviewed in a manner to include in scope, proportionate to the nature and risks of
                      the proposed activities under the Program, identification and assessment of the risks and development of
                      appropriate risk management instruments, so as to guide the future TA activities.



                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources

                      Although the TA activities primarily involve studies, designs, and policy recommendations rather than direct
                      infrastructure implementation, the outcomes of these activities—namely future urban development and
                      infrastructure projects—may have impacts on biodiversity and natural resources. The TORs for all TA-supported
                      studies will undergo rigorous environmental screening, proportionate to the nature and risk profile of the proposed
                      activities under the program. This screening will anticipate potential risks to ecosystems and natural habitats that
                      could arise from downstream infrastructure investments, including water, sewerage, drainage systems, and solid
                      waste management facilities and including relevant E&S inputs in TORs to assess and managed these risks.
                      Environmental screening processes will also incorporate localized environmental assessments that consider Punjab’s
                      ecological context, explicitly ensuring the exclusion of natural and critical habitats from infrastructure siting and
                      design. By identifying sensitive areas early, the program will develop appropriate mitigation strategies during the TA
                      phase to inform and guide future infrastructure planning and implementation, thereby minimizing adverse
                      environmental impacts and supporting sustainable urban development.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      No social impacts related to Indigenous Peoples (IPs) are anticipated as no IP are known to exist in the districts where
                      the TA and Program activities will be implemented. The Kalash community in Lower Chitral district of the KP province
                      is the only community considered as IP in Pakistan in accordance with the definition given in ESS7. These areas are



Public Disclosure
                      not in Punjab province, hence, ESS7 is not applicable.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      The TA does not anticipate potential impacts on known cultural heritage. However, the downstream program
                      activities might involve excavation during expected investments phases. This will require preparation of Chance Find
                      Procedures. TORS of the studies and assessment will be reviewed to ensure that these requirements are included in
                      the scope.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      There are no FIs involved in the Porgram TA.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         In Part



                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                       For TA component under IPF, project will apply country system on labor management with gap filling measures to
                       align with Bank’s ESF in accordance with recommendations of ESF Overview Assessment.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                      No
                       It has not been finalized yet which other IFI’s will finance the PICP. This is still being discussed and possibility of using
                       common approach will be discussed once it has been finalized which IFIs will be financing the program.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The Borrower has completed the following E&S analysis:
                     i.     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     ii.    Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     iii.   Labor Management Procedures (LMP) embedded in the ESCP




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank



Public Disclosure
                      Task Team Leader:        Amena Raja                                Title:           Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                   araja1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:             Carlo Alberto Amadei                      Job Title:       Water Specialist

                      Email:                   camadei@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                          Amena Raja, Carlo Alberto Amadei

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                 Nida Asif


                    Sep 26, 2025                                                                                                          Page 11 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     V. APPROVAL

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Imran-ul Haq




Public Disclosure




                    Sep 26, 2025                                                         Page 12 of 12
