Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 12/10/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04505




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 19, 2026                                                                          Page 1 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                     Operation Acronym             Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508930                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)          BFP4RI                        2026

                     Operation Name            Blended Finance Platform for Resilient Infrastructure

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries              Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     South Africa              South Africa                               EASTERN AND                    Finance, Competitiveness
                                                                                          SOUTHERN AFRICA                and Innovation

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                   Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Credit Guarantee          Development Bank of South Africa           20-Jan-2026                    24-Feb-2026
                     Vehicle, National
                     Treasury

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     22-Dec-2025               5,000,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective is to establish the Credit Guarantee Vehicle to mobilize private capital for
                     investment in resilient infrastructure.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The first phase of the MPA will establish a Credit Guarantee Vehicle as the first instrument of the Blended Finance
                     Platform to mobilize private capital for investment in critical and resilient infrastructure such as the electricity, transport
                     and logistics, and water and sanitation sector, to create jobs, reduce carbon emissions and deliver infrastructure
                     services for citizens and businesses. Phase 1 of the MPA will consist of three parts namely: Part 1: CGV Capitalization:
                     Provision of the Government Equity Participation to support the capitalization of the CGV and the issuance of CGV
                     Credit Guarantees (including the establishment of the CGV and its management, staffing, governance, operational,

                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                         Page 2 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                     monitoring and evaluation, financial management, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and pipeline
                     development arrangements, systems and procedures), Part 2: Pipeline Development: Provision of support for the
                     development of a pipeline of potential projects for support under the CGV, including client engagement, the carrying
                     out of risk assessments, pre-feasibility and feasibility studies, and legal, financing and operational structuring of projects
                     and Part 3: Project Coordination and Implementation: Provision of support for the PIU and project management,
                     including for financial management, procurement, environmental and social risk management, monitoring and
                     evaluation, stakeholder engagement and coordination, and operational, administrative and compliance support for the
                     establishment, operationalization and launch of the CGV.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The multi-phased project (MPA) aims to establish a Blended Finance Platform to mobilize private capital, deliver
                     infrastructure services, reduce carbon emissions, and create jobs. The first phase, through an Investment Project
                     Finance (IPF), will support establishing a Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV) to demonstrate effective leverage and
                     mobilization of private capital for critical infrastructure including in the electricity, transport, water and social sectors,
                     while subsequent phases will support upscaling of the CGV. CGV will be a non-bank financial entity structured as a
                     private corporation, with equity participation via the South African National Treasury (NT), followed by other bilateral
                     Development Financial Institutions’ (DFIs) participation. The CGV will offer partial credit guarantees to facilitate de-
                     risking of private sector participation in the above mentioned critical infrastructure. The initial focus will be on the
                     transmission subsector. Preparatory work relevant to the transmission network, to identify transmission corridors with
                     least environmental risks and impacts have already been completed. Support to transport, water sector, including port



Public Disclosure
                     terminals, rail, water augmentation, waste water treatment works and bulk water supply, health care, housing and
                     mixed used will follow during the subsequent phases of preparing the CGV pipeline. Therefore the location and extend
                     of these projects are not yet fully known. The project will be implemented on a national and provincial level in coastal,
                     rural, peri-urban and urban areas. South Africa has diverse landscapes, varying climates, and is a water-scarce country.
                     It has a wide variety of biodiversity sensitive areas located in terrestrial and marine protected zones.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The implementation arrangements are expected to consist of three levels namely, 1) the Project Implementing Unit
                     (PIU), 2) the Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV) and 3) Special Purpose Vehicles, of which the later will be the receiver of
                     the guarantees of the CGV. The Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) will be mandated by NT to establish a
                     Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the Infrastructure Finance and Implementation Support Agency (IFISA) who
                     will be responsible for Components 2 and 3 of the Project. The PIU environmental and social (E&S) specialists (one
                     environment specialist and one social specialist) will be assigned from the existing resources within the DBSA, within the
                     timeframe as set out in the Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP). The PIU E&S specialists will be responsible for
                     overseeing the appointment and capacity building of the CGV environmental, social and health and safety specialists, as
                     needed. The ESAP will require DBSA to further assess the capacity needs of the CGV, once established, and propose a
                     capacity building plan. The PIU will further be responsible for facilitating the development of CGV Environmental and
                     Social Management System (ESMS) including operational policies and procedures inline with the IFC Performance
                     Standards (PSs), World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (WBG EHSGs) and national
                     requirements. DBSA has well developed environmental and social safeguards standards (ESSS) in line with the national
                     legislation and IFC Performance Standards (PSs). It has dedicated Environmental and Social Specialist who is responsible
                     for overseeing E&S risk management of its investments. The DBSA ESSS and capacity are considered adequate to

                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                         Page 3 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                     implement complex projects inline with the IFC PSs. The IFISA is in the process of being established, and therefore its
                     capacity cannot be assessed at this stage.

                     The CGV will only be established after project approval and therefore its capacity can not be assessed at this stage. The
                     CGV will be established as a non-bank financial entity structured as a private corporation and will be managed by an
                     independent and professional team consisting of the following qualified and full time specialist namely, an
                     environmental specialist (ES), a health and safety specialist (HSS) and a social specialist (SS) who will be responsible for
                     implementing the CGV ESMS. The Terms of References (ToRs) for the appointment of the CGV ES, HS and SS specialists
                     will be prepared by the PIU and shared with the Bank for review and no objection during project implementation. The
                     shortlisted candidates for the CGV ES, HS and SS positions will be shared with the Bank for prior review and no-objection
                     before the candidates are appointed.

                     Downstream investment projects supported will be implemented by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) consisting private
                     sector participants, with potential oversight from state owned entities (SOE) such as Eskom for energy, Transnet for rail
                     and port projects and the South Africa National Roads Agency limited for roads projects. Direct investment to the
                     project, implemented by the SPV could likely come from the main local South African commercial Banks. The South
                     African SOE entities have experience with implementing large complex infrastructure projects under national
                     requirements, while the main commercial banks have well established environmental and social risk management
                     systems in line with the United Nations Environmental Program Finance Initiative Principles for Responsible Banking and
                     IFC PSs including dedicated E&S risk management units. The Bank has supported IPF projects in the energy sector under
                     Eskom (P116410) applying OP/BP 4.03 and (P177398) applying the ESF of which the environmental and social




Public Disclosure
                     performance is overall satisfactory. The legislative framework related to environmental matters such as the assessment
                     of environmental impacts and risks, enhancement of environmental quality and protection of water and biodiversity
                     resources, is considered robust and highly regulated. Environmental Impacts Assessment regulations contain a list of
                     activities which are deemed to have a potential adverse impact on the environment for which an environmental
                     authorization needs to be obtained prior to commencing with construction. Legislation and regulations for worker
                     health and safety are particularly well-developed, especially occupational health and safety (OHS) regulations related to
                     the construction industry. The legislative system, in addition to the CGV ESMS which will be established, is regarded as
                     adequate to manage the potential environmental, health and safety risks and impacts associated with the potential
                     downstream investment projects.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                         High
                     The environmental risk category under OP4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities is FI-1
                     (High risk). OP4.03 is applicable to the project as the CGV will be established as a private entity and the downstream
                     pipeline projects, supported by the guarantees will be largely implemented through private sector participation. Part
                     1 of the IPF will support the Government of South Africa equity participation through NT in the CGV. Part 2 will
                     support the initial start-up cost for the establishing of the CGV, developing of the CGV operational procedures
                     including the ESMS, development of a pipeline portfolio for the CGV and technical assistance for creating an enabling


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                     environment. Part 3 will support project coordination and implementation arrangements. The direct activities
                     supported under Phase 1 of the MPA are not anticipated to have a significant environmental risk, however a risk
                     rating of high has been assigned due to the anticipated downstream financial exposure associated with the large
                     infrastructure developments, which will be facilitated (de-risking) by guarantees from the CGV. The downstream
                     pipeline project, supported by the CGV, have a potential to cause significant adverse environmental, health and safety
                     risks and impacts which are considered diverse and irreversible, if not properly mitigated. Key environmental risk
                     associated with the CGV financial exposure include (i) capacity of private and public sector to assess and manage
                     environmental, health and safety (EHS) risks and impacts, (ii) complex contractor and supply chain EHS management,
                     (iii) poor compliance and enforcement of EHS requirements by the project developers and contactors, (iv) loss of
                     biodiversity and natural habitats (marine and terrestrial), (v) increased air emissions including green house gasses, (vi)
                     soil and water pollution, (vii) generation of large quantities of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, (viii) fatalities and
                     disabling injuries due to construction related occupational health and safety hazards and (ix) community health and
                     safety risks including traffic related incidents, exposure to construction hazards such as dust, noise, hazardous
                     substances, (x) life and fire safety risks due poor structural integrity and public space safety considerations, and (xi)
                     poor emergency preparedness and response planning. The establishment and development of the CGV has been
                     mandated by NT to the DBSA through IFISA. The DBSA is considered to have the necessary capacity and experience
                     managing large complex projects. IFISA has not yet been established in DBSA. The CGV will only be established during
                     implementation therefore its capacity to manage E&S risks can not be determined at this stage. To assess and
                     manage the CGVs exposure to EHS risk, CGV will be required to appoint qualified and experienced environmental,
                     health and safety resources to implement the ESMS in line with national requirements and applicable IFC
                     Performance Standards (PSs) prior to the issuing of any guarantees. The ESAP will require DBSA to further assess the




Public Disclosure
                     capacity needs of the CGV, once established, and propose a capacity building plan. The timelines for the appointment
                     of the CGV specialist and establishment of the CGV ESMS are stipulated in the Environmental and Social Action Plan
                     (ESAP). Once established, a separate ESAP will be entered into with the CGV.
                                                                                                                                             High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk category under OP4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities is Category A
                     FI-1 (High risk). Potential social impacts are associated with: (i) community health and safety; (ii) displacement and
                     resettlement risks; (iii) labor influx; (iv) inclusion of vulnerable groups into decision-making processes; (iv) challenges
                     in ensuring adequate stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism; and (v) SEA/SH risks. In addition to
                     these risks, the institutional capacity of future CGV is yet unknown, albeit necessary requirements on establishing
                     appropriate ESMS are embedded in the Environmental Social Action Plan (ESAP). Establishing a new institutions like
                     CGV requires building capacity from scratch, including hiring and training social specialists. Ensuring compliance with
                     national laws and IFC Performance Standards (PSs) might be a significant challenge for a new institution like CGV that
                     does not have ESMS in place yet. NT/DBSA will need to ensure that CGV has adequate resources for CGV to establish
                     its ESMS. The CGV will also support a wide range of infrastructure projects across different sectors, with each sector
                     potentially posing unique social risks, making it difficult to develop a one-size-fits-all ESMS.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards




                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                        Page 5 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      The project will apply OP/BP 4.03 as the CGV will be established as a private entity and the downstream pipeline
                      projects, supported by the guarantees will be largely implemented through private sector participation. The project
                      will support NT initial equity investment in the CGV under Part 1 and the establishment of the CGV and development
                      of a pipeline portfolio, amongst others, under Part 2. The CGV will only be established during project implementation.
                      The CGV will support the de-risking of large infrastructure projects of which the nature, location and magnitude is
                      currently not fully known and will only be established after project approval.. However, as an initial phase the CGV
                      will focus on provide guarantees to de-risk activities supporting the strengthening of the energy transmission network
                      and repowering of outer areas of existing power stations. The portfolio will later on be expanded to include support
                      to waste water and water sector projects, including desalination, transport projects including rail way and expansion
                      of harbor terminals, amongst others. The nature of these large scale infrastructure activities may have a particular
                      relevance to the IFC PS 1 to 9 in that it could cause significant adverse environmental, occupational and community
                      health and safety risks (PS2 and 4), loss of biodiversity, land issues (PS5), IP/SSAHUTLC (PS7), impacts on sensitive
                      habitats (PS6), surface and ground water pollution (PS3) and Cultural Heritage (PS8), if not properly managed. To
                      assess and manage CGVs environmental and social risk exposure, the CGV will be required to establish an ESMS in line
                      with PS 1, national laws, international obligations and treaties, as applicable, the World Bank Group Environmental,
                      Health and Safety (WBG EHSG) and to the satisfaction of the Bank. The ESMS will need to be appropriate to the
                      nature and scale of the anticipated risks associated with the CGV pipeline portfolio and will need to be reviewed and
                      updated as needed as additional sectors are being added. A ToR for the development of the ESMS will be prepared by
                      the PIU and will be shared for Bank review and no objection within the timeframe stipulated in the ESAP. The ESMS
                      will as a minimum incorporate the following elements, in line with the relevant requirements of the IFC PSs: (a)



Public Disclosure
                      environmental and social policy that will be endorsed by the CGV senior management; (b) procedures for identifying
                      and assessing E&S risks and impacts as part of the decision making process; (c) organizational structure; (d)
                      monitoring, reporting and reviewing of portfolio E&S risks and impacts, (e) emergency response and preparedness, (f)
                      stakeholder engagement including provisions to ensuring inputs in project design, site selection and alternatives and
                      (g) provisions for setting up Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The ESMS will allow for screening of projects to be
                      supported (de-risked) to exclude activities with significant irreversible, cumulative and unprecedented E&S risks
                      including activities stipulated in the ESMS exclusion list. The ESMS exclusion list will be inline with the exclusion list of
                      FI project not supported by the IFC, which includes projects such as production involving harmful or exploitative
                      forms of forced labour or child labor and commercial logging operations in primary tropical forests amongst others.
                      The ESMS will need to be integrated in the operational procedures and decision making of the CGV.. The E&S Policy
                      and a summary of the ESMS will need to be publicly disclosed as stipulated in the ESAP prior to issuing of guarantees.
                      The CGV will be required to submit at least the first three Environmental and Social Due Diligence reviews conducted
                      for projects, to the Bank for prior review as stipulated in the ESAP. To meet the disclosure requirements for high risk
                      projects, a preliminary draft E&S policy was publicly disclosed on the NT website on October 2 2025 as part of
                      appraisal and to demonstrate readiness. As the CGV board is not yet established, the draft policy will need to be
                      reviewed, updated and thereafter adopted by the CGV board once the CGV has been established. The capacity of CGV
                      to manage E&S risks will be further determined once the CGV has been established. ToRs for the appointment of the
                      CGV environmental and health and safety specialists and social specialist will be prepared and shared with the Bank
                      for review during project implementation, and a list of the shortlisted candidates will be shared with the Bank for
                      prior review and no-objection. This requirement will be reflected in the Environmental and Social Action Plan
                      between the Bank and CGV to which parties will enter into when CGV is legally established as an entity, all in line with


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                         Page 6 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                      the requirements of the Loan Agreement. South Africa’s own legal and policy framework for environmental and social
                      standards is anchored in the Constitution (Section 24) as well as NEMA, whereas internationally South Africa is a party
                      to key treaties including the Paris Agreement, Basel, Rotterdam, and Stockholm Conventions, as well as the Montreal
                      Protocol. Stakeholder engagement, information disclosure are mandated through these domestic laws and
                      international treaties. At the project level, a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) was prepared which outlines a
                      structured approach to identifying, informing, and consulting stakeholders throughout the project lifecycle.
                      Consultations were held on November 7 2025, and comments incorporated in the draft SEP. The draft SEP and ESCP
                      have been disclosed prior to Appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement for this project is guided by Performance Standard 1 (PS1) requirements, consistent with
                      the application of OP/BP 4.03. Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) was prepared by DBSA, and it outlines a
                      structured approach to identifying, informing, and consulting stakeholders throughout the project lifecycle. The SEP
                      emphasizes: (i)early and inclusive engagement; (ii) information disclosure Project-related environmental and social
                      risks, mitigation measures, using multiple channels for ongoing stakeholder engagement (e.g., public meetings,
                      websites, etc); (iii) Consultation and Feedback during preparation, including from potential shareholders of CGV with
                      consideration to their ESG capacities; (iv) An accessible and existing GRM systems within DBSA and NT that aim to
                      process and address concerns promptly and effectively, including anonymous submissions as appropriate.
                      Consultations were held on November 7, organized by DBSA and National Treasury (NT), well before the Appraisal
                      stage. These consultations provided an opportunity for stakeholders to review project objectives, anticipated
                      environmental and social risks, and proposed mitigation measures. ESAP includes necessary requirements for



Public Disclosure
                      stakeholder engagement for CGV shareholders, including establishment of ESMS that will need to have stakeholder
                      engagement aspects and GRM in place, in the context of each investment. CGV will be required to have GRM (i.e.
                      external communication mechanism, to be in line with PS1). This requirement, as part of the overall ESMS
                      requirements, will be embedded in the ESAP between the Bank and CGV when the latter is established, in line with
                      the Loan Agreement and CGV Project Agreement. Stakeholder Engagement at DBSA level will focus on three areas: (i)
                      Consultations on the scope, design, and policy structure of the CGV-- National Treasury, in close collaboration and
                      participation of DBSA, will lead; (ii) Consultations on governance and operational structure of the CGV, project
                      including the design of stakeholder engagement and GRM structures of the CGV entity the preparation of the ESMS,
                      and project pipeline development which the DBSA will lead. This phase will take place after the project approval; and
                      (iii) Consultations on specific projects under the CGV ESMS. The CGV ESMS will require on a project-by-project basis
                      from both CGV and each project proponent (SPV) for project section, design, approval, implementation and grievance
                      management. With regards to DBSA, it already has an existing complaint handling mechanism on which the project
                      will built further, where appropriate. The DBSA’s Independent Grievance Redress Mechanism (IGRM) is a formal
                      process that allows individuals or communities affected by DBSA-financed projects to raise complaints about adverse
                      impacts such as health, safety, social, or environmental issues. Complaints can be submitted via email, online forms,
                      or in writing, and must include details like project name, location, and the nature of harm. DBSA acknowledges
                      receipt within 10 days, reviews eligibility, and seeks resolution through compliance checks and dialogue.
                      Confidentiality and language support are available, and project clients are also required to maintain their own
                      grievance systems proportionate to project risks. Draft SEP will be disclosed prior to Appraisal.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant



                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                    Page 7 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                      PS2 will apply to the PIU and CGV, once established as well as the downstream implementation of the proposed
                      pipeline projects. The project will involve direct, contracted, and supply chain workers. The risk exposure of CGV is
                      largely related to the potential impacts during the construction and operations phases of the downstream
                      infrastructure projects supported in its portfolio. Construction of large infrastructure projects pose a particular risks
                      to occupational health and safety of workers. Potential health and safety hazards during the construction and
                      operational phases may include: a) falling from heights, b) interaction with moving machinery and equipment, c) slips,
                      trips and falls, d) exposure to hazardous chemicals and other substances, e) noise and vibration, f) working in
                      confined spaces and g) electrocution. Construction of large infrastructure projects are governed by the South Africa
                      Occupational Health and Safety Act (1993) and its regulations. The Act requires projects to appoint dedicated full-
                      time health and safety officers and requires projects to put in place a health and safety file consisting of a
                      comprehensive occupational health and safety plan, procedures for assessing risks, procedures for managing
                      incidents and emergencies, permit-to-work procedures for high risk activities and specific requirements for assessing
                      competency and providing health and safety training to workers, among others. The legislative system is considered
                      comprehensive. As part of the CGV ESMS, CGV will assess the potential health and safety risks of its portfolio and
                      ensure that the relevant health and safety requirements inline with the national requirements, PS2 and the WBG
                      EHSGs are considered. In particular the ESMS will make provisions to ensure that adequate provision is made for
                      contractual health and safety requirements to be imposed on contractors, including fair labor practices, non-
                      discrimination, freedom of association, and collective bargaining rights for all its pipeline supported projects. CGV will
                      also establish human resources policy and procedures as part of the ESMS.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      PS3 will apply to the PIU, CGV and largely to the downstream implementation of the CGV pipeline projects to be
                      implemented by the SPV and supported by guarantees from CGV. As relevant the PIU and CGV will need to consider
                      resource efficiency as part of its operations and procurement processes as stipulated in the ESAP. As part of the initial
                      stages of the CGV, its pipeline portfolio will focus on provide guarantees to support infrastructure projects in the
                      energy sector, in particular the strengthening the transmission network, while the CGV pipeline portfolio will be
                      further broaden to be support the water and sanitation, transport and social sectors of which the project will only be
                      fully finalized during implementation. The risk exposure of CGV is largely related to the potential impacts during the
                      construction and operations phases of these downstream infrastructure projects if not adequately mitigated and
                      managed. Risks and impacts during construction may including air, soil and water pollution as a result of land clearing
                      (dust), generation of waste, use of construction equipment and storage and use of hazardous substances. It is
                      anticipated that the infrastructure projects may require large quantities of natural resource such as crusher stone,
                      sand, soil and water. Potential impacts and risks during the operational phases of the projects may include production
                      of hazardous (batteries solar panel, medical), general, and effluent waste which may lead to causing soil and water
                      pollution. Infrastructure projects may also contribute to Greenhouse gas emissions and utilization of natural
                      resources such as water in its processes. Resource efficiency, pollution prevention and management are legislated in
                      various pieces of the South Africa legislation such as the National Environmental Management Act (1998), National
                      Environmental Management: Waste Act (NEMWA) (2008), National Environmental Management Air Quality Act
                      (NEMAQA) (2004) and the National Water Act (NWA) (1998) to name a few. The legislative system, though
                      fragmented, are considered comprehensive in ensuring impacts are identified and where possible avoided, reduced,
                      mitigated and monitored as part of the environmental impact assessment (EIA) process. The risks and impacts will
                      need to be assessed and mitigated through the establishment of the CGV ESMS as set out in PS1. The ESMS will


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                       Page 8 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                      encompass all requisite processes and procedures to ensure that site-specific considerations related to resource
                      efficiency, pollution prevention, and waste management are identified, addressed, and effectively managed in line
                      with national legislative requirements, good international industry practices (GIIPs) and the WBG EHSGs.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      PS4 is relevant to the downstream pipeline projects supported by guarantees from CGV that may pose a risk to
                      community health and safety. PIU and CGV will be both guided by PS4 requirements. At first the CGV pipeline
                      portfolio will focus on provide guarantees to support infrastructure projects in the energy sector in particular the
                      strengthening the transmission network, while the future downstream pipeline projects to be support in sectors such
                      as water and sanitation and transport will only be known during project implementation. The risk exposure of CGV is
                      largely related to the potential impacts during the construction and operations phases of the downstream
                      infrastructure projects supported in its portfolio. Construction of large infrastructure projects pose a particular risks
                      to community health and safety if not properly mitigated and managed. Potential risks include traffic related
                      incidents, exposure to construction hazards such as dust, noise, hazardous substances, life and fire safety risks due
                      poor structural integrity and public space safety considerations, and poor emergency preparedness and response
                      planning. In addition, Gender-Based Violence (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) risks are heightened
                      during construction phases due to the influx of workers and interaction with local communities. These risks require
                      strict adherence to the Addressing Gender-Based Violence and Harassment: Emerging Good Practice for the Private
                      Sector and integration of Codes of Conduct for workers. Furthermore, security risks, including theft, vandalism, and
                      potential community unrest, must be assessed and managed in line with PS4 and the World Bank Group
                      Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs). The requirement to consider aspects related to community



Public Disclosure
                      health and safety are fragmented in various pieces of legislation including but not limited to the Occupational Health
                      and Safety Act (OSHA) (1993) and National Environmental Management Act (NEMA) (1998) which requires these
                      aspects to be considered as part of a project risk and impact identification process, while the National Building
                      Regulations and Standards relates to health and safety aspects related to buildings and structures. As part of the CGV
                      ESMS, CGV will assess the potential community health and safety risks of its portfolio and ensure that the SPVs
                      consider and implement the relevant health and safety requirements inline with the national requirements, PS4 and
                      the WBG EHSGs as part of the design, construction and operational phases. The ESMS will encompass all requisite
                      processes and procedures to ensure that site-specific considerations related to community health and safety risks are
                      identified, mitigated and effectively managed.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is not considered relevant to the Borrower as OP 04/03 triggers PSs. PS5 will apply to the downstream
                      implementation of the proposed pipeline projects. The pipeline infrastructure projects may lead to the physical and
                      economic displacement including loss of livelihoods. South Africa has a robust legislative system that would act as a
                      safeguard that serves to ensure that alternatives to displacement are considered prior to project authorization.
                      Recent legislative developments have also sought to improve procedural clarity and advance land reform, notably
                      through the 2024 Expropriation Act and the 2024 Tenure Amendment. Nonetheless, challenges remain, particularly
                      regarding constitutional uncertainties related to compensation for expropriation. Key social risk considerations
                      include the need to manage risks associated with land acquisition and changes in land use. The CGV ESMS should
                      therefore consider alternative designs that avoid any significant land acquisition and physical displacement. The sub-
                      project investments are currently not known, and will be identified during implementation through activities under


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                      Part 2. The ESMS will have to include a comprehensive resettlement/land acquisition program that addressed, among
                      others, impacts and risks related to livelihood such as interference with pastoral uses and other access to collective
                      resources, and business interruption or disruption even if land not directly or fully acquired. DBSA will be responsible
                      for setting up the ESMS, including preparing appropriate ToRs that will need to be reviewed and approved by the
                      Bank. Given the constitutional challenges surrounding compensation and tenure security, the ESMS will incorporate
                      measures to bridge these gaps through supplemental safeguards such as: (i) conducting gap analyses between
                      national frameworks and PS5 requirements; (ii) developing corrective action plans where deficiencies are identified;
                      (iii) ensuring that vulnerable groups affected by historical resettlement or tenure disputes receive targeted livelihood
                      restoration support; and (iv) establishing grievance redress mechanisms that remain accessible to communities
                      impacted by past or ongoing government-led processes. These provisions will help ensure that residual risks linked to
                      legacy land acquisition and constitutional uncertainties do not undermine compliance with PS5 and the overall social
                      sustainability of the pipeline investments.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      PS6 is relevant to the downstream pipeline project supported by CGV guarantees in particular to the energy sector
                      projects (transmission lines), transport projects (rail, roads and ports) and water and sanitation project (waste water
                      treatment and distribution), which may have an adverse impact on biodiversity if not adequately managed. The CGV
                      pipeline portfolio will only be developed during project implementation as part of Part 2 and therefore the full extend
                      of the impact on biodiversity are not currently known. South Africa has a high terrestrial and marine biodiversity, with
                      three major biodiversity hotspots, namely the Succulent karoo, Cape floristic region and the Maputaland-Pondoland



Public Disclosure
                      Albany corridor and forty-two marine protected areas which covers approximately 5% of its coastal areas. Habitat
                      degradation, change in land-use, overexploitation of marine resources and human activities such as urbanization,
                      agriculture and mining are primary contributors to the loss of biodiversity in South Africa. Linear projects such as
                      transmission lines, pipelines and road infrastructure may result in habitat losses, fragmentation, and disruption of
                      ecological systems while the water sector projects may impact on environmental flows due to over-abstraction and
                      lead to water pollution due to release of untreated effluent and stormwater from infrastructure projects. As part of
                      the initial pipeline of the CGV, support will be focused on the energy sector in particular strengthening the
                      transmission networks. Wind energy and transmission projects have a particular impact on migratory birds and bat
                      species. Both transmission lines and wind energy projects are a leading contributor to bird mortality in South Africa in
                      particularly for birds of conservation concerns such as the Cape Vulture, Black Harriers and other raptor species. After
                      the initial stages, the pipeline portfolio of the CGV is anticipated to be broaden to include other sectors as previously
                      mentioned. Under transport, the development of ports may affect sensitive marine ecosystems, water sector may
                      impact environmental flows, while housing and mix development infrastructure may lead to loss of habitats and
                      fragmentation, destruction of ecosystem services and introduction of alien invasive species. Impacts on biodiversity is
                      governed by the requirements in the NEMA (1998) and National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act
                      (NEMBA) (2004) which requires a mitigation hierarch approach to be followed as part of the EIA process to avoid,
                      minimize or reduce biodiversity impact. Where residual impacts remains significant project proponents will be
                      required to implement conservation measures in the form a biodiversity offset. The legislative framework for
                      assessing impacts on biodiversity is considered comprehensive. As part of the CGV ESMS, CGV will be required to
                      assess the potential impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem services of its portfolio, and require the SPVs, for the
                      projects which guarantees will be issued tog prepare EIAs, biodiversity management plans and offsets as require, to


                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                      ensure that the relevant requirements are met inline with the national legislation and PS6, and to ensure that
                      mitigation measures in line with the mitigation hierarchy approach are considered in the design, construction and
                      operational phases of the pipeline projects.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                            Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      PS7 is relevant. It is estimated that in South Africa around 4 million people lack reliable access to clean water and
                      other basic services. The infrastructure crisis magnifies income inequality, by disproportionality affecting vulnerable
                      households and small firms who do not have the means to develop alternatives such as off grid electricity solutions
                      and road transport. The project partly aims to address this crisis and benefit communities by bringing positive
                      outcomes. At the same time, the infrastructure projects supported by the CGV, such as renewable energy generation,
                      transmission, and water augmentation, may have significant impacts on vulnerable and disadvantaged communities
                      during construction. To address risks associated with inclusion of vulnerable communities into project decision-
                      making, CGV, through measures and procedures established as part of its ESMS, will need to ensure that they are
                      adequately consulted and provided with access to grievance redress mechanism. In addition, certain groups in South
                      Africa, such as traditional communities including Khoi-San and other culturally distinct groups, may fall under the
                      definition of Indigenous Peoples as per PS7. For potential downstream projects that may be directly affect these
                      groups, the ESMS will need to incorporate requirements for Free, Prior, and Informed Consent and if relevant,
                      prepare necessary instruments. Inclusion of vulnerable groups, such as women-headed households, persons with
                      disabilities, and economically marginalized communities, should be addressed under PS1 through robust stakeholder
                      engagement



Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                      Relevant

                      PS8 will apply to the downstream private sector pipeline project supported by CGV guarantees. Large scale
                      infrastructure development may have a direct impact on any cultural heritage, due to its national scale, large scale
                      earthworks, linear infrastructure activity covering long distances in rural, peri-urban and urban areas, which may
                      result in impacts on unmarked and marked graves, and other structures or artifacts of cultural and heritage
                      importance. The ESMS must establish procedures for screening of potential impacts on cultural heritages and for
                      contractual requirements for contractors to develop and implement procedures to handle accidental findings in
                      accordance with the South African national heritage protection laws.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      The is applying the OP/BP4.03 which follows the IFC PSs, therefore the requirements of the FI to establish an ESMS is
                      addressed under PS1.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       The national legislative requirements including any requirements under international treaties and obligations will be
                       integrated in the CGV ESMS. Through the ESMS, the CGV will ensure that the projects for which guarantees will be
                       issued, comply with the relevant national legislative requirements relevant to environment, health and safety and
                       social, IFC PSs, WBG EHSGs and Good International Industry Practices.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              Yes
                       Additional financing partners will only be identified during the project implementation. The use of a common
                       approach will therefore only be discussed and agreed once the proposed financing partners are onboard. The exact
                       financing partners and agreements will only be finalized during implementation. It is further anticipated that a
                       common approach will be followed in terms of the ESAP. If there are gaps it is anticipated that the other financing
                       partners will enter into separate agreements with the CGV and the ESMS will be updated. The exact financing partners
                       and agreements will only be finalized during implementation. The ESMS will be developed considering best
                       international practices set out by the IFC PSs. It is anticipated that other financing partners will review and endorse
                       the CGV ESMS as part of their due diligence processes.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?




Public Disclosure
                     By Appraisal:

                     Draft Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP)
                     Disclosed preliminary draft CGV Environmental and Social Policy disclosed on October 2, 2025.
                     Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan

                     Aspects that will be captured in the ESAP for implementation by DBSA after project approval:

                     a) Prepare and submit for Bank review and no objection a Terms of Reference for the development of an Environmental
                     and Social Management System in line with PS 1, World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines and
                     the national requirements. .
                     b) Prepare a terms of reference for the appointment of an environmental specialist, health and safety specialist and a
                     social specialists to be appointed as part of the CGV management team, which will be responsible for the
                     implementation of the CGV ESMS once the CGV is established.

                     Once the CGV is established, the Bank will agree upon the relevant Environmental and Social Actions needed to be
                     undertaken by the CGV as set out in a separate ESAP. Aspects that will be captured in the ESAP for implementation by
                     CGV once established includes:
                     a) Adopt and implement an Environmental and Social Management System in line with PS1, World Bank Group
                     Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines and national requirements and to the satisfaction of the Bank. No
                     guarantee will be issued prior to the establishment of the ESMSs and no objection from the Bank.



                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Blended Finance Platform For Resilient Infrastructure (P508930)



                     b) Publicly disclose an updated E&S Policy and summary of the Environmental and Social Management System prior to
                     issuing of any guarantees.
                     c) Appoint environmental, health and safety and social specialists which will be responsible for the implementation of
                     the CGV ESMS.
                     d) All guarantee business activities need to be screened against the exclusion criteria to determine eligibility for support
                     under the project and as set out in the ESAP.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Marc Schrijver                          Title:          Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  mschrijver@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Joonkyung Seong                         Job Title:      Senior Energy Economist

                      Email:                  jseong@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




Public Disclosure
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                         Marc Schrijver, Joonkyung Seong

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                Juanita Whitfield

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                       Aimonchok Tashieva




                    Jan 19, 2026                                                                                                     Page 13 of 13
