Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01273




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                          Armenia: Water and
                               EUROPE AND CENTRAL
Armenia, Armenia                                            P508124                       Irrigation Services
                               ASIA
                                                                                          Enhancement Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               14-Apr-2025                  13-Jun-2025                   Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Ministry of Territorial
Republic of Armenia            Administration and
                               Infrastructure

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide improved access to efficient and financially sustainable
irrigation and safely managed rural water supply services in selected areas of Armenia.

Components
Component 1: Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening
Component 2: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Enhancement
Component 3: Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management
Component 4: Project Management

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           174.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                174.00
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                  80.00


                                                                                                                    Page 1
      The World Bank
      Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



   Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00

 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                              80.00
   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Counterpart Funding                                                                                       20.00
       Borrower/Recipient                                                                                      20.00
     Other Sources                                                                                             74.00
       FRANCE: French Agency for Development                                                                   74.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Substantial


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




Other Decision (as needed)




B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

 1.     Armenia has made significant strides since gaining its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, with a
 transformed economy with sustained growth, ambitious reforms supporting a market-oriented environment. From
 2000 to 2022, average annual growth was 6.3 percent, reducing poverty from 32.1 percent to 23.7 percent. However,
 growth has been volatile. After the Velvet Revolution, growth reached 7.6 percent in 2019, but the economy contracted
 by 7.2 percent in 2020. The economy recovered in 2021 and was further fueled by inflows of people, money transfers,
 and re-routed trade, with growth averaging 11 percent in 2022-23, before decelerating to a projected 5.5. percent for



                                                                                                                  Page 2
         The World Bank
         Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


    2024. Poverty in Armenia has steadily decreased over the last decade, with extreme poverty nearing 1.1 percent. Access
    to basic services like water and heating remains more limited in rural areas.

    2.     Climate change poses high economic and social risks for Armenia. Armenia’s annual temperature has increased
    by 2.38 ± 0.29°C since 1960, outpacing the global average of 1.5°C1, with projections indicating continued above-average
    warming over the next 50 years2. Warmer temperatures and increased incidences of extreme weather events damage
    infrastructure, impact health and productivity, and threaten key sectors. Hazardous hydrometeorological events have
    intensified in recent decades3 and studies have shown that both damaging droughts4,5 and floods6 are likely to continue
    to be exacerbated by climate change in different parts of the country. Agriculture is highly vulnerable to climate change,
    facing declining land and labor productivity, water shortages, and shifting growing seasons. Hazardous
    hydrometeorological events have intensified in recent decades with increasing risks because of natural disasters, such
    as landslides, floods, heatwaves, and drought 7,8. Women spend more time performing water-related household duties
    due to inadequate water supply, and have greater domestic responsibilities, and an expanding role in agricultural labor
    due to male out-migration, all of which are increasingly burdened by climate change and water shortages, also affecting
    their health and time poverty.9

    3.    The agricultural sector lost ground in the economy in value added and employment share, while industry and
    the services sector have become more important drivers of growth. Agriculture's GDP peaked at US$2.1 billion in 2014
    but fell to US$1.7 billion in 2018. Between 2012 and 2019, agriculture’s share of GDP and employment dropped from
    37 percent to 24 percent10 and further to about 8.5 percent in 2023. However, from 2023 to 2024, agricultural output
    grew by 1.6 percent after years of decline with an output of US$2.4 billion11. Currently the sector employs over 225,000
    people, of which almost half are women (48 percent). This makes up 19 percent of the total employed population12 and
    provides income to about 1 million Armenians (about 30 percent of the country’s population), who are dependent on
    agriculture. Services have been the main driver of per capita growth since 2000 (excluding trade) growing by 28 percent
    and industry 8 percent in 2022. Services' share of GDP rose from 46 percent in 2012 to 60 percent in 2023, driven by
    Information and Communication Technology (ICT), tourism, and healthcare. The industrial sector’s share also increased
    from 16 percent to 23. percent during this period.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

    4.    Irrigated agriculture is essential to Armenia’s economy, providing livelihoods for over 225,000 people and
    contributing heavily to food production, with around 80 percent of agricultural output coming from irrigated lands.

1 Berkeley Earth. Retrieved from: https://berkeleyearth.org.
2 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report 2022
3 World Bank and ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2021. “Climate Risk Country Profile: Armenia.” Manila: ADB and Washington, DC: World Bank.
4
  Savadyan A, Hovsepyan A, Hovsepyan L (2022) Integrated Drought Management in Armenia. Global Water Partnership.
5
  Arakelyan A and Margaryan L (2023) Integrated water resources management challenges in Armenia in the context of the global climate and water crisis. Geology
and Geography: 57(3). Proceedings of the Yerevan State University.
6 Galstyan H, Khan S, Sayadya H, Sargsyan A, Safaryan T (2020) Spatial-temporal trends analysis of flood events in the Republic of Armenia in the context of climate

change. Journal of Water and Climate Change: 11.21.
7
  Hallegatte, Stéphane, Adrien Camille Vogt-Schilb, Mook Bangalore, and Julie Rozenberg. 2017. Unbreakable: Building the Resilience of the Poor in the Face of
Natural Disasters. Climate Change and Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.
8 World Bank. 2022b. “Republic of Armenia: Risk and Resilience Assessment.” Draft, World Bank. Washington, DC.
9 Asian Development Bank. 2019. “Armenia Country Gender Assessment”. Manila, Philippines.
10 Data as of January 2021 of ILOSTAT (dashboard), International Labour Organization, Geneva, https://ilostat.ilo.org/.
11 Armenia’s National Statistical Committee, 2024
12 Armenia’s National Statistical Committee, 2024




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
         The World Bank
         Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


  However, only about 25 percent of Armenia’s arable land is currently equipped for irrigation, limiting the sector’s
  resilience to climate shocks and seasonal variability. Globally, irrigated agriculture can boost yields to double, driving
  job creation, poverty reduction, and climate resilience by ensuring reliable water access amid droughts and extreme
  weather. Agriculture is a cornerstone of Armenia’s economy, employing around 20 percent of the workforce with most
  jobs concentrated in rural areas and therefore irrigation is critical for agricultural productivity. However, Armenia’s
  outdated and deteriorating irrigation infrastructure leads to water losses, inefficiencies, and reduced farmer
  profitability, hindering agricultural growth. Armenia has 208,000 hectares of irrigable land, but only 95,000 hectares (46
  percent) are currently irrigated, highlighting the need for efficient water management to boost crop yields, productivity,
  and food security. A major challenge is the aging Soviet-era irrigation infrastructure, which is outdated, deteriorating,
  facing high water losses. Armenia’s irrigation efficiency is only 25 percent, far below the 70–85 percent of modern
  systems, with half of the water lost in distribution. As a result, only half of the previously irrigated land remains
  functional, causing water shortages, lower productivity, and income losses for farmers. Modernizing infrastructure and
  improving management could boost water productivity by up to 40 percent without increasing water use, a crucial step
  for the agricultural sector and is a fundamental climate adaptation strategy for Armenia, with water security benefits
  for other water use sectors in rural communities.

  5.    The irrigation sector in Armenia faces critical institutional and operational challenges that hinder effective
  water delivery for agriculture. The Water Committee (WC) struggles with inadequate technical capacity, poor planning,
  and a lack of project management resources, while sector monitoring and asset management are underdeveloped, with
  outdated tools like GIS and CMMS. Water User Associations (WUAs), responsible for local irrigation, have not received
  support since 2015 and face issues such as large service areas, outdated infrastructure, poor farmer participation, and
  financial instability. Similarly, the Water Supply Agency (WSA), which provides bulk water to WUAs, suffers from
  outdated infrastructure, low tariffs, insufficient maintenance funding, and a lack of modern asset management systems
  and skilled staff. Both WUAs and WSA need urgent reforms, including infrastructure modernization, tariff restructuring,
  and improved financial and operational management to ensure long-term sustainability and efficiency in the sector.

  6.     Armenia has made significant strides in improving its water supply and sanitation (WSS) services over the past
  two decades, largely through phased Public-Private Partnership (PPP) reforms that have enhanced operational
  performance, service quality, and financial stability. Currently, most WSS services are managed by "Veolia Djur," under
  a lease contract lasting until 2031. However, about 650,000 people in 579 ‘unserved’ rural settlements13 remain outside
  this contract, relying on aging, small-scale networks, spring or groundwater sources, and community-managed systems
  with limited municipal oversight. These areas face challenges such as deteriorating infrastructure, inadequate water
  storage and disinfection, sparse metering, and a lack of reliable data and skilled personnel, with sanitation services also
  underdeveloped. Despite the improvements, the policy landscape for these rural settlements is inadequate, with low
  tariffs hindering sector development and the lessee’s financial sustainability, while the Water Code exempts local
  services from tariff regulation and licensing. The Water Committee (WC) and Public Services Regulatory Commission
  (PSRC) lack authority to oversee local governance bodies, leading to poor maintenance and limited service expansion.
  To address these gaps and ensure long-term sustainability, legal, policy, and institutional reforms are needed, with a
  focus on improving rural WSS services and infrastructure.




13 These settlements consist of rural areas and small towns, with populations ranging from 9 people to 11,585 people.




                                                                                                                         Page 4
         The World Bank
         Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


  7.     Armenia struggles with water information management, affecting irrigation and water supply operations. There
  is no regulatory framework for data management or data sharing, despite the WC producing key infrastructure data.
  The WUAs manage separate irrigation data, resulting in fragmented and inefficient systems. The Water Infrastructure
  Information System (WIIS) was developed to integrate water sector data but remains incomplete, preventing
  coordination across irrigation, drinking water and sanitation. This fragmentation leads to poor planning, inefficient
  resource allocation, and service delivery challenges. Outdated infrastructure and limited technical capacity further
  accelerate investment deterioration. Strengthening water information management is essential for a more sustainable
  and efficient water sector in Armenia.


  8.     In 2021, the GoA developed a Government Program Strategy Document, in which there is a clear vision to tackle
  water sector reforms. The 2021–2026 Government Program document14, has a sub-section that presents a vision for
  the water, which outlines the following priorities, including: (i) improving irrigation system performance; (ii) enhancing
  efficiency, ensuring water savings, enhancing the crop yield, expanding irrigable lands, and using new technologies; (iii)
  improving the quality of services delivered in the irrigation sector; (iv) improving WSS services in settlements not
  included in the national lease contract; (v) strengthening local water institutions; (vi) elaborating the draft Law on
  Irrigation Water, to regulate the role of WUAs in developing irrigated agriculture in Armenia; and (vii) exploring PPP
  models for irrigation and water management. However, since 2021, progress against this vision has been limited, leaving
  most of the objectives unmet. The proposed MPA program seeks to bridge these gaps and support the government in
  achieving goals set out in the vision document. In May 2024, the Prime Minister emphasized the urgent need for water
  sector investment to tackle low water use efficiency, cost recovery challenges, water losses, groundwater depletion,
  Lake Sevan’s quantity and quality issues, and the need for additional storage. Recognizing the urgency of these
  challenges, GoA requested World Bank financing for a Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (MPA) to enhance reliable
  irrigation and rural potable water supply in priority areas. As part of this request, GoA asked the World Bank to support
  WSS expansion in unserved rural areas, where some 650,000 people rely on unregulated, community-managed sources
  and services. GoA is also seeking alternative RWSS delivery models, including engaging the local private sector beyond
  the scope of the national lessee, and exploring new institutional approaches (including outsourcing, delegated
  management, PPPs, public management, etc.) to improve access, sustainability, and local capacity.

 Relationship to CPF
  9.     The proposed project is fully aligned with Armenia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2025-202915 and with
  its High-Level Objective (HLO) 3: More Resilient Economy, and with CPF HLO 5: More Climate Resilient Economic Activity.
  HLO 3 focuses on increasing the resilience of Armenia’s economy by prioritizing climate adaptation in key economic
  sectors, with particular emphasis on supporting sustainable and resilient irrigation services for the agriculture sector
  and enhancing and expanding water supply services in unserved areas. HLO 5 emphasizes strengthening the institutional
  governance of the water sector. The proposed program aligns directly with this objective, as its focus is to tackle climate
  vulnerabilities in Armenia by investing and providing beneficiaries with improved access to climate-resilient irrigation
  systems and water supply services, while also strengthening institutional capacities to ensure sustainable and effective
  water resource management. The WISE program also aligns directly with the Armenia Country Climate and Development


14 The Government Program 2021-2026 describes the Government vision for country development, including defense, foreign policy, economic development, under

which there is a section 3.7 that provides a vision for reforms and related “list of actions” in an action plan. The GoA has made limited progress on implementing the
actions from the action plan.
15 Approved on January 21, 2025




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 5
           The World Bank
           Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


     Report (CCDR), which identifies several priorities such as strengthening WUA institutional capacity, reforming the water
     tariffs, and other policy measures16.


     10. The proposed WISE program is consistent with the World Bank's vision, fits into its Global Challenge Programs
     (GCPs), aligns with the WBG scorecard, the new WBG Water Strategy (FY25-30), the WBG Climate Change Action Plan
     (2021-2025), the Armenia Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA), and advances the achievement of SDG 6 on safely
     managed water supply and sanitation for all and of SDG 2 to end hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition
     and promote sustainable agriculture. Water Security and Climate Adaptation is the first of the World Bank GCPs that
     contribute to the creation of a world free of poverty on a livable planet. The water GCP aims to strengthen water
     security, increase access to safely managed WSS services, and invest in the scale-up of sustainable water management
     and disaster risk reduction solutions. The proposed WISE program contributes to all three of the WBG Water Strategy’s
     strategic objectives (water for people, water for food, and water for planet). The RRA identifies water security as a key
     driver for overcoming fragility in Armenia—a challenge the WISE Program is designed to address. Within the framework
     of SDG 2, the project supports Armenia in advancing towards the target of implementing resilient agricultural practices
     that increase productivity and production and strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change; and within SDG 6
     it supports the advancement towards the target of universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water,
     sanitation, and hygiene (SDG 6.1. and SDG 6.2).

     C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

1. The proposed PrDO of the Program is to provide access to improved irrigation services and safely managed rural WSS
services in selected areas of Armenia.

2. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of Phase 1 IPF of the MPA is to provide improved access to
efficient17 and financially sustainable18 irrigation and safely managed rural water supply services in selected areas of
Armenia.


     Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide improved access to efficient and financially sustainable
     irrigation and safely managed rural water supply services in selected areas of Armenia.

     Key Results

3.        The proposed program will focus on two key result areas: (i) provide access to improved irrigation services; and
(ii) provide access to safely managed rural water supply and sanitation services.




16
     World Bank Group. 2024. Armenia Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series. Washington, DC: World Bank
17 Irrigation efficiency measures the effectiveness of an irrigation system in delivering water to crops, expressed as the percentage of water beneficially used by plants

compared to the total water applied. Water supply efficiency measures the effectiveness of a water supply system to deliver water supply services to communities. In
water supply, technical efficiency is generally measured as the amount of water losses (non-revenue water).
18 Financially sustainable irrigation is an approach that balances the costs of irrigation infrastructure and maintenance with reliable funding, effective cost recovery

mechanisms, and sufficient economic returns. For water supply, financial sustainability also balances the costs of water supply infrastructure and operation and
maintenance with reliable funding, effective cost recovery mechanisms, and sufficient economic returns.


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 6
         The World Bank
         Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


4.      At the end of the 10-year program, the following outcomes are expected: (i) 311,600 additional people gaining
access to improved irrigation services; and (ii) approximately 100,000 additional people gaining access to safely managed
rural water supply or sanitation services.
  D. Program Description

5.         The MPA program is structured as a 10-year engagement through two phases to achieve the PrDO. The PDO
for each phase and the PrDO target the same topics, and the phases are progressive; each phase maintains a similar
structure and builds towards the achievement of the overall program development objective. The structure of the MPA
is uninterrupted and overlapping to ensure that the Program's activities continue without a gap in the rollout of the key
activities. The program includes: (i) a six-year Phase 1 (2025-2031)19 using performance-based conditions with focused
investments to increase climate resilience towards droughts, floods and extreme temperature; and (ii) a six-year Phase
2 (2029-2035) to scale-up and expand infrastructure investments in systems selected from remaining irrigation schemes
and from priority unserved settlements for both water supply and sanitation, with a combined focus on operational and
financial efficiency, to boost climate adaptation. The second phase will start preparation after the second or third year
of implementation of Phase 1, and implementation of Phase 2 should start in 2029, at the fourth year of implementation
of Phase 1. Activities related to the preparation of Phase 2 (financed under Phase 1) will be completed before Phase 2
starts.

 6.         Phase 1 will focus on the following components:

 7.       Component 1: Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening. This component will provide support to
 the MTAI and the WC in key identified priority areas including: (i) the development of a consolidated National Water
 Strategy, a National Irrigation Strategy, a Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Strategy, and a National Irrigation Master
 Plan to be approved by GoA, which will take into account potential OP7.50 transboundary riparian concerns; (ii) revision
 of the irrigation sector tariffs system, to transition to setting fixed fees based on actual irrigated land and variable fees
 based on actual use of water on the irrigated land; (iii) an Asset Maintenance Fund and an Asset Maintenance Plan to
 be established by the WC and/or WSA dedicated for the proper operations and maintenance (O&M) of any newly
 modernized irrigation scheme; (iv) a comprehensive institutional reform program to improve functions of the WC and
 the WSA; and (v) establishment of a national Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center (IWAAC). IWAAC will
 provide essential information, tools, and applications required for monitoring, forecasting, and climate adaptation, such
 as water accounting, crop monitoring, weather forecasting services for farmers, flood and drought monitoring and early
 warning, groundwater monitoring, and irrigation management planning, among others. IWAAC will also serve as a
 mechanism for outreach to communities to share critical climate and water data and receive feedback to calibrate the
 applications.

 8.      Component 2. Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Enhancement will focus on providing improved access to
 safely managed rural water supply services in selected areas of Armenia to enhance climate resilience against drought,
 floods and extreme heat. It will do so by improving the regulatory framework and institutional capacity to advance
 sector reform and promote sustainable service delivery, duly accounting for current and expected climate change
 impacts. It will furthermore support GoA in improving access to safely managed water supply in unserved rural
 settlements through the rehabilitation and construction of water supply infrastructure that will incorporate engineering
 design principles from the WB Resilient Water Infrastructure Brief, in conjunction with establishing inclusive water

19 The first phase of this program needs to have a duration of six years to complete the necessary baseline assessments for Component 2 and the necessary feasibility

stage studies for Component 3, as well as all preparatory documents for Phase 2 infrastructure investments. The 6-years Phase 1 project allows time to complete civil
works to achieve the PDO of Phase 1. Phase 2 timing can be reduced depending on progress made during Phase 1, however, remains as six years at this stage.


                                                                                                                                                                Page 7
         The World Bank
         Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


 supply service provision with the participation of women during the planning, implementation, and operating processes
 through consultations, focus groups and other means. Phase 1 will not consider sanitation infrastructure, which will
 only be considered for Phase 2 of the Program. This component will include consultations with all affected community
 members to highlight the role communities play in WSS planning and service delivery and will enhance accountable and
 transparent WSS service delivery.

 9. Component 3. Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management will boost drought resilience by
 financing rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation systems at main, secondary, and tertiary canal levels
 currently managed jointly by WSA at the large main canal and reservoirs level and by WUAs at the secondary and tertiary
 distributary level. In cooperation with the Water Committee, a sample of five irrigation schemes are short-listed for
 consideration under Phase 1 (see Table 3). The total command area of the irrigation systems under consideration is
 about 39,580 ha which will be selected based on hydrological, technical, economic, and agricultural parameters, under
 a Framework Approach20. For Phase 2, additional four irrigation schemes have been identified. It must be noted that
 under this component, there will be no construction of new irrigation schemes and no construction of any extension to
 the existing schemes. While a large part of the rehabilitation/modernization will involve reconstruction/modernization
 of original systems, the feasibility and detailed design studies will systematically examine the opportunities to consider
 water control and delivery structures, that are operated to maintain a constant canal water levels over time – regardless
 of the flow rate. This shall also include automation of headworks or the introduction of Supervisory Control and Data
 Acquisition (SCADA) to monitor and control water distribution of the larger canal systems.

 10.     Component 4: Project Management. An interim Project Coordination Team (PCT) will be housed within the WC
 and will assume primary responsibility for project implementation, including procurement of civil works and of goods
 and services, as well as related procurement and financial management (FM), compliance with agreed environmental
 and social management measures, and project M&E. This component will finance costs related to project
 implementation including consulting fees for PCT staff, M&E software, procurement, FM, reporting of baseline and
 project completion surveys; project audits; and related activities. The component will also include capacity building
 support for the PCT, including citizen engagement training skills for the PCT staff.




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
  Legal Operational Policies                                                                                          Triggered?
  Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                                         Yes
  Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                                   No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


11.      The overall Environmental and Social (E&S) risk is Substantial. The E&S risk classification reflects the proposed
activities under Phase 1 of the MPA. The following Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 10 are

20 This is an indicative number based on the assumption that all short-listed schemes will qualify for project investment upon completion of the preliminary and

detailed design studies. This number is considered as a ‘high scenario’ and the final project areas may be reduced after selection of I&D schemes for the project
rehabilitation program, which also has implications for the total beneficiaries under the project.


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 8
         The World Bank
         Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


considered relevant for the operation. The main environmental, social, health, and safety risks and impacts are associated
with the activities under components 2 and 3 which aim to improve access to water supply and sanitation services in rural
areas through the rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure, as well as the rehabilitation and modernization of
irrigation systems. The risks will be mitigated through the preparation, implementation, and monitoring of E&S
instruments and capacity-building for project staff and service providers. Specific risks under Phase 2 of the MPA are
generally unknown and will be assessed during the preparation of this phase in the future.


 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

12.     Implementing Agency. Overall responsibility for the Program will remain with the Water Committee, which sits
within the MTAI. Project implementation responsibility of the Program rests with an interim PCT21 under the WC. A
Steering Committee will be established at the level of the Deputy Prime Minister’s office to oversee and monitor overall
progress of the Program. The Program director will likely report directly to the Steering Committee. The development of
the National Water Strategy, the National Irrigation Strategy, and the National WSS Strategy will be carried out under the
leadership of the Deputy Prime Minister’s office and executed by the MTAI’s and the WC with close involvement of all
stakeholders engaged in the water sector in Armenia, as well as other entities involved in water sector development.


  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
  CONTACT POINT

  World Bank
    Ranu Sinha
    Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

    Arusyak Alaverdyan
    Sr Agricultural Spec.

    Poolad Karimi
    Senior Irrigation Specialist

  Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Republic of Armenia
   Milena Hovhannisyan
   Head of International Cooperation Department
   milena.hovhannisyan@minfin.am

  Implementing Agencies


21 As the GoA has not made a final decision to establish a new water agency, the PCT is interim, when the GoA seeks to establish a new water agency, they will move

the project PCT under the leadership of this new agency.


                                                                                                                                                               Page 9
     The World Bank
     Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)


 Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure
 Martiros Nalbandyan
 Deputy Chairman of Water Committee of MTAI
 martiros.nalbandyan@gov.am
 Vardan Kostanyan
 Deputy Minister
 vardan.kostanyan@gov.am

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Ranu Sinha, Arusyak Alaverdyan, Poolad Karimi

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Winston Yu                            25-Mar-2025

Country Director:                        Rolande Simone Pryce                  11-Apr-2025




                                                                                             Page 10
