Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        RA MINISTRY OF TERRITORIAL
                                               ADMINISTRATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE




                                WATER AND IRRIGATION SERVICES
                                   ENHANCEMENT PROJECT


Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized

                               STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN




Public Disclosure Authorized
                 STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)




                                 FOR THE


WATER AND IRRIGATION SERVICES ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (WISE – P508124)


                               PREPARED BY


    Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure of Armenia




                                  DRAFT
                                March 2025
Table of Contents
     1. INTRODUCTION                                                                             1
     1.1 Project Description                                                                     1
       1.1.1      Activities and Components                                                      1
       1.1.2 Implementing Agencies                                                               2
     1.2    Objective and Scope of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan                               4
     1.3    Principles of Stakeholder Engagement                                                 6
     1.4    Limitations                                                                          7

2.     STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS                                                   9
     2.1 Project Stakeholders                                                                    9
     2.2 Potentially Affected Parties                                                            10
     2.3 Potentially Interested Parties                                                          11
     2.4 Disadvantaged and/or Vulnerable Groups                                                  12

3.     STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM                                                            14
     3.1 Modalities for Engagement                                                               14
     3.2 National Requirements for Public Discussions and Consultations                          14
     3.3 Summary of Stakeholder Engagement during Project Preparation                            15
     3.4 Stakeholder Engagement during Project Implementation                                    15
     3.5 Reporting Back to Stakeholders                                                          18
     3.6 Resources and Responsibilities                                                          18
       3.6.1 Management Functions and Responsibilities                                           18
       3.6.2 Resources                                                                           19

4.     FEEDBACK AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM                                                  20
     4.1 Objective of Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism                                   20
     4.2 Grievance Submission and Resolution                                                     21
     4.3 Closure of Grievances                                                                   22
     4.4 Grievance Records and Documentation                                                     22

Annex 1: Detailed Description of Project Activities under Each Component                         24

Annex 2. The FGRM focal points and the FGRM coordinator’s contact information publication form   31

Annex 3. SEP Budget                                                                              32
                                        ACRONYMS
AFD        Agence Française de Développement
DPM       Deputy Prime Minister
ESF       Environmental and Social Framework
ESIA      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMP      Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESS       Environmental and Social Standards
FGRM      Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
FM        Financial Management
GoA       Government of Armenia
GRC       Grievance Redress Committee
H&S       Health and Safety
HLIB      Health and Labor Inspection Body
HMC       Hydrometeorology and Monitoring Center
I&D       Irrigation and Drainage
IA        Implementation Agency
IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ILCS      Integrated Living Conditions Survey
ILO       International Labor Organization
IPF       Investment Project Financing
IPF-PBC   Investment Project Financing with Performance-Based Conditions
IREP      Irrigation Rehabilitation Emergency Project
ISF       Irrigation Service Fee
IWAAC     Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center
IWPC      Integrated Water and Planning Center
LMP       Labor Management Procedures
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MoE       Ministry of Economy
MP        Monitoring Plan
MPA       Multi-phase Development Approach
MTAI      Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructures
NRW       Non-Revenue water
O&M       Operations and maintenance
OHS       Occupational Health and Safety
PAP       Project Affected Person(s)
PBC       Performance-Based Conditions
PCT       Project Coordination Team
PDO       Project Development Objective
PEA       Project Execution Agency
RA        Republic of Armenia
RP        Resettlement Plan
RPF     Resettlement Policy Framework
RWSS    Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Services
SCADA   Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SEA     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SEF     Stakeholder Engagement Framework
SEP     Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SH      Sexual Harassment
SNCO    State Non-Commercial Organization
WB      World Bank
WC      Water Committee
WISE    Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Project
WSA     Water Supply Agency
WSS     Water Supply and Sanitation
WUA     Water User Association
1. INTRODUCTION
Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Project (or hereafter WISE Project) is being prepared to
enhance climate resilient access, efficiency, and financial sustainability of irrigation and rural water
supply and sanitation (RWSS) services in project affected areas.
This draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared to guide relevant stakeholder
engagement activities both during the project preparation and implementation.
This draft SEP will be disclosed and open to feedback and consultation. The feedback from
stakeholders will be incorporated into the final version of SEP.

1.1 Project Description

1.1.1   Activities and Components
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide improved access to efficient and financially
sustainable irrigation and rural WSS services in selected areas of Armenia. The project is part of a 10-
year Multi-phase Development Approach (MPA) that aims to improve the delivery of irrigation and
rural WSS services across Armenia. Phase 1 is designed to enhance climate-resilient irrigation and WSS
services. It will equip six Water User Associations (WUAs) with modern irrigation systems and enhance
irrigation service efficiency through upgrades to primary, secondary and tertiary networks in selected
schemes to boost climate resilience towards drought, floods and extreme heat. Phase 1 will also
improve access to sustainable WSS services by developing rural WSS investment plans and upgrading
water supply infrastructure. It will also prepare feasibility studies, designs, and bidding documents for
Phase 2 investments. Further, Phase 1 will also include Performance-based Conditions (PBCs) to
support policy, legal and institutional reforms as well as a learning program that documents insights
to guide implementation through research, data analysis and policy development. The project
implementation period of Phase 1 will be six years.
Phase 1 of the project includes four components, including one component with PBCs, as follows:
    a. Component 1. Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening supports MTAI and the
       Water Committee (WC) in key priority areas, including the development of national strategies
       for water, irrigation, and rural drinking water and sanitation; revision of irrigation tariffs based
       on land use and water consumption; establishment of an Asset Maintenance Fund and Plan
       for modernized irrigation schemes; creation of Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS)
       units with defined agreements, performance indicators, and monitoring systems; and the
       launch of a National Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center (IWAAC) to enhance
       water management and adaptation efforts.) with PBCs. This component will also include two
       PBCs that seek to support institutional capacity building within MTAI, WC and WUAs.
    b. Component 2. Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Enhancement will focus on providing
       improved access to efficient and financially sustainable rural WSS services in selected areas of
       Armenia. This includes a combination of institutional strengthening, capacity building as well
       as regulatory reforms and feasibility studies and infrastructure assessments. This
       subcomponent will support feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for high-
       priority Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) investments to enhance resilience against climate-
       induced droughts, floods, and extreme heat under both phases of the MPA. Based on an
       agreed investment plan with the Government of Armenia (GoA), it will implement ‘no-regret’
       infrastructure and service improvements in the most critical unserved settlements,
       considering technical, economic, socio-political, and institutional factors.



                                                                                                         1
    c. Component 3. Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management will finance
       rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation systems at main, secondary, and
       tertiary canal levels currently managed jointly by WSA at the large main canal and reservoirs
       level and by WUAs at the secondary and tertiary distributary level. The total command area
       of the irrigation systems under consideration is about 39,580 ha which will be selected based
       on hydrological, technical, economic, and agricultural parameters, under a Framework
       Approach1. Similarly, for Phase 2 a total of additional 4 irrigation schemes were short-listed
       for consideration under this phase.
    d. Component 4: Project Management. An interim WISE Project Coordination Team (PCT) will
       be housed within the Water Committee and will assume primary responsibility for project
       implementation, including implementation of civil works and related procurement and
       financial management (FM), compliance with agreed environmental and social management
       measures, and project monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This component will finance staff
       costs; coordination of the project-financed activities with other ongoing International
       Financial Institution (IFI) projects in the water sector; design, implementation, and reporting
       of baseline and project completion surveys; and the preparation of assessment studies (e.g.,
       pre-feasibility and feasibility studies), detailed engineering designs, and construction
       supervision. The component will also include capacity building support for the PCT, including
       citizen engagement training skills for the staff of the PCT.
Detailed description of Project activities under each component and subcomponent is presented in
Annex 1.


1.1.2 Implementing Agencies

Overall responsibilities for the project implementation will be located within the Ministry of Territorial
Administration and Infrastructures (MTAI) and the Water Committee (WC). Day-to-day
implementation will be supported by the Project Coordination Team (PCT) within the WC.
Implementation of Components 1 - 3 will be conducted through the MTAI. A project Steering
Committee will be established at the level of the Deputy Prime Minister’s (DPM) office to oversee and
monitor the overall progress of the project. The project director will likely report directly to the
Steering Committee. The development of the National Water Strategy, the National Irrigation
Strategy, and the National WSS Strategy will be carried out under the leadership of the DPM’s Deputy
Prime Minister’s office and executed by the MTAI’s and the WC with close involvement of all
stakeholders engaged in the water sector in Armenia, as well as other entities involved in water sector
development.

The PCT will be responsible for identifying subproject interventions for each component, developing
bidding documents, procuring consultancy services and subproject designs. The PCT will ensure labor
management procedures are integrated into the bidding documents/ works contracts. Additionally, it
will manage the procurement of civil works and ensure technical supervision.

1.1.3 Project Area and Beneficiaries

The proposed project areas were co-selected in close partnership with the WC and the MTAI as they
were identified based on marzes where irrigation systems need urgent upgrading and where climate
analysis shows increasing rainfall variability as well as surface water scarcity necessitating investments
to improve irrigation systems. Components 1 and 2 will intervene at a national scale focusing on legal,
regulatory, institutional, and technical capacity reforms for the WC, the WSA, and selected Water User
                                                                                                        2
Associations. For Component 3, the investments in irrigation modernization will be considered in the
following canals/marzes: a) Kotayq main canal irrigation system in Kotayq marz, b) Arzni-Shamiram
main canal irrigation system in Argatsorn and partially in Kotayq marzes, c) Lower Hrazdan main canal
irrigation system in Armavir marz, d) Debetavan canal in Tavush marz, and e) Lori canal irrigation
systems in Lori marz. In all proposed project areas, smallholders (average holdings of 1.2 ha) with high
exposure to the effects of increasing water scarcity and climate change predominate.

Direct project beneficiaries of the component 3 (irrigation), defined as landowners across all short-
listed schemes, number approximately 31,614 (see table 1), with 65 percent of beneficiaries across
schemes designated as smallholders (farm plots of less than 1 ha). These comprise farmers, low-
income households, women, and youth. Out of these, 7,414 are registered female landowners; thus,
around 23.5 percent of beneficiaries are expected to be women. All project activities were designed
to encourage proactive engagement of women and women’s groups, thus ensuring equal benefits,
including in WUA leadership roles. The range of expected benefits to these groups include increased
livelihood opportunities and jobs in irrigated agriculture, and reduced vulnerability to droughts and
floods. Direct project beneficiaries of the component 2 (RWSS), defined as individuals across all target
settlements number 17,000 beneficiaries in currently underserved settlements. In addition, as it was
observed in the past under the previous Irrigation Rehabilitation Emergency Project (IREP, P116681),
this project will have a significant direct impact on employment in the areas where the construction
activities will take place and for the country. The rehabilitation works to be financed under the project
are labor intensive and will result in many jobs being created during the implementation phase. At the
national level, the project will also contribute to the creation of jobs in batching plants as well as sand
and gravel quarries (see table below). Most of the employment created will be during the winter
months, allowing under-employed and seasonally inactive farmers’ access to an alternative source of
income.

Table 1. Beneficiaries by Component and Gender
                                                                             Number of Landowners/
                             Basin                         Number of           Female
  Name of        River                                                                    Households
                          management       Marz      Landowners/Households/ Landowners/
 Component       Basin                                                                   with Less Than
                             area                         Beneficiaries     Households/ 1 ha (percent
                                                                            Beneficiaries out of total)

     Kotayk
   Irrigation
      Canal     Hrazdan     Hrazdan       Kotayk              4,171                810           98.0
 (Component
        3)

     Arzni-
  Shamiram
     Canal    Hrazdan,                    Kotayk,
                           Hrazdan,
   Irrigation  Kasakh,                                       18,835               5,606          80.7
                           Akhuryan     Aragatsotn
    Scheme    Metsamor
 (Component
        3)

    Lower
              Hrazdan, Etchmidzin,       Armavir,
Hrazdan Canal                                                 5,089                754           58.1
  Irrigation  Kasakh,    Yerevan         Yerevan
   Scheme

                                                                                                         3
 (Component Metsamor
     3)

  Debetavan
     Canal
   Irrigation
                Debed      Northern      Tavush              644                 35           44.2
    Scheme
 (Component
        3)

  Lori Canal
   Irrigation
    Scheme      Debed      Northern       Lori              2,875               209           66.3
 (Component
        3)

Water Supply
in Unserved
Settlements                                                 17,000              8,500         N/A
(Component
     2)

      Total                                                 48,614             15,914         347.3




Institutional beneficiaries. Activities supported under Components 1, 2, and 3 target central and
decentralized state agencies managing water resources and delivering irrigation and drinking water
and sanitation services. Staff in these public agencies are expected to benefit from increased technical
and operational capacity to carry out their mandates, improved equipment, and more accessible data
to support user-centered and timely decision-making related to water resources and hydro-climatic
risks and system management.


1.2    Objective and Scope of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan
The WISE Project is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF).
In line with Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 10 on Stakeholder Engagement and Information
Disclosure, the implementing agencies should provide stakeholders with timely, relevant,
understandable, and accessible information, and consult with them in a culturally appropriate
manner, which is free of manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, or intimidation.
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public
information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP outlines the ways
in which the project implementing agency will communicate with stakeholders and includes a
mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project
activities or any activities related to the project.
The SEP covers the overall project activities, prioritizing those with potential environment and social
risks. However, entry points will be explored in areas where development opportunities can be
pursued through project’s resources.
Component and/or site-specific level engagement will be integrated as part of the overall design and
implementation of the activities concerned. Depending on the typology of the project activities, the

                                                                                                      4
expected level of engagement, as well as the approaches and modalities may be defined into i)
strategic engagement, awareness raising and public consultations to inform policy development,
institutional reform, and capacity building under technical assistance activities and ii) site-specific
engagement for infrastructure investments both for rehabilitation and new construction.
Key areas where stakeholder engagement and outreach will be prioritized include:
    a. Management of potential adverse impacts associated with the project’s activities. Such
        impacts may result from:
        •   enforcement of certain reforms such as water tariffs and subsidies with higher costs borne
            by households to remain connected to services. Some vulnerable households may get
            excluded from support.
        •   implementation of site-specific infrastructure activities due to land acquisition, temporary
            and permanent restrictions on land use, construction-related impacts, temporary
            disruptions of services, etc.
        •  unequal and unfair distributions of irrigation water among users during operation
           prioritizing large farmers, providing irrigation water supply to vulnerable users only at
           night shift, etc.
    b. Enhancement of potential development opportunities and social acceptance. The project may
       establish additional measures to enhance participation and access to benefits in terms of
       access to water and water services for women and vulnerable groups, including but not
       limited to poor households, the elderly, people with disability. These may be explored
       through:
        •   introduction of universal design and climate resilience through the project’s investments
        •   leveraging opportunities for local communities through project-generated employment,
            access to WSS and irrigation services, targeting vulnerable groups.
        •   Dissemination of info materials on cultivation of more valuable crops
        •   Organizing seminars for women in affected communities on more effective methods of
            consumption of their yield, on basics of marketing, etc.
The above-mentioned objectives may be explored through meaningful stakeholder engagement
which is a two-way communication with the focus on consultation, collaboration and empowerment
of stakeholders. It includes:
    ▪ Informing - providing information with the use of bulletins, brochures, websites, social media,
        press releases, press conference;
    ▪ Consulting - gaining information and feedback for informed decisions with the use of surveys,
        focus groups, social media, online discussions, public meetings, forums, workshops, individual
        talks;
    ▪ Collaborating - working with stakeholders to understand their issues and concerns to jointly
        formulate responses with the use of forums, advisory panels, round table discussions,
        partnership;
    ▪ Empowering – delegating decision making on some issues to stakeholders through integration
        of stakeholders into governance structure as committee members (for instance in Grievance
        Redress Committee, Community Development Committee).
    At the community level, stakeholder engagement can also be seen as a continuum of community
    involvement.




                                                                                                      5
       Figure 1 below, adopted from a diagram originally drawn by the International Association for
       Public Participation, and illustrates the levels of

                                LEVELS OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT

                              Consult             Involve          Collaborate           Share
       Outreach
                         More community           Better            Community        Responsibility
  Some community
                          involvement           community          involvement       Undertaking
    involvement
                                               involvement                          ownership and
 Provide information      Communication                          Partnership with
                            flows to the      Communication       community on       responsibility
  to the community
                          community and      flows both ways:   each aspect of the Establishment of
                          seeks feedback       participatory       project from       the sense of
                                                 form of         development to        ownership
                                              communication          solution



Figure 1 – Community Involvement Continuum


 Based on the models discussed above, the project will adopt a tailored approach to stakeholder
 engagement that aligns with the needs and characteristics of each group. For vulnerable populations
 such as women, the elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers, a more
 inclusive and participatory engagement model will be applied, ensuring their voices are heard and
 their needs addressed. For government entities, local authorities, and institutional stakeholders, a
 collaborative approach focusing on partnership and coordination would be most effective. This
 differentiated engagement strategy will help ensure that all groups are meaningfully involved in the
 project and that their contributions shape the project’s outcomes.
 This SEP builds on the existing engagement activities that have been established and/or performed by
 the WC to date. Such engagement includes stakeholder engagement activities conducted within the
 following projects of Water Committee as Project Execution Agency:


                •   Integrated Water Resource Management / Akhouryan River, Construction of Kaps
                    Reservoir and Gravity Irrigation System, funded by KfW,
                •   Communal Infrastructure Program (CIP) II, Phase 3, funded by EIB/KfW.
 The implementation of these projects started by the “Water Sector Projects Implementation Unit” of
 the Water Committee and were continued by the Armenian Territorial Development Fund.
 1.3       Principles of Stakeholder Engagement
 In order to meet good practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for
 stakeholder engagement:
       •    Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the project(s) will be arranged
            during the whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation,
            interference, coercion, or intimidation.
       •    Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed
            among all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for
            communicating stakeholder feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and
            concerns.
                                                                                                      6
      •    Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
           communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects
           is inclusive. All stakeholders at all times are encouraged to be involved in the consultation
           process. Equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to
           stakeholders’ needs is the key principle underlying the selection of engagement methods.
           Special attention is given to vulnerable groups that may be at risk of being left out of project
           benefits, particularly women, the elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced persons, and
           migrant workers and communities, and the cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.
      •Flexibility: Cultural context (for example, particular gender dynamics), or governance factors
       (for example, high risk of retaliation) inhibits traditional forms of face-to-face engagement,
       the methodology should adapt to other forms of engagement, including various forms of
       internet- or phone-based communication.
Stakeholder engagement cycle includes the following elements:
    ▪ Engagement and interaction with the stakeholders, initiation of a dialogue for collaboration;
      ▪    Identification of milestones for collaboration through a review of stakeholders’ interests and
           needs finding cross-cutting sections of mutual interest for profound collaboration;
      ▪    Collaboration and participation in Project activities to have a chance to pursue their own
           interest, to satisfy their needs, to influence on decision making processes;
      ▪    The engagement in participatory processes will allow them to express their feedback, to share
           responsibility for outcomes and to undertake the ownership of the results.
Stakeholder engagement is a continuous cycle that begins anew after reaching its endpoint. This
process involves recording achievements, gathering feedback, enhancing performance, updating
objectives, and initiating the cycle again at a higher level. This approach includes identifying and
engaging new stakeholders while maintaining collaboration with committed existing partners.
Specific engagement approaches will be determined based on contexts once site-specific investments
and/or policy-specific reforms have been determined during the project implementation.


1.4       Limitations
Stakeholders are individuals or groups who have interest in or influence on the projects. The SEP aims
to engage all stakeholders, or at least their respective groups, and to consider their needs and interests
in the Project. However, managing stakeholder expectations and relationships can be challenging,
especially when they have conflicting or competing interests, opinions, or demands.
Limitations to stakeholder engagement identified during the preparation stage may include the
following:
a) Uncertainty in Site-Specific Investments
      •    Since specific sites for investments and affected stakeholders are not yet fully identified, the
           engagement plan remains a framework rather than a detailed plan.
      •    This makes it difficult to implement targeted consultations and meaningful participation for
           affected communities.
      •    The SEP must be updated semi-annually as site-specific details emerge.
b) Farming season



                                                                                                         7
    •   During agricultural season from mid spring to mid fall most of the farmers, water users are in
        their fields busy with gardening, cultivation of their lands and are reluctant to leave their work
        and participate in consultations.
    •   Participants of the discussions are not stakeholders of irrigation water schemes as they are
        not farmers or water users.
c) Challenges with Vulnerable Group Inclusion
    •   Disadvantaged groups (women, elderly, small-scale farmers, displaced people) may struggle
        to participate due to economic or social barriers.
    •   Risk of exclusion in decision-making processes related to irrigation and water supply services.
    •   Women and marginalized groups may not be well-represented in Water User Associations
        (WUAs) or local committees.
d) Stakeholder Fatigue & Engagement Overload
    •   Continuous engagement with multiple stakeholders (government, WUAs, farmers, local
        businesses) can create fatigue if meetings are frequent but lack clear progress.
    •   Stakeholders may disengage if they feel that consultations are repetitive or lack tangible
        outcomes.
e) Grievance Redress Challenges
    •   The Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism (FGRM) is in place, but stakeholders may
        lack awareness or trust in the process.
    •   There is a risk that marginalized groups may not feel comfortable raising complaints.
To address above-mentioned limitations in stakeholder engagement, the Project will follow a clear
process for identifying and building relationships with stakeholders, particularly vulnerable and
marginalized groups, as described in this SEP.
During agricultural season, brief discussions can be organized in the fields, briefly interrupting
stakeholders’ farming activities for feedback collection and providing them with written informative
materials.
To overcome the limitations, stakeholder interests will be regularly assessed through focus groups,
consultations and other methods, ensuring that proposed SE activities are targeted and adequate to
the stakeholder needs and perspectives. Both project staff and stakeholders will be provided with
training and workshop for effective engagement upon need. Project information regarding
environmental and social risks will be properly disclosed in a timely and accessible manner, using
various formats to reach diverse audiences. Established grievance redress mechanism will facilitate
two-way communication, while collaboration with local self-governmental bodies and organizations
will help bridge gaps in understanding and trust. Engagement strategies will be periodically assessed
to allow for continuous improvement and responsiveness to stakeholder needs.




                                                                                                        8
      2.     STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS

      2.1 Project Stakeholders
      Project stakeholders are defined as individuals, formal or informal groups and organizations, and/or
      governmental entities whose interests or rights will be affected, directly or indirectly, by the Project,
      both positively and negatively, who may have an interest in Project implementation, and who have
      the potential to influence the Project outcomes in any way.
      As per the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework, Environmental and Social Standard 10
      (ESS10) on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, stakeholders may be categorized
      into:
                 ▪     Affected Parties – stakeholders that are affected or may be affected by the Project;
                 ▪     Other Interested Parties – other parties who may have an interest in the Project.
      As a special category of stakeholders, the SEP also identifies Disadvantaged or Vulnerable Groups,
      i.e., individuals or groups who may be more likely to be adversely affected by the project impacts
      and/or may require special engagement efforts due to their vulnerable status1 to ensure their equal
      representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated with the Project. Efforts
      will be made to identify vulnerable, disadvantaged, or marginalized groups and identify their specific
      needs.
      Based on this categorization, the SEP outlines appropriate engagement mechanisms, their tentative
      timelines, roles and responsibilities for their implementation, and resources allocated for
      implementing the SEP activities. Stakeholder engagement mechanisms will be tailored to the needs of
      vulnerable groups as identified in the SEP.




      COMMUNITY LEVEL                   REGIONAL LEVEL                  NATIONAL LEVEL                  INTERNATIONAL              PRIVATE SECTOR
                                                                                                            SECTOR

                                      Regional and local              GoA, Ministries, State         International financial        Public-Private
  PAPs, beneficiaries/ farmers
                                           Authorities             agencies, Water Committee              institutions               Partnerships


  Vulnerable groups –women,                                                                                                           Agricultural
                                   “Lori”, “Tavush”, “Kotayq”        “Jrar” CJSC (Water Supply
  people with disabilities, poor                                                                                                  business companies
                                    “Aragatsotn” “Ejmiatsin”             Agency) Company)
      households, ethnic           and “Yerevan” WUAs and
        minorities, etc.                   other WUAs
                                                                      “Veolia Jur” CJSC (WSS
                                                                            Company)
      Community based                  Local NGOs/CSOs
        organizations                                                 Academic Institutions,
                                                                     Technical commission of
                                                                     water systems operation
                                                                        and maintenance

Figure 2 – Potentially affected and other interested parties




      1 Vulnerable status may stem from an individual’s or group’s race, national, ethnic or social origin, color, gender, language,

      religion, political or other opinion, property, age, culture, literacy, sickness, physical or mental disability, poverty or economic
      disadvantage, and dependence on unique natural resources.

                                                                                                                                        9
2.2 Potentially Affected Parties
Affected parties include local communities, community members, and other parties that may be
subject to direct impacts from the Project.
Under Component 2, in phase 1, the investments are expected to be in several se marzes – the
confirmation of which will be based on technical, economic, socio-political and institutional
considerations. The beneficiaries of the Component 3 activities will be the water users of Kotayq, Lori,
Tavush, Aragatsotn, Ejmiatsin and Yerevan WUAs that receive irrigation water from the following main
canals: 1) Kotayk Irrigation Canal, 2) Arzni-Shamiram Canal Irrigation Scheme, 3) Lower Hrazdan Canal
Irrigation Scheme, 4) Debetavan Canal Irrigation Scheme, and 5) Lori Canal Irrigation Scheme.
Policy-level reform will involve broader stakeholders at all levels to ensure the key processes are
inclusive and guided by good governance principles, including transparency, disclosure and
stakeholder engagement and participation. Site-specific investments, such as civil works will need to
be implemented with participation of host communities and understanding of impacts and mitigation
measures will need to seek the views of project affected people, including vulnerable groups.
Broadly defined, affected parties may include the following:
Adversely Affected: Stakeholders that may potentially be adversely affected from the project
activities include:
    •   Policy and institutional reforms (i.e., tariffs, efficiency measures, potential retrenchment,
        etc.): households who may need to bear higher costs of accessing services, WUAs may face a
        challenge with water fee collection with higher tariffs WUAs during the first years.
    •   Site-specific infrastructure activities: farmers and households whose land parcels may be
        affected (permanent and temporarily), or whose farming activities may be temporarily ceased
        due to civil works and/or disruption s of services.
Positively Affected: Stakeholders that will benefit from the project activities include:

    •   Capacity building activities: key staff of MTAI, WC, PCT, Regional Governors’ Administrations
        (Marzpetarans) and WUAs receiving training and career development opportunities.
    •   Institutional reform and strengthening: WC, WSA and WUAs through improved Operations
        and Maintenance (O&M) cost recovery, water allocation and water use efficiency.
    •   Access to WSS: Settlements in several marzes of RA, target households who directly benefit
        from improved access to and quality of WSS services
    •   Access to irrigation services: farmers/members of Kotayq, Lori, Tavush, Aragatsotn, Ejmiatsin
        and Yerevan WUAs who benefit from more reliable irrigation services, farmland owners who
        may receive new irrigation from the expansion of the existing networks.


Table 2. Potentially Affected Parties of the WISE Project
 Type of        Name of Stakeholder          Interest                Description of stakeholder groups
 Stakeholder
                  MTAI and WC                                        These are main stakeholders who are also
                                              Water sector reform
                                              and institutional      responsible for elaboration and
                                              strengthening of       implementation of water sector reform
                                              irrigation and rural   and strengthening of national water
                                              WSS service delivery   resources policy. They should be actively
                                                                     engaged in this activity so as to guide the
                                                                     activities of this component.




                                                                                                          10
                                                                        This group is responsible for
                Regional Governors’                                     implementation of water sector reform
                Offices (Marzpetarans)                                  and strengthened national water resources
                                                                        policy at regional level, so their
                                                                        engagement and feedback during the
                                                                        preparation period is very important.
                Water User
                                                                        This group will be supported by improved
 Positively     Associations, WSA,
                                                                        irrigation sector management and service
 affected       water users
                                                                        delivery, such as tariffs and subsidy
 parties
                                                                        reforms, institutional strengthening, and
                                                                        development of tools to enhance oversight
                                                                        and management.
               Settlements in marzes                                    The communities will be supported by
               benefiting from WSS                                      institutional strengthening and capacity
               improvements                                             building of rural WSS services - safely
                                                                        managed water supply services.
               MTAI, WC and PCT                                         This will support to mobilize required
                                            Technical assistance
                                            activities                  technical expertise, conduct monitoring
                                                                        and evaluation activities to ensure that the
                                                                        Project is on track and all project activities
                                                                        meet the Bank requirements on the
                                                                        environmental, social, fiduciary, and
                                                                        technical sides, enhance the staff’s
                                                                        capacity for improved project
                                                                        management.
                                                                        The Project will contribute to social-
               Settlements in marzes
                                                                        economic and agricultural development of
               benefiting from WSS
                                                                        communities which will benefit on the
               improvements
                                                                        whole from enhanced irrigation services
               And water users of Kotayq,                               and safe WSS services.
               Lori, Tavush, Aragatsotn,
               Ejmiatsin and Yerevan
               WUAs      that     receive
               irrigation water from
               Arzni-Shamiram,       Low    Site-specific
               Hrazdan, Kotayq, Lori and    infrastructure activities
               Debetavan main canals:
               PAPs, local businesses
                                                                        There might be Project affected persons
                                                                        whose land or assets might be affected. In
                                                                        such cases a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                        (RAP) will be prepared.
 Adversely
 affected      Vulnerable groups                                        This group of different people are mostly
 parties                                                                indifferent to such Projects lacking
                                                                        resources for land cultivation. Special
                                                                        approach can be applied to start dialogue
                                                                        with them and to provide meaningful
                                                                        consultation.



2.3 Potentially Interested Parties
The projects’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities and/or
stakeholders. These include

                                                                                                               11
    •   Other government agencies: Ministry of Economy (responsible for the development and
        implementation of policies, regulations, and programs related to agriculture), Ministry of
        Environment (formulating policies, regulations, and programs related to water resource
        management and conservation), Ministry of Health (oversees public health concerns related
        to water quality, sanitation, and hygiene).
    •   Non-governemnt and civil society organizations as development partners: CARD Foundation,
        Country Water Partnership, Innovative Solutions for Sustainable Development, etc.
    •   Organisations involved in research and academia: Technical commission of water systems
        operation and maintenance, National Agrarian University of Armenia, Yerevan State
        University, Faculty of Geography and Geology, "ArmWaterProject Institute", etc.

Table 3. Other Interested Parties of the WISE Project
     Type of           Name of Stakeholder              Interest         Description of stakeholder groups
   Stakeholder

                    Ministry of Economy                                  This Ministry is responsible for the
                                                                         development and implementation
                                                                         of policies, regulations, and
                                                                         programs related to agriculture
                    Ministry of Environment                              This Ministry is responsible for
                                                                         formulating policies, regulations,
                                                                         and programs related to water
                                                                         resource management and
                                                                         conservation

                    Ministry of Health                                   This Ministry is responsible for
                                                                         overseeing public health concerns
                                                                         related to water quality,
                                                                         sanitation, and hygiene
 Other interested                                 Water sector reform
 parties            Organizations involved in     and institutional
                    research and academia         strengthening of
                                                                         This group can be supportive and
                                                  irrigation and rural
                                                                         have its valuable input in
                                                  WSS service delivery
                                                                         development of policy and reforms


                    NGOs/CSOs                    Site-specific           This group are highly motivated
                                                 infrastructure          and are open for collaboration
                                                 activities              around new concepts and ideas.




2.4 Disadvantaged and/or Vulnerable Groups
Within the Project, vulnerable and/or disadvantaged groups may include people who due to their
circumstances may experience disproportionate adverse impacts due to project activities and/or may
face higher likelihood of exclusion rather than other groups.
These groups include the following but not limited to elderly people, persons with disabilities and their
caretakers, women-headed households, small holder farmers, landless farmers, families living under
poverty line, displaced population, etc.
Special attention will be given to identifying and consulting vulnerable groups within the communities
impacted by the Project, as deemed necessary. Additionally, the project will identify suitable
approaches and/or representative organizations to partner with for engaging these groups early in

                                                                                                              12
the implementation phase. Details regarding the methods of engagement will be outlined in the
subsequent sections.




.




                                                                                          13
3. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM

3.1 Modalities for Engagement
Mechanisms for stakeholder engagement across different groups are expected to include but not
limited to public consultations, interviews and focus groups discussions, including outreach to enable
safe platforms to raise concerns.
Prior disclosure of relevant information in a format and language accessible to target groups will be
performed in advance of any public consultations, interviews and/or focus group discussions. This will
also include disclosure of available Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism (FFGRM) channels.
Engagement associated with policy and strategy development and reform activities will be integrated
as part of public deliberation and consultation processess to solicit stakeholders’ feedback prior to
their adoption. Specific details of engagement are further elaborated as appropriate..
During the screening process the vulnerable FGRM ents of the affected community should be
identified, for instance large number of women headed households, ethnic minorities, persons with
disabilities, extremely poor households, etc. These groups need meaningful consultation. Meaningful
stakeholder engagement should focus on consultations, collaboration and empowerment of
stakeholders, and two-way communication. Special information and communication materials can be
prepared and disseminated among these groups, focus group or round table discussions, separate
meetings can be held with the representatives of those groups or separate people to reveal their
opinion about the project, their concerns and needs for inclusion in the Project. The concerns and
suggestions should be considered during the elaboration of detailed designs as much as possible and
feedback should be provided to the parties concerned.
The feedback, opinions and suggestions received from the stakeholders will be taken into account and
reflected in Project activities. They will be recorded by the FFGRM, discussed and considered as much
as possible even if they may result in design modification.


3.2 National Requirements for Public Discussions and Consultations
Component 1 of the Project includes development of a consolidated National Water Strategy, a
National Irrigation Strategy, a Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Strategy, and a National Irrigation
Master Plan, as well as revision of critical water sector legislation including the water code, irrigation
norms and the WUA law.
The Law on Normative Legal Acts and the RA Government Decree N 1146-N dated 10 October 2018
“On Defining the Procedure for Organizing and Conducting Public Discussions”, adopted according to
this law, stipulates mandatory public consultations on draft legal acts of high significance both at the
local and national level. The duration of public discussions is at least 15 days, and all drafts are
published on the unified government website (www.e-draft.am), where anyone can provide feedback
through submission of opinions, recommendations or amendments, as well as vote in favor or against
the proposed text.
The strategy documents are subject to strategic environmental assessment (SEA) and should be
disclosed in compliance with the Government Decree N 1325-N on the Procedure for Public
Notification and Discussion (2014, last amended in 2023). This procedure regulates the relations
connected to the procedure of public notification, discussions and hearings of the strategic
environmental impact assessment of the concept document and all categories of planned
activities: environmental impact assessment and expertise.

                                                                                                       14
Once the consultation period concludes, the responsible body collects and analyzes all received
feedback and prepares a summary of proposals. The draft strategy is then adjusted accordingly,
incorporating relevant suggestions. The revised version, along with a summary of public feedback, is
made publicly available both on the e-draft.am platform and on the official website of the institution
proposing the legislation.
Based on the analysis and the summary of the received proposals, the body carrying out the public
consultation makes the necessary adjustments to the draft. According to the Procedure for Organizing
and Conducting Public Consultations, the revised drafts and the summary from all public consultations
should be available on the E-draft website, and on the website of the institution that is proposing
legislation. The policy and institutional reforms under Component 1 will follow the requirements of
the Law on Normative Legal Acts and will be disclosed and consulted at the e-draft.am.



3.3 Summary of Stakeholder Engagement during Project Preparation
The project seeks to foster meaningful consultations with stakeholders identified in the above section,
particularly with those that may be adversely affected to ensure potential impacts can be avoided
and/or mitigated through a participatory and inclusive process. The following outlines the
engagement undertaken for preparation and activities planned to support Project implementation.
Based on this identification, the PCT will further identify individuals or groups who may have different
concerns and priorities about project impacts, mitigation mechanisms and benefits, and who may
require different, or separate forms of engagement and various methods of communication.
After finalization and approval of this SEP by the Bank it will be biannually updated to reflect the
modifications of the Project and the possible change in the stakeholders with their interests and
impacts.
This SEP is developed proportionate to the nature and scale of the project and its potential risks and
impacts. The draft SEP will be disclosed both in Armenian and English as early as possible, and before
project appraisal, to seek the views of stakeholders on the SEP, including on the identification of
stakeholders and the proposals for future engagement. If significant changes are made to the SEP, the
updated SEP will be disclosed.

3.4 Stakeholder Engagement during Project Implementation
Water User Associations have an important role in overall stakeholder engagement activities. WUAs
have established internal grievance resolution procedures and they have hot lines for feedback with
water users. They can also serve as local grievance focal points during construction activities. Some
WUAs maintain dedicated social media pages, groups, or websites, which can be utilized for
stakeholder engagement and information disclosure purposes to maintain communication with the
Project beneficiaries.
The project will undertake the following engagement activities over the course of its implementation:
Table 4: Planned Stakeholder Engagement Activities
   Project                                    Approach/                  Target
               Timeline     Topic/Theme                                                  Responsibilities
    Stage                                       Method                Stakeholders
 Design       During the Component 1. • Round table                 MTAI, Water          Project
 stage        design       Water Sector      discussions,           Committee,           Manager,
              preparation Reform and     • Working group            State agencies,      Project
              period       Institutional     discussions            Regional             Coordinator,
                           Strengthening                            Governor             Consulting

                                                                                                     15
                 • Forums on            Offices, LSGBs,    companies or
                   social media         CSOs, NGOs,        Individual
                 • Public meetings      WUAs, WSA          Consultants,
                 • Disclosure of                           E&S team of the
                   the draft                               PCT,
                   (i) the                                 Community
                   comprehensive                           Liaison
                   national water
                   strategy,
                   (ii) the
                   standalone ten-
                   year national
                   irrigation
                   strategy,
                   (iii) the drinking
                   water and
                   sanitation
                   strategy, and
                   (iv) the
                   irrigation
                   master plan
                   on e-draft and
                   the PCT
                   website for
                   public feedback
Component 2.     • PC meetings to       Water              Project
Rural Water        present ESMPs,       Committee,         Manager,
Supply and         ESIAs and RAPs       LSGBs, Veolia      Project
Sanitation         if any               Jur CSC,           Coordinator,
Enhancement      • Meaningful           affected           E&S teams of
                   consultations        communities,       the PCT, of the
                   with PAPs            households         Design
                 • Social Media -                          Consultant,
                   Facebook,                               Community
                 • Dissemination                           Liaison
Component 3.       of written           Water              Project
Modernizing        information -        Committee,         Manager,
Irrigation         brochures,           LSGBs, Jrar CSC,   Project
Infrastructure     posters, flyers,     WUAs,              Coordinator,
& System           website              communities,       E&S teams of
Management                              farmers            the PCT, of the
                                                           Design
                                                           Consultant,
                                                           Community
                                                           Liaison
Tailored         • Separate             • Women            Project
approach for       meetings for           headed           Manager,
vulnerable         women and              households,      Project
groups                                                     Coordinator,
                                                           E&S teams of
                                                                       16
                                            vulnerable         • Child headed      the PCT, of the
                                            groups;              households,       Design
                                          • Meaningful         • People with       Consultant,
                                            consultation         disabilities,     Community
                                          • Dissemination      • Ethnic            Liaison
                                            of written           minorities,
                                            information –      • refugees
                                            brochures,
                                            posters, flyers,
                                            website
Civil      During the    Rural water      • Public             • Affected          Project
works      entire        supply and         notification         communities;      Manager,
           period of     sanitation         meetings,          • PAPs (if any);    Project
           civil works   enhancement,     • Info boards,       • Businesses        Coordinator,
                         modernization    • Dissemination        located in the    E&S teams of
                         of irrigation      of written           area;             the PCT, of the
                         infrastructure     information -      • People            Construction
                         and system         brochures,           residing in the   Contractor and
                         management         posters, flyers,     project area;     Technical
                                            website, social    • Vulnerable        Supervision
                                            media                households to     Consultant
                                                                 be aware of       Community
                                                                 temporal          Liaison
                                                                 employment
                                                                 opportunities
                         Tailored         • Separate           • Women             Project
                         approach for       meetings to          headed            Manager,
                         vulnerable         present              households,       Project
                         groups             temporal           • Child headed      Coordinator,
                                            employment           households,       E&S teams of
                                            opportunities      • People with       the PCT, of the
                                                                 disabilities,     Construction
                                                               • Ethnic            Contractor and
                                                                 minorities,       Technical
                                                               • refugees          Supervision
                                                                                   Consultant
                                                                                   Community
                                                                                   Liaison
Operation Early stage Rural water         - Monitoring         • Affected          Project
stage     of          supply and            surveys for          communities;      Manager,
          operation   sanitation            feedback           • PAPs (if any);    Project
                      enhancement,        - Separate           • Businesses        Coordinator,
                      modernization         meetings for         located in the    E&S teams of
                      of irrigation         women and            area;             the PCT, of the
                      infrastructure        vulnerable         • People            Construction
                      and system            groups;              residing in the   Contractor and
                      management                                 project area      Technical
                                                                                   Supervision
                                                                                   Consultant

                                                                                               17
                                                                                      Community
                                                                                      Liaison
                            Tailored                              • Women             Project
                            approach for                            headed            Manager,
                            vulnerable                              households,       Project
                            groups                                • Child headed      Coordinator,
                                                                    households,       E&S teams of
                                                                  • People with       the PCT, of the
                                                                    disabilities,     Construction
                                                                  • Ethnic            Contractor and
                                                                    minorities,       Technical
                                                                  • Refugees          Supervision
                                                                                      Consultant
                                                                                      Community
                                                                                      Liaison



3.5 Reporting Back to Stakeholders
Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops, including reporting on project
environmental and social performance and implementation of the stakeholder engagement plan and
FGRM, and on the project’s overall implementation progress.
After the disclosure of the ESMP and the commencement of civil works the following activities will be
conducted by the Contractors, Technical Supervision Consultants under the coordination of the Client
to keep the stakeholders informed:
• Public notification meetings,
• Info boards,
• Dissemination of written information - brochures, posters, flyers, website, social media,
• Separate meetings with the representatives of vulnerable groups to present temporal employment
   opportunities.
During the operation period:
• Monitoring surveys for feedback,
• Separate meetings for women and vulnerable groups to inform them about their opportunities of
  sharing the results of the Project through involvement in the Project.

3.6 Resources and Responsibilities
3.6.1 Management Functions and Responsibilities
Component 4 will finance a project implementation structure that will be responsible for project
management, including coordination and technical supervision of project implementation, financial
management (FM), procurement, monitoring, and evaluation (M&E), social and environmental
standards management and oversight including gender-focused activities, communications and
outreach, and progress reporting.

WC, through PCT will be responsible for the implementation of Project activities, including
implementation of SEP. The implementation of the SEP involves collaboration across multiple
specialists to ensure that all aspects of the project SE are adequately addressed.



                                                                                                  18
The PCT will have a team of environmental and social specialists mandated to ensure project
implementation in consistency with all relevant environmental and social requirements. Social
Specialist, supported by PCT, will be responsible for implementation of the SEP, as detailed in the SEP
activities table (Table 4) above, and to comply with the timelines specified in this document. The Social
Specialist will have overall responsibility to update, adopt, and implement SEP, including various
engagement mechanisms, their tentative timelines, roles and responsibilities, and resources allocated
for implementing the SEP activities.
The Social Specialist will coordinate with WUAs and local communities to ensure meaningful
consultations and organize public consultation meetings. Other specialists involved in SEP
implementation will include Environmental Specialist, M&E specialist and technical specialists. The
Environmental Specialist will assist the Social Specialist in organizing and conducting public
consultations, where both environmental and social concerns can be addressed simultaneously. The
M&E Specialist will support the Social Specialist by designing and implementing a monitoring
framework to track the outcomes and impacts of the SEP activities. The M&E Specialist will contribute
to regular reporting on SEP activities, highlighting areas where social engagement is succeeding and
identifying areas for improvement. Technical Specialists (engineers, supervisors) will help explain
technical aspects of the project to stakeholders during consultations, ensuring that communities
understand how the project may affect their environment and social life.
The project will also contract Community Liaison Officers (CLOs) to operate in target marzes. These
CLOs will support the implementation of SEP activities, reporting to the Social Specialist and the wider
E&S team within PCT.

 3.6.2 Resources
The following table provides an estimate of resource requirements for the implementation of the SEP.
The resource requirements for SEP implementation are generally allocated to key areas such as
staffing, communication campaigns, capacity building, GRM implementation, and other essential
activities to ensure effective stakeholder engagement and project communication. SEP budget is
presented in Annex 3.




                                                                                                      19
4.       FEEDBACK AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM

4.1 Objective of Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
FGRM will be established and maintained throughout the course of the Project. The FGRM will ensure
that citizens can submit inquiries and grievances, and have their grievances redressed in a timely and
effective manner without directly addressing the court.
FGRM provides a transparent and credible process for fair, effective and lasting outcomes. It also
builds trust and cooperation as an integral component of broader community consultation that
facilitates corrective actions.

The FGRM addresses grievances that arise in the Project under Component 2 and 3 either due to
actions by the PCT or the contractor/sub-contractors employed by the PCT from affected communities
and external stakeholders. A separate mechanism is developed to address worker grievances. The
process is described in Labor Management Plan (LMP). The PCT is responsible for managing the FGRM,
but many of the grievances on the Project will likely relate to the actions of the Contractor and so will
need to be resolved by the Contractor. The PCT with the support of the Technical Supervision
Consultant will administer the FGRM process deciding whether they or the Contractor is responsible
and determining the best course of action to resolve the grievance. The Consultant will support the
PCT to monitor grievance resolution being undertaken by the contractor.
The project FGRM deals with resettlement issues: land and other assets acquisition (e.g., amount of
compensation, suitability of residual land plots, loss of access roads and business, etc.) as well as the
losses and damages caused by construction and/or rehabilitation works. The FGRM is described in the
Resettlement Framework in details as well.
The FGRM is an instrument with which:
         ▪    Affected people can make a complaint or resolve any dispute that may arise during the
              course of the implementation of the projects;
         ▪    The PCT ensures that appropriate and mutually acceptable redress actions are identified and
              implemented to the satisfaction of complainants;
         ▪    The PCT supports accessibility and transparency in handling complaints and grievances;
         ▪    The PCT manages time factor (avoids the need to resort to judicial proceedings (at least at
              first).

Typical grievances under components 2 and 3 may relate to:
     -       Land acquisition and physical displacement;
     -       Civil work damages;
     -       Environmental impacts; and
     -       Direct and/or indirect social - economic impacts.

Guiding principles of effective FGRMs key principles include the following:
Confidentiality and Anonymity:
     ▪       Have multiple channels through which complaints can be registered.
     ▪       Allow safe and confidential reporting: survivors should be able to report Sexual Exploitation
             and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH) (SEA/SH) without being identified publicly.
     ▪       Protect information about the complainants.



                                                                                                         20
    ▪   Log cases information in a complainant logbook and stored in a locked cabinet, documenting
        only limited anonymous information about the incident.
    Survivor-Centricity and Safety
    ▪ Support the creation of a supportive, dignified, and protective environment for the SEA/SH
        survivor, and full respect of his/her rights, wishes and choices.
    ▪ Be based on the survivor’s informed consent, which needs to be guaranteed throughout the
        FGRM.
    ▪ Maintain confidentiality and anonymity as a fundamental way to guarantee survivors’ safety:
        survivor files should not be discussed with anyone.
    ▪ Prioritize the safety of the survivor at all times.
    ▪ Provide feedback on the case to the survivor only and exercise strong caution before
        communicating any results beyond the survivor.


4.2 Grievance Submission and Resolution
FGRM will include the following Steps:
Step 1: Submission of grievances in writing, via telephone hotline/mobile, mail, social media (e.g., FB),
website, or grievance logbook through a contractor organization or directly to the PCT. The FGRM will
also allow anonymous grievances to be raised and addressed.
Step 2: Recording and classification of grievances based on the typology of complaints and
complainants to ensure a more efficient response. An initial response shall be provided as soon as
possible. The typology will consider the characteristics of the complainant (e.g., vulnerable groups,
persons with disabilities) as well as the nature of the complaint
Grievance Focal Point (Stage 1)
Stage 1 of the FGRM involves recording complaints, whether written or oral, in the FFGRM log, which
will be prepared and made available to communities and contractors. Grievances will be recorded by
designated focal points at the community level and at construction sites, as assigned by the
community and the Contractor, respectively.
Once a grievance has been logged, it will be resolved immediately by the community administration
or the Contractor, if feasible. If the grievance requires a more detailed examination and cannot be
resolved at this stage, the PAP will be informed about the grievance resolution procedures under Stage
2. A PAP also retains the right to proceed directly to Stage 2 without first utilizing the Stage 1
procedures. The timeframe for resolving a Stage 1 grievance is seven days.
Grievances will be addressed at the local level whenever possible. If resolution at this level is not
feasible, the grievance will be escalated to the GRC established at the Project level. All grievances and
their resolutions will be documented, with redress provided within an appropriate timeframe, not
exceeding two weeks.
Grievance Resolution at Project Level (Stage 2)

At this stage, the grievance will be reviewed at the PCT level. Unresolved grievances from Stage 1, with
the complainant’s consent, will be submitted to the PCT in written form. Likewise, aggrieved
complainants or PAPs who are dissatisfied with the resolution at Stage 1 may escalate their grievances
to the PCT. The designated community focal point will assist them in lodging an official complaint.



                                                                                                      21
The PT’s FGRM coordinator will review the written complaints of PAPs who were not satisfied at Stage
1 and will forward them internally to the appropriate departments for redress. The referral process
shall be completed within 10 days, and the complainant shall be informed of the decision within a
maximum of 30 days.

4.3 Closure of Grievances

A grievance will be considered ‘resolved’ or ‘closed’ when a resolution satisfactory to both parties has
been reached and all corrective measures have been successfully implemented. Once a proposed
solution is agreed upon between the Project and the complainant, the timeframe for implementation
will depend on the nature of the solution. However, all necessary actions to implement the solution
shall be undertaken within one month of the grievance being logged and will be tracked until
completion. Once the solution is implemented or is in progress to the satisfaction of the complainant,
the status of the complaint in the FGRM log will be marked as ‘Closed.’ The FGRM log will then be
submitted to the World Bank team.

In certain circumstances, the Project may ‘close’ a grievance even if the complainant is not satisfied
with the outcome. This may occur, for instance, if the complaint pertains to technical aspects of the
project design that cannot be modified or if the grievance is determined to be unjustified, containing
incorrect or misleading information. In such cases, the Project will document its efforts to investigate
the grievance and justify the decision to reject the complaint. The status of the grievance in these
instances will be marked as ‘Rejected,’ and the complainant will be informed of the decision within
one month from the date the grievance was recorded.

4.4 Grievance Records and Documentation
The PCT will nominate a FGRM Focal Point to manage a grievance log to keep a record of all grievances
received. The log will contain the name of the individual or organization lodging a grievance; the date
and nature of the grievance; any follow-up actions taken; the solutions and corrective actions
implemented by the Contractor or other relevant party; the result or status of the grievance.
The Supervisor and construction companies in their monthly monitoring reports will provide
information on grievance management. Grievance monitoring and reporting will occur in the PCT’s
semiannual and annual progress reports to be prepared for the WB.
The FGRM focal point’s and the FGRM coordinator’s contact information will be publicized (Annex 2).

Information on the Project will be available on the PCT’s website and will be posted on information
boards in affected communities in the Project area. Information can also be obtained from the FGRM
Focal Point.
The FGRM mechanism will not impede access to the Country’s judicial or administrative remedies.
1.3 SEA/SH Grievances
The SEP establishes sensitive procedures related to grievances concerning SEA/SH, ensuring a
survivor-centered approach.

All complaints, especially SEA/SH-related, will be treated with strict confidentiality. The identity of the
survivor will be protected at all stages. The procedure will follow a survivor-centered approach,
prioritizing the survivor’s needs, consent, and preferences. Referral mechanisms to support services
will be established to support the survivor to find services they might need (health, legal, or
psychosocial, etc.).

                                                                                                        22
Investigations into SEA/SH grievances will be handled sensitively and confidentially. No action will be
taken without the survivor’s informed consent. The survivor will be involved in deciding how the
complaint is handled, including whether an investigation proceeds. A strict no-retaliation policy will
be in place, ensuring that survivors and witnesses are protected from any form of retaliation for
reporting SEA/SH cases.

SEA/SH grievances will be prioritized and resolved within a clearly defined timeframe, typically within
30 days or sooner, depending on the severity of the case. The survivor will be regularly updated on
the progress of the grievance resolution process, ensuring transparency and trust in the procedure.

Details on addressing grievances related to workplace concerns, including those involving SEA/SH, are
provided in the Project LMP.




                                                                                                    23
Annex 1: Detailed Description of Project Activities under Each Component

The project will finance four components. The project implementation period will be six years.
The project instrument is Investment Project Financing with Performance-Based Conditions (IPF-
PBC), organized around the four components, including one component with PBCs, as follows: (i)
Component 1: Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening (with PBCs); (ii) Component 2:
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Enhancement; (iii) Component 3: Modernizing Irrigation
Infrastructure & System Management; and (iv) Component 4: Project Management. A gender gap and
social assessment will be carried out to provide missing information relevant especially to the
proposed interventions under components 1 and 2, on membership and representation in WUA and
in rural WSS decision making bodies, and of WC and WSA HR policies related to female staff attraction,
retention, and promotion.
        Component 1: Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening (US$20M). This is a
        component with PBCs which will provide support to the MTAI and the WC in key identified
        priority areas including: (i) the development of a consolidated National Water Strategy, a
        National Irrigation Strategy, a Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Strategy, and a National
        Irrigation Master Plan, all to be developed and approved by GoA, and which will take into
        account potential OP7.50 transboundary riparian concerns; (ii) revision of the irrigation sector
        tariffs system, to transition to setting fixed fees based on actual irrigated land and variable
        fees based on actual use of water on the irrigated land; (iii) an Asset Maintenance Fund and
        an Asset Maintenance Plan to be established by the WC and/or WSA dedicated to the proper
        operations and maintenance (O&M) of any newly modernized irrigation scheme; (iv) revision
        of critical water sector legislation including the water code, irrigation norms and the WUA law;
        and (iv) establishment of a national Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center
        (IWAAC). IWAAC will provide essential information, tools, and applications required for
        monitoring, forecasting, and climate adaptation. IWAAC will also serve as a mechanism for
        outreach to communities for example through participatory consultations, community
        dialogue forums, collaboration with local NGOs to share critical climate and water data and to
        receive feedback to calibrate the applications. Component 1 will include two Performance-
        Based Conditions (PBCs) as described below.
        Subcomponent 1.1 and PBC 1: Strengthening national water resources policy and planning
        (US$3.4M). This PBC will provide support to the MTAI and the WC to develop and approve a
        comprehensive National Water Strategy, a ten-year National Irrigation Strategy, a Rural WSS
        Strategy, and an Irrigation Master Plan. This subcomponent will also examine all existing legal
        frameworks for water sector management in Armenia, including the Water Code, the WUA
        law, revision of irrigation norms and other related legislative acts.
        PBC 1 includes three sub-PBCs, which are related to the drafting, development, and GoA
        approval of: (i) a comprehensive National Water Strategy (PBC#1.1); (ii) a National Irrigation
        Strategy (PBC#1.2); and (iii) a Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Strategy (PBC#1.3).
        Approval of these strategies will be a pre-requisite for the initiation of Phase 2. The project
        will also invest in a National Irrigation Master Plan, which will assess technical feasibility,
        economic viability, environmental sustainability, social inclusivity, and climate adaptation in
        water-stressed areas. A thorough analysis of agricultural dynamics and market potential will
        guide investments, with the associated terms of reference (TOR) for preparing the master plan
        addressing potential riparian issues under OP 7.50.
        Subcomponent 1.2: Improving irrigation sector management and service delivery
        (US$16.6M) will finance the following activities:

                                                                                                     24
A comprehensive institutional reform program to improve the functions of the WC and the
WSA (US$5.3M). This activity will finance: (i) TA for an organizational audit/institutional
assessment, including gender and inclusion aspects, of the WC and WSA internal structure
and/or support to GoA to establish a new water agency. If GoA creates a new agency, this
component will finance TA and procurement of goods and services to help establish and
operationalize it; (ii) a separate follow-on TA for the internal capacity development of WC, the
WSA, and field-based staff. Related purchases will include equipment (including computers,
field instruments, transportation and water measurement instruments) as well as an Asset
Management System comprising a Geographic Information System (GIS)-based management
information system (MIS).
Implementation of revised irrigation tariffs (US$1.55M). This activity will focus on reforming
irrigation sector tariffs and farmer contributions, balancing the main principles of cost-
recovery and affordability35, and transitioning to fixed fees based on irrigated land and
variable fees based on water consumption. To inform the reform process, this activity includes
conducting a baseline analysis of bulk irrigation water supply costs and conducting
affordability and willingness-to-pay studies, designing a tariff methodology, and a roll out plan
including a phased approach with support to farmers unable to afford full O&M cost recovery
fees.
PBC 2 includes three sub-PBCs: (i) establishment of an Asset Maintenance Fund dedicated for
the O&M of any newly modernized irrigation scheme under the WISE project. The fund can
initially be funded by the state budget and gradually start receiving funding from the revised
WSA bulk water supply tariffs and WUA ISFs within two years of the system becoming
operational (PBC#2.1); (ii) a revised bulk irrigation tariff and WUA ISF methodology is
approved for 6 WUAs which aligns with the WUA law as well as having a two-part structure
(fixed and volumetric) for the ISF (PBC#2.2); and (iii) development and approval of a tariff roll
out plan with communications strategy for outreach to those WUAs which will be impacted
by increased tariffs and an increased ISFs (PBC#2.3).
Capacity building program for Water User Associations (US$1.6M). Through this activity the
project will provide support to six 6 target WUAs. The TA will be provided through the re-
established WUA Support Groups and will include strengthening legal, administrative,
technical, managerial, and financial management capabilities. This may include training on
different topics (informed by a comprehensive capacity needs assessment conducted in year
1 of the project for all WUA staff and members, including among women and across all age
groups), and provision of goods (such as water meters, IT equipment and office furniture,
specific technical tools, and machinery). Several key issues will be addressed under this
activity: (i) strengthening institutional/governance by assessing the size and reorganization of
the WUAs, strengthening Administrative Councils36, enhancing participatory governance,
improving elections and participatory decision-making, and increasing water user awareness
on efficient water use; (ii) strengthening WUA capacities through gender-centric training,
upgrading equipment, improving working conditions, and attracting women and young
professionals, including into leadership and technical positions, especially in remote areas, by
establishing targeted outreach programs for women and young graduates in universities and
technical schools to inform them of internship and job opportunities in the water sector and
by promoting and nominating young users and women candidates for elections; and (iii)
improving water resources management, by upgrading GIS water accounting, implementing
annual water planning, installing metering, and shifting to volumetric irrigation fees.




                                                                                              25
This Activity will also finance water saving and management technologies for male and
female WUA members to mitigate heat stress, reduce climate risks, and enhance water
efficiency for climate adaptation. It will provide modern climate resilient-irrigation systems,
Decision Support Systems via mobile apps, and digital advisory and early warning services to
improve access to climate and weather data. Training will be integrated with technology
access to support informed decision-making and climate resilience, as well as fostering
dialogue with (young) farmers, capturing their experiences and needs. The activity will also
promote the participation of young people and women in WUA decision-making, reviewing
barriers, recommending actions, and conducting awareness campaigns and skill development
programs to increase their participation in Management, Operations, and Maintenance
(MOM).
Establishment and Operationalization of a National Irrigation Water Accounting and
Adaptation Center (US$8.15M). This activity will establish IWAAC within the WC or in a new
land and water agency to enhance water and irrigation management. Building on Armenia’s
GIS-based system, it will integrate remote sensing, ground monitoring, and climate data to
improve water accounting, crop monitoring, and adaptive irrigation planning. The center will
modernize decision-making with state-of-the-art technology, offering weather forecasting,
early warning systems for floods and droughts, and climate-resilient water management tools.
IWAAC will also strengthen local monitoring networks, establish a national remote sensing
platform, and coordinate inter-agency collaboration. It will streamline data collection and
analysis, address monitoring gaps, support climate adaptation in irrigation planning and water
allocation, and develop decision-support tools to enhance resilience against extreme weather
and climate variability while defining sectoral roles, responsibilities, and accountability.
IWAAC will also establish a Water Professionals Training Unit to enhance in-country technical
expertise in irrigation modernization covering operation, maintenance, management, and
collaboration with international designers. It will develop a national digital irrigation library,
translating key resources into Armenian. A targeted training program for young to mid-level
professionals will focus on irrigation infrastructure development and management, including
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems, canal lining, pipeline design, and
corrosion mitigation. Training will be conducted domestically and internationally in
collaboration with global experts, with participants contributing materials to the digital
library.
Component 2. Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Enhancement (US$30M) will focus on
providing improved access to efficient and financially sustainable rural WSS services in
selected areas of Armenia to enhance climate resilience against drought, floods and extreme
heat. It will do so by improving the regulatory framework and institutional capacity to advance
sector reform and promote sustainable service delivery, duly accounting for current and
expected climate change impacts. It will furthermore support GoA in improving access to
safely managed water supply in unserved rural settlements through the rehabilitation and
construction of water supply infrastructure that will incorporate engineering design principles
from the WB Resilient Water Infrastructure Brief, in conjunction with establishing inclusive
water supply service provision with the participation of women during the planning,
implementation, and operating processes through consultations, focus groups and other
means. Phase 1 will not consider sanitation infrastructure, which will only be considered for
Phase 2 of the Program. This component will include consultations with all affected
community members to highlight the role communities play in WSS planning and service
delivery and will enhance accountable and transparent WSS service delivery.
Subcomponent 2.1. Institutional strengthening, capacity building, and regulatory reform
(US$7M). This subcomponent will support activities at the national, the marz and the local
                                                                                               26
levels to build institutional capacity for delivering WSS services and for expanding coverage in
anticipation of climate change droughts, floods and extreme heat. Specifically, the
subcomponent will support (i) the collection of baseline information on the status of the RWSS
services in all the country’s marzes; (ii) the preparation of a service improvement and
implementation roadmap for unserved areas, including improving the institutional set-up and
enabling environment of the sector; (iii) the development of a framework for a sector-wide
monitoring system; (iv) the implementation of monitoring and control tools in the WC to
enhance the effectiveness of supervision and control of the WSS sector across the country; (v)
the implementation of technical assistance to improve water quality, increase water quantity,
reduce non-revenue water (NRW) and increase community satisfaction; (vi) a socio-cultural
and gender assessment to examine how these dimensions are reflected in national policies,
strategies, sectoral plans and programs, and to identify any related gaps with regard to WSS
access and services in the targeted unserved areas; (vii) development of a capacity building
strategy and plan for the RWSS sector and its associated costs for better identifying, designing,
implementing and managing WSS services; (viii) the design and delivery of a learning program
and an Information, Education and Communications (IEC) program that include training
activities for (a) WSS system planning, design, construction, and management, (b) system
operations and maintenance arrangements for sustainable RWSS service delivery, (c)
procurement procedures and practices; (d) financial accounting and reporting, and (e) RWSS
system monitoring and evaluation; (ix) the development of a national catalogue of rural
sanitation system technologies and WSS service delivery models, including assessing private
sector options, for future implementation across the country; (x) the development of an
investment plan for rural WSS systems and services for all the unserved areas of all marzes in
the country, in line with prioritization criteria agreed with the client and based on the
comprehensive assessment of RWSS services across the country; and (xi) the development of
a RWSS roadmap for the unserved areas, including improving the institutional set-up of the
sector (and considering private sector options).
Comprehensive regulatory reform to improve the financial sustainability of WSS services. A
key component of the enabling environment of the WSS sector is a solid regulatory
framework. The component will support the development and implementation of a
comprehensive WSS tariff reform program to ensure that sustainable pricing models reflecting
both operational costs and fair and equitable consumer rates are in place, while considering
regional socio-economic conditions and aligning with good international practice. The
regulatory reform developed should consider a long-term vision for the sector and should be
sufficiently flexible to accommodate future developments. To inform the reform process, this
activity includes conducting a baseline analysis of WSS costs and conducting affordability and
willingness-to-pay studies. Additional activities to be explored in this reform process include
recommendations for government subsidies for water users unable to afford full O&M cost
recovery fees. In addition to developing a tariff methodology, as part of project
implementation the GoA will develop and approve a tariff roll out plan with a corresponding
communications strategy for outreach to those communities affected by increased tariffs, as
well as a behavior change campaign and a marketing campaign.
Private concession contractual arrangements. To support and allow for future infrastructure
investments and effective WSS service delivery, the contractual relationship between the
lessee and GoA is extremely important. As the current contract is creating some tensions, the
project will support GoA in improving its performance under the contract and its capacity to
collaborate with the lessee by providing independent TA for reviewing the goals,
achievements and binding constraints of the PPP contract, while also reviewing the technical,
institutional, commercial, financial and legal aspects of the contract. This TA will aim to ensure

                                                                                               27
that GoA has the necessary data, analyses and improved technical capacity to assist it in
achieving these goals. It should be noted that Phase 1 will not directly support or intervene in
any potential negotiations that may take place between GoA and the lessee. If such support
is requested by GoA, it could be provided by the World Bank Group (including IFC) during the
preparation or implementation of Phase 2 of the MPA.
Subcomponent 2.2. Feasibility Studies and Infrastructure Investments (US$23M). This
subcomponent will support the undertaking of feasibility studies to prepare and structure
WSS investments that will withstand climate change exacerbated droughts, floods, and
extreme heat. Feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs will be developed for the
highest-priority investments for implementation under both phases 1 and 2 of the
MPA37. Based on the prioritization of activities under the investment plan, the subcomponent
will implement infrastructure and service improvement interventions deemed to be ‘no-
regret’ in nature for the highest-priority unserved settlements, based on criteria agreed with
GoA based on technical, economic, socio-political and institutional considerations.
Infrastructure investments will include construction of water networks - which constitute
minor additions or alterations to existing schemes - including household connections (and
connections to schools and healthcare facilities, where necessary), metering, and any
necessary water treatment systems, which will incorporate climate resilient engineering
principles. In phase 1, these investments are expected to be in several marzes – the
confirmation of which will be based on technical, economic, socio-political and institutional
considerations. This will exclude activities that: (A) are unable to meet the requirements set
forth in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan of the Project; (B) result in the
establishment of new schemes that use or risk pollution of water of international waterways,
(C) have high-risk environmental or social impacts; and/or (D) will have a negative impact on
any critical natural habitats or cultural heritage areas”.
Component 3. Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management (US$119M) will
boost drought resilience by financing rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation
systems at main, secondary, and tertiary canal levels currently managed jointly by WSA at the
large main canal and reservoirs level and by WUAs at the secondary and tertiary distributary
level. In cooperation with the Water Committee, a sample of five irrigation schemes are short-
listed for consideration under Phase 1 (see Table 3). The total command area of the irrigation
systems under consideration is about 39,580 ha which will be selected based on hydrological,
technical, economic, and agricultural parameters, under a Framework Approach38. For Phase
2, an additional four irrigation schemes have been identified. It must be noted that under this
component, there will be no construction of new irrigation schemes and no construction of
any extension to the existing schemes.
Subcomponent 3.1: Modernizing Climate Resilient Irrigation Infrastructure & System
Management (US$114 million). The activities to be carried out in schemes selection consist
of detailed feasibility studies, including Economic and Financial Analysis, and Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment for rehabilitation/modernization of five short-listed irrigation
systems (Table 2). Final selection of schemes will be based on technical feasibility, estimated
investment cost, financial and economic viability, allocated budget, OP7.50 considerations. In
addition, the project will engage WUAs at an early stage of design to participate and sign-off
on the designs. The following structures will be considered for rehabilitation and/or
reconstruction/modernization across the selected schemes: headworks; critical sections of
main canals inverted syphons; aqueducts, secondary and tertiary network (pipeline or lined);
water control/distribution; outlets; mudflows; flood protection; flow and/or volumetric
measurement structures, wherever necessary check structures for easy removal or flushing of
trash, bridges, maintenance roads, and related pump stations with aim of identifying
                                                                                             28
        technological advancements that can modernize selected systems (e.g., conversion from
        pumping to gravity or transition from gravity to pressurized pipe networks, where feasible, or
        construction of off-line canal side regulating reservoirs), and other required ancillary
        structures. This sub-component will also carry out technical and institutional assessments of
        Vorotan-Arpa-Sevan Conveyance Tunnel. Wherever feasible, the project will maximize
        elevation to convert from pumped to gravity systems, to reduce energy consumption and
        minimize GHG emissions. The feasibility and detailed design studies will systematically
        examine the opportunities to rehabilitate/modernize existing systems by considering water
        control and delivery structures, that are operated to maintain a constant canal water levels
        over time, regardless of the flow rate. Climate adaptation and hazard resilience principles will
        be embedded in the selection and in the design of all investments based on the Bank’s Water
        GP's guidelines.
Table 2. Short-List of Irrigation Schemes for Phase 1

                                                                    Lengt            Cost of
                                                Actual                    Length of
                                WUAs     Comman          Type of h of                Modernizati
No Irrigation                                   Irrigate                  secondary
              Water source      involved d Area          irrigation Main             on (US$M)
   scheme                                       d Area                    distributo
                                in O&M (ha)                         Canal
                                                (ha)                      rs (km)
                                                                    (km)

                         Yerevan
  Lower   River
                         WUA,
1 Hrazdan Hrazdan/Ranchp           11,400           7,000    mixed     53.0 43.00        75
                         Echmiadzi
  canal   ar p/s
                         n WUA

                          Kotayk
  Arzni-   River Hrazdan/
                          WUA,
2 Shamiram Aparan                   20,600          12,000 gravity     89.1 15.2         130
                          Aragatsot
           reservoir
                          n WUA

    Kotayk                      Kotayk                                                   35
3             River Hrazdan               4,000     1,400    mixed     32.0 74.0
    canal                       WUA,

             Rivers Tashir and
             Dzoraget, (also
             dotaton     from
4 Lori canal Rivers            Lori WUA 3,080       410      gravity   47.6 18.0         14
             Miskhanka,
             Agarak        and
             Hovandar)

    Debetava                    Tavush                                                   4.5
5            River Debet                  500       500      mixed     14.0 3.0
    n                           WUA

TOTAL                                     39,580    21,310                               258



        Sub-component 3.2: Introduction of SCADA (US$5 million). This sub-component will finance
        two activities. The first activity will be related to collection, processing and management of

                                                                                                     29
field data from throughout the canal and pipeline systems to boost climate
resilience. Following the development of a comprehensive SCADA plan, the field data activity
will include (i) accurate real-time measurement of critical flow rates and water levels that are
impacted by climate change (ii) transmission of that data, (iii) organization and archiving of
that data, (iv) providing easy access to real-time as well as historical data, (v) standardization
of equipment and software for these purposes, (vi) training of an excellent SCADA team of
technicians for installation, troubleshooting, and repair, and (vii) establishment of a high
quality, well-stocked SCADA center with spare parts, equipment for testing, diagnostics, and
component assembly. Of particular importance will be the establishment of data security and
backup. Once the first activity is well established, investments will be made for a second
SCADA activity. The second SCADA activity will provide limited remote manual operation and
monitoring of headwork gates. This will not be the primary focus of SCADA but will provide
valuable experience for future Armenian irrigation investments in remote manual and
automatic (not included here) operation of gates and monitoring of water distribution in the
larger canal systems, where modernization investments that consider climate change induced
rainfall variability will be made. The use of flow measurement data will be integrated. The
SCADA system will not only assist operators with real-time information for improved water
management; it will also provide historical databases for later analysis and planning.
Component 4: Project Management (US$6M). An interim Project Coordination Team (PCT)
will be housed within the WC and will assume primary responsibility for project
implementation, including procurement of civil works and of goods and services, as well as
related procurement and financial management (FM), compliance with agreed environmental
and social management measures, and project M&E. This component will finance staff costs,
design, implementation, and reporting of baseline and project completion surveys; and the
preparation of assessment studies (e.g., pre-feasibility and feasibility studies), detailed
engineering designs, and construction supervision. The component will also include capacity
building support for the PCT, including citizen engagement training skills for the PCT staff.




                                                                                               30
Annex 2. The FGRM focal points and the FGRM coordinator’s contact information publication form

 Description                               Contact Details
 FGRM focal point at community level
 FGRM Coordinator
 To:
 Address:
 E-mail:
 Website:
 Telephone:




                                                                                            31
Annex 3. SEP Budget

The following tentative budget is estimated based on potential activities that could be funded under
Component 4 on the Project’s Management.


                                                            Unit        Times
                                                                                                       Total
          Budget categories                Quantity       costs, $       per           Years
                                                                                                      costs, $
                                                          per year       year
     Staff salaries
     Community Liaison Officers in 6
                                           6     1,000     1                             6             36,000
     provinces /marzes2
     Events
     Project launch meetings (space
                                           6     1,500     1                             1             9,000
     rent, catering, printed materials)
     Communications materials, PR       lump
                                                                                                       6,000
     kit (posters, brochures)            sum
     Round table discussions               2     2,000     1                             2             8,000
     Consultations with vulnerable
                                          18      500      3                             1             27,000
     groups in 6 provinces /marzes
     Trainings
     Training on environmental,
     social issues (including SEA/SH)      2     2,000     1                             3             12,000
     for Contractor /Consultant staff
    Feedback
     Monitoring survey for feedback        1     12,000    1                             1           12,000
                         TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET                                        110,000




2
 Community liaison officers will not be municipality staff, they will be selected as individual consultants in each
marz where the works will be implemented to support the Project

                                                                                                                 32
