Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/17/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04770




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 20, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508698                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)     SRWSSP2                     2026

                     Operation Name            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Tanzania                  Tanzania                                 EASTERN AND                  Water
                                                                                        SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Water                        12-May-2025                  15-Sep-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     18-Feb-2025               260,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The program development objective is to increase and sustain access to at least basic water supply, sanitation and
                     hygiene services in all rural districts.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The access gap to water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services remains high in Tanzania. There is a need to
                     maintain and accelerate the progress on sector reforms initiated by the government through its Water Sector
                     Development Program and through previous World Bank-financed projects. There is an opportunity and a pressing need
                     for a transformational operation addressing the institutional challenges affecting the sustainability of rural water supply
                     and sanitation in Tanzania and increasing access to WASH for the under and unserved populations. In recent years, the
                     Bank has been supporting WASH services in rural areas of Tanzania through the Sustainable Rural Water Supply and
                     Sanitation Program Phase 1. Through the program, over 7.9 million people have been provided access to clean and

                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     sustainable water supply services and 10 million people with improved sanitation services in four years. The proposed
                     program is to continue the successful implementation of Phase 1 and further push the agenda of sustainable WASH
                     service delivery in rural areas of Tanzania. The program will have the following four results areas: (i) Increased access
                     and sustainability of safely managed WASH services; (ii) Climate resilient water resources management; (iii) Policy,
                     institutions and regulation for strengthened service delivery; and (iv) Maximizing finance for development.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The SRWSSP Phase 2, and its IPF component, will be implemented in 25 regions across the mainland Tanzania. Tanzania
                     experiences a variety of climatic conditions. Mean annual temperatures are influenced by altitude, ranging from 21°C in
                     high mountain areas to 29°C at sea level. Ensuring adequate water resources for competing needs requires attention, as
                     renewable freshwater resources (per capita) have been cut roughly in half over the last 25 years and are becoming
                     increasingly variable due to climate change. The rural water supply and sanitation sector faced legacy challenges related
                     to service coverage. Environmental factors such as drinking water quality, poor sanitation, and hygienic practices
                     significantly contribute to poor nutritional status and health conditions. Tanzania regularly suffers from cholera linked to
                     poor Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) conditions, including an ongoing outbreak since 1 January 2024 affecting 23
                     regions, with 6,143 cases and 100 deaths. This follows a previous outbreak in 2015 . Since the establishment of RUWASA
                     in 2019; a 23-fold increase in the number of functional rural water points was achieved with more than 7.91 million
                     people verified to have gained access to improved water supply under the SRWSSP; there was a significant increase in
                     rural household sanitation access, with 10.1 million people gaining access to improved sanitation facilities as of June
                     2024. As of December 2023, WASH access in primary schools and health care facilities improved with 1,902 health care



Public Disclosure
                     facilities (out of 6,888 total public health care facilities in the country) and 1,387 primary schools (out of 11,485 total
                     primary schools in the country) provided with improved sanitation and hand washing facilities, through the SRWSSP

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The main implementing agency for the Program will be RUWASA which was established by the SRWSSP in 2019. Since its
                     establishment RUWASA has been responsible for implementing the SRWSSP requirements including the environmental
                     and social measures per the PAP and the ESSA recommendations. The E&S performance of the SRWSSP has been
                     maintained as satisfactory and moderately satisfactory. All requirements of the national system (preparation of ESIAs,
                     ESMPs, registration at OSHA etc.) have been met. The main challenge facing environmental and social management of
                     the Program is the limited capacity of RUWASA to manage works contracts and ensuring that requirement E&S
                     measures are being effectively implemented on ground. The Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) that
                     will be prepared for the PforR will address such challenges and will include recommendations to effectively enhance the
                     E&S capacity of RUWASA through providing E&S contract management training and enhance the E&S staffing in
                     different regions.
                     Water Basin Boards will be implementing some of the IPF components, especially those associated with limited works.
                     The Water Basin Boards vary in their capacity, some of them have participated in implementing some of the World Bank
                     projects, such as the Ruvu-Wami Water Board, and have experience in complying with the Bank’s environmental and
                     social requirements. However, the majority do not have such track record and will need some capacity building in
                     specific ESF requirements associated to their correspondent activities




                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Moderate
                     The IPF component will mainly include technical assistance activities and capacity building activities that are of a soft
                     nature but will also include some works that may be associated with some risks and impacts. Those works include
                     drilling some testing boreholes and installing Hydromet stations. Those activities would be associated with some
                     environmental risks including: (i) health and safety risks to workers especially related to the traffic safety and risk of
                     being struck by moving machines; (ii) limited air emissions and noise from drilling machinery and transportation; and
                     (iii) limited construction waste management. Some of the technical assistance activities are associated with some
                     downstream environmental and social risks, such as the update of IWRM plans, which may recommend some
                     investments that would be associated, in addition to the above, with: (iv) risks related to changed land use and (v)
                     possible minor risks on marine biodiversity.
                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Under the IPF component, the primary focus will be on providing technical assistance and building capacity, activities
                     that are generally anticipated to have no negative impacts on communities or other involved stakeholders.
                     Additionally, the client intends to drill boreholes and install Hydromet stations. The drilling activities will not require
                     new land acquisition, as they will take place on client-owned land or institutional lands, which will not trigger any land
                     acquisition or displacement of individuals. However, it is expected that the drilling activities may pose risks related to


Public Disclosure
                     the health and safety of workers involved in these tasks. These anticipated risks will be managed through mitigation
                     measures that will be put in place.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant as there will be some environmental and social risks and impacts that need to be managed consistent
                      with ESS1 requirements. A template Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared to identify
                      the different E&S risks related to the IPF component activities, identify mitigation measures and include standard
                      requirements to be included in contracts with works/supply contracts. The Technical Assistance activities, such as
                      Integrated Water Resource Management Plans and inventory of risk based dams, will include E&S requirements in
                      their correspondent ToRs . Those E&S requirements will be according to the Operational Environmental and Social
                      Risk Committee (OESRC) Advisory Note on Technical Assistance and the ESF.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant as project implementation will involve a diverse range of stakeholders across various levels of
                      government, including National, Regional, District, Ward, Village/Mtaa, and grassroots communities. Additionally,
                      other key parties—such as NGOs, CBOs, and stakeholders in the water sector, including the Development Partner


                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                      Group for Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (DPG-WASH)—will actively participate at different stages of the project.
                      Aligned with the principles of ESS10, it is essential to ensure meaningful engagement of all stakeholders, including
                      vulnerable communities, throughout the project's lifecycle. To achieve this, a comprehensive Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) will be developed and implemented.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      Project workers are expected to be of two main categories (i) direct workers, mostly civil servants employed by the
                      Government at the National and local level; and (ii) contracted workers including consultants sourced nationally and
                      internationally and contractor workers. Risks are related to OHS and are possible failure to abide by national
                      legislation in relation to working hours, rest periods, pay, and other benefits and health and safety of workers
                      including all required insurances. Those risks will be managed through the template ESMP that will be prepared for
                      the TA activities as mentioned under ESS1.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant because the monitoring wells will abstract water, however just limited amount. The Integrated Water
                      Resource Management plans that will be prepared need to address ESS3 requirements in terms of water
                      conservation and pollution prevention measures, and those requirements will be included in their ToRs and will be
                      according to the requirements of the World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (WBG EHSG).

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      There will be some traffic for transporting equipment for drilling wells and Hydromet and traffic management
                      procedures, as part of the template ESMP, need to be in place to ensure safety of the community. It is worth noting
                      that the dam inventory will not probably include technical studies that will have significance on dam safety, however,
                      should the inventory needs to include such studies, dam safety requirements of ESS4 should be considered in their
                      ToRs

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The small amount of land required for this activity will not involve the acquisition of new land, and there is no
                      anticipated risk of displacing individuals. The plan is to install monitoring equipment in the boreholes being drilled as
                      part of the RUWASA supply project, ensuring that the activity remains within the boundaries of existing resources.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                     Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      The template ESMP will include exclusion criteria for IWRM that may be associated with downstream impacts on
                      marine sensitive habitats, and for drilling wells that may impact protected areas and critical habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant



                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                      The template ESMP will include exclusion criteria for activities that may be associated with impacts on marine
                      sensitive physical cultural resources

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        TBD
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities




Public Disclosure
                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     By Appraisal
                     -       Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), and final version following negotiations
                     -       Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     -       Revised environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) for the PforR
                     During implementation and before IPF works are contracted
                     - Template ESMP for the IPF component


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Ruth Jane Kennedy-Walker                 Title:         Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                 rkennedywalker@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Toyoko Kodama                            Job Title:     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist




                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                      Email:                  tkodama@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Ruth Jane Kennedy-Walker, Toyoko Kodama

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Mohammad Farouk Ibrahim Kandeel

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Emil Mathew Karuranga




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                Page 7 of 7
