Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                                                         1 of 2




                               FROM: Mr. Rodney Mkansi Tel: 012 315 5160, Email: Rodney.Mkansi@Treasury.gov.za




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Ms. Satu Kristiina Kahkonen
                               World Bank’s Country Director
                               South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Namibia, Eastern and Southern Africa Region
                               P.O. Box 12629
                               Hatfield
                               Pretoria
                               0028




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Dear Ms Kahkonen


                               SUBMISSION OF DRAFT PRELIMINARY ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
                               SYSTEM POLICY FOR THE CREDIT GUARANTEE VEHICLE

                               The National Treasury wishes to express our appreciation for the opportunity to engage with the
                               the World Bank Group team on the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) for
                               the Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV).

                               The National Treasury also acknowledges the World Bank’s significant contributions to South
                               Africa’s energy sector, particularly through sovereign and non-sovereign financing that is
                               supporting renewable energy integration, transmission grid development, and progress on the




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               CGV.

                               Following our recent meeting between the National Treasury and the World Bank, I am pleased
                               to submit the National Treasury’s preliminary draft ESMS Policy for your consideration
                               (Annexure A), pending the approval of the Director-General and the Minister of Finance.

                               This draft policy has been developed in alignment with South Africa’s robust environmental
                               legislation, the World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS), and the IFC
                               Performance Standards. It reflects the National Treasury’s shared understanding of the need to
                               establish and disclose the ESMS in compliance with the Pelosi Amendment, which requires
                               public disclosure at least 120 days prior to Board consideration.
                                                                                            2 of 2




The ESMS outlines the CGV’s commitment to integrating environmental, social, and governance
(ESG) risk management into its credit guarantee operations, including:

    •   A clear policy statement on sustainability and ESG commitments;
    •   Risk screening, classification, due diligence, monitoring, and reporting mechanisms;
    •   An exclusion list aligned with international best practices; and
    •   Defined governance arrangements between the National Treasury and CGV to ensure
        effective oversight and accountability.

I welcome the continued technical guidance from the World Bank’s environmental and social
specialists to refine and finalise this policy ahead of the planned preparation mission scheduled
around September 2025.

The National Treasury’s officials look forward to working closely with your team to ensure
alignment with the requirements for disclosure and subsequent operationalisation.


I trust that you will find the above in order.




Sincerely yours,




RAVESH RAJLAL
ACTING DEPUTY DIRECTOR-GENERAL: ASSET AND LIABILITY MANAGEMENT
DATE: 30 July 2025
This document is a preliminary draft intended for internal review, discussion and relevant approvals purposes
only. The analysis, assumptions, and recommendations contained herein are subject to further validation and
refinement. Final conclusions may change based on additional data, stakeholder input, and evolving market
conditions


DATE

30 July 2025




PRELIMINARY DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
POLICY: CREDIT GUARANTEE VEHICLE


CGV INVESTMENT STRATEGY

The Credit Guarantee Vehicle (“CGV”) has been established as a new financing vehicle that
aims to mobilize private capital into South Africa's sustainable infrastructure sectors. Its
primary objective is to support the country's Just Energy Transition and climate resilience
objectives. The CGV is a licensed and regulated, independent non-life insurer that has been
developed by the Government of South Africa in partnership with the World Bank Group. It is
structured to offer credit guarantees to de-risk infrastructure investments and attract private
sector participation.

CGV ESG POLICY

CGV’s Environmental, Social and Governance (“ESG”) policy outlines its commitments to
ensuring ESG risk management considerations and governance standards in its credit
guarantee business engagements. By doing this, CGV will manage ESG risks of its investment
portfolio and support projects to seek continuous improvement in environmental and social
practices.

The CGV is committed to maintaining the highest standards of ESG responsibility as part of
this integrated finance initiative through the establishment of an Environmental and Social
Management System (“ESMS”). The ESMS is a fundamental institutional mechanism that
enables the CGV to identify, assess, mitigate, and monitor the ESG risks and impacts
associated with its guarantee operations. The ESMS is consistent with the national laws and
regulatory frameworks of South Africa, as well as international standards, the World Bank
Environmental and Social Standards, International Finance Corporation (“IFC”) Performance
Standards World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines, IFC Good
Practice Notes (where relevant) and the Equator Principles.

CGV will endeavor to ensure that all its guaranteed business activities, directly or indirectly,
will confirm all relevant national and international standards. CGV will not support business
activities listed on our Exclusion List.

CGV’s respect for human rights and their integration into our business engagements are
guided by the South African national laws and standards established in the International Labor
Organization Conventions (“ILO Conventions”) and other relevant International Standards the
Republic of South Africa is aligned with. The guiding principles, commitments, and institutional
arrangements outlined in this ESMS Policy will regulate the integration of ESG considerations




                                                                                                            Official Use Only
into the guarantee decision-making and operational processes of the CGV. It functions as a
statement of intent and a foundation for the establishment of a development-oriented,
environmental and social risk-aware, and robust institution.

This ESMS policy endorses the CGV's vision to provide support through issuing guarantees
to enable the financing of environmentally and socially sustainable infrastructure projects while
simultaneously fostering inclusive development outcomes, accountability, and transparency.

IMPORTANCE OF ESG POLICY

The environmental challenges facing the world are complex, dynamic and constantly
changing. Awareness of environmental and sustainability issues is growing, given the
increasing effects of climate change, population pressure and environmental degradation. In
response, environmental legislation has become increasingly stringent and market policies
and measures have developed to promote sustainable development and a green economy.
Furthermore, integrating environmental and social governance into investments is a
responsible investment practice and generates positive outcomes for public sector practices.
Sustainable and equitable development, environmental and social appraisal forms a
component of the overall investment appraisal and enables the CGV to mainstream
environmental and principles to investment projects within the vehicle’s mandate.

SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY

This Policy is applicable to all credit guarantee investment support provided by the CGV.
Detailed climate, governance, labour and gender aspects are covered under specific
governance, labour and gender related policies, which should be read in conjunction with this
Policy. The policy practices include risk management and positive impact.

The policy extends to all infrastructure sub-sectors that will be supported by CGV, including:

   •   Renewable energy and energy storage programmes (e.g., solar, wind, battery storage)

   •   Transmission infrastructure

   •   Water infrastructure (e.g., abstraction, treatment, and distribution)

   •   Transport (e.g., freight rail, ports, roads)

   •   Housing and mixed-use development

   •   Wastewater treatment

These sectors are subject to environmental and social screening under this policy, including
risk classification into categories High, Substantial/Moderate and Low risks.as defined in the
CGV’s ESMS and Information Memorandum.



                                                 2


                                                                                             Official Use Only
APPROACH TO CLIMATE CHANGE

The CGV will ensure that sub-projects that have significant impact on climate change, will,
where necessary, conduct additional detailed climate related assessments and provide
relevant information to manage climate related risks and impacts. The client will need to
provide vulnerability assessments, mitigation and adaptation objectives, measures/targets,
indicators, monitoring plans and budgets.

The project/s need to address the following:
   • How a project promotes or detracts from a country’s transition planning to renewable
       energy, biodiversity conservation and water security.

   •   How risk will be managed in vulnerable parts of the economy.

   •   How harmful developments have been avoided or delayed and how capital allocation
       will be shifted to sectors resilient to transition risk or to those that may benefit from the
       transition

CGV'S COMMITMENT TO SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
   •   Sustainable Finance: CGV will prioritize the support of infrastructure initiatives that
       not only generate financial returns but also contribute to long-term climate objectives,
       social equity, and environmental resilience. This encompasses compliance with the
       Paris Agreement, the Just Energy Transition Partnership, South Africa Climate Policy,
       and South Africa's National Development Plan.

   •   ESMS Implementation: For each major activity in its investment cycle, CGV will
       develop and operationalize tailored tools, procedures and plans that align with the
       standards articulated in this ESMS policy. CGV ESMS implementation will provide a
       structured framework for identifying, assessing, and mitigating ESG risks, ensuring
       comprehensive documentation, accountability, and alignment with both local and
       international standards. By implementing this ESMS, CGV reinforces its commitment
       to sustainable, socially responsible development and the long-term success of its
       credit guarantee initiatives.

   •   Compliance: The CGV will only support activities that comply with all applicable South
       Africa's environment, health, safety, labor, and social legislation and relevant municipal
       by-laws. In addition to national regulations, CGV will mandate initiatives to comply with
       international standards, including the IFC Performance Standards, World Bank
       Environmental and Social Standards, Equator Principles, and pertinent international
       labor and human rights conventions.

   •   ESG Risk Integration: The credit approval framework of CGV will require screening
       and categorisation of ESG risks. ESG considerations will be integrated into all phases
       of the CGV guarantee business, from pre-appraisal to post-disbursement monitoring,
       to ensure that material risks are identified, mitigated, and reported. The CGV will utilize

                                                3


                                                                                                Official Use Only
   •   mechanisms to ensure companies incorporate the relevant ESG requirements in line
       with national legislative requirements and relevant international standards.

   •   Capacity and Resources: Throughout its life cycle, CGV will appoint a senior
       management (“ESMS Officer”) representative to have oversight role on ESG risk
       management of its credit guarantee portfolio and establishment of the ESMS
       organogram. The CGV ESMS Officer will be supported by a team of qualified
       professionals who will be responsible for ensuring portfolio investees align with the
       CGV ESMS. Additionally, the CGV will establish partnerships with the Department of
       Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment (DFFE) and other technical agencies to
       facilitate capacity development and continuous learning.

   •   Continuous Improvement: To ensure robust oversight and continuous improvement,
       CGV will implement internal review mechanisms accompanied by key performance
       indicators (“KPIs”) specifically designed to monitor portfolio-level ESG performance.
       These KPIs will serve as benchmarks, enabling CGV to systematically track progress,
       address emerging risks, and celebrate successes. Periodic policy, procedural, and
       instrument updates will be guided by insights gained through the ongoing operation of
       the ESG management system, fostering a culture of adaptive learning.

   •   Transparency and Disclosure: The CGV will develop a monitoring and reporting
       framework to disclose material ESG information in conformance with the international
       standards, investor requirements and transparency best practices. This encompasses
       the timely publication of annual sustainability performance reports, ESMS updates,
       and high-risk project summaries.

   •   External Communications Mechanism: CGV’s ESMS includes and External
       Communication Mechanism (“ECM”) which provides a means for the public to submit
       or raise concerns related to CGV’s ESG Policy and CGV’s supported guarantee
       portfolio, and have these inquiries responded to by CGV in a timely manner. The
       process of receiving, reviewing and responding to communications from external
       stakeholders is described in the detailed ECM.

   •   Stakeholder Engagement: CGV will maintain the principles of participatory and
       inclusive engagement. The institution will ensure that the voices of vulnerable groups,
       such as women, youth, and indigenous communities, are taken into account in the
       design and implementation of the project by facilitating stakeholder consultation and
       grievance redress procedures.

ESG RISK MANAGEMENT APPROACH

The CGV recognises that the proactive and systematic management of ESG risks is crucial
for the successful mobilization of private capital for sustainable infrastructure. The CGV will
establish and implement a comprehensive ESMS to guarantee that its credit guarantee
operations do not lead to adverse environmental or social outcomes and instead contribute
positively to development.


                                              4


                                                                                           Official Use Only
The ESG risk management approach of the CGV comprises the following key components:


1. Screening
CGV will screen all projects to ensure it aligns with the CGV Exclusion List. In addition to other
exclusions, the CGV Exclusion List will include the IFC Exclusion List of projects that cannot
be financed.


2. ESG Risk categorisation
All sub-projects that are being considered for credit guarantees will be categorized according
to their nature, scale, location and severity of their potential environmental and social risks
and impacts. The sensitivity of affected communities and environments will determine the
classification of projects as High, Substantial, Moderate, or Low risk.

   •   High-risk projects will result in substantial adverse ESG consequences that are either
       irreversible, diverse, or unprecedented.

   •   Substantia/Moderate risk projects may have substantial adverse effects that are
       restricted in scope and can be mitigated through established protocols.

   •   Low risk projects have minimal or limited adverse impacts that are readily mitigated.


3. ESG due diligence
The CGV will ascertain the necessary scope and extent of due diligence in accordance with
the risk categorisation. Due diligence may encompass the following for sub-projects with High,
Substantial and Moderate risks:

   •   A review of stakeholder engagement records, environmental and social management
       plans (“ESMPs”), resettlement action plans (“RAPs”), and environmental and social
       impact assessments (“ESIAs”).

   •   Confirmation of adherence to the environmental statutes of the host country and the
       standards of the IFC and the World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety
       Guidelines.

   •   Site visits, consultations with affected communities, and third-party expert reviews as
       required.

Before issuing any guarantee for projects with material ESG gaps from the ESG due diligence,
the CGV will require mitigation measures, capacity enhancements in an Environmental and
Social Action Plan (“ESAP”).




                                                5


                                                                                              Official Use Only
4. Integration with guarantee decision processes
The credit risk assessments and investment committee decisions of the CGV will be
completely integrated with the results of ESG due diligence. Approval may be contingent upon
the execution of specific mitigation measures or capacity enhancements for projects with a
high level of risk.

Guarantee contracts will incorporate proposed ESAP, ESG terms and conditions to guarantee
enforceability.


5. Supervision and Monitoring
A monitoring framework that is risk based will be implemented by the CGV. Projects that pose
a high, substantial and moderate risk will be monitored throughout the duration of the
guarantee to evaluate:

   •   Adherence to the ESMS and legal obligations.

   •   Progress on addressing the ESAP items.

   •   Community grievances and emerging or unforeseen ESG hazards.

Progress reports from project developers, independent audits, and site visits by CGV or third-
party experts are all potential monitoring instruments.


6. Accountability and grievance redress
The CGV will guarantee that the ECM is accessible and functional for stakeholders who are
impacted by sub-projects.

Also, the CGV will establish its own autonomous mechanism to receive and address
complaints concerning ESG consequences associated with guaranteed initiatives. This is
indicative of CGV's dedication to accountability, transparency, and community engagement.


7. Training and institutional capacity
The ESMS will be implemented by the CGV through the establishment of an internal ESG
function that is staffed by dedicated and trained personnel. Staff capacity will be continuously
developed through training, participation in DFI networks, and collaboration with technical
partners. CGV will also offer ESG awareness training to its collaborators and sub-project
developers as needed.


8. Disclosure and reporting
On a regular basis, CGV will provide an update on the ESG performance of its guarantee
portfolio. ESG summaries and essential documents will be publicly disclosed in a timely
manner. The institution will ensure that its ESG commitments and performance indicators are
transparently documented.


                                               6


                                                                                            Official Use Only
CGV EXCLUSION LIST

The CGV is committed to preventing the support of projects or activities that present
intolerable environmental, social, or reputational risks, particularly in the context of
infrastructure development, through its credit guarantee operations. Consequently, CGV will
not offer credit guarantees to sub-projects that are explicitly associated with or involve any of
the following:

   •   Activities that are prohibited by South African law or international agreements to which
       South Africa is a party, such as those that have a substantial negative impact on
       biodiversity, cultural heritage sites, or protected areas.

   •   Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws
       or regulations or international conventions and agreements, or subject to international
       bans, such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting substances,
       PCB's, wildlife or products regulated under Convention on International Trade in
       Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).

   •   Production or trade in weapons and munitions.

   •   Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding beer and wine).

   •   Production or trade in tobacco.

   •   Gambling, casinos and equivalent enterprises.

   •   Production or trade in radioactive materials. This does not apply to the purchase of
       medical equipment, quality control (measurement) equipment and any equipment
       where IFC considers the radioactive source to be trivial and/or adequately shielded.

   •   Production or trade in unbonded asbestos fibers. This does not apply to purchase and
       use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is less than 20%.

   •   Drift net fishing in the marine environment using nets in excess of 2.5 km. in length.

   •   Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor2/harmful
       child labor.

   •   Commercial logging operations for use in primary tropical moist forest.

   •   Production or trade in wood or other forestry products other than from sustainably
       managed forests.




                                               7


                                                                                             Official Use Only
   •   Infrastructure projects that involve forced or detrimental displacement in the absence
       of sufficient resettlement and livelihood restoration plans, as defined by national
       legislation and international standards (e.g., IFC Performance Standard 5).

   •   Projects that are either involved in or contribute to human trafficking, forced labor, or
       child labor, including those that are part of construction supply chains or service
       contracts.

   •   The construction or operation of facilities that produce or trade in banned or restricted
       substances, such as ozone-depleting substances, asbestos, or persistent organic
       pollutants (POPs), in violation of South African regulations or multilateral
       environmental agreements.

   •   Projects that are situated in or have a negative impact on legally protected areas,
       critical habitats, or indigenous lands, unless consent and mitigation measures are
       clearly documented and disclosed.

   •   The construction of large-scale infrastructure that poses significant environmental or
       social risks is prohibited unless such projects are in accordance with international best
       practices and subject to complete public consultation and disclosure.

   •   Projects that are primarily intended for military or paramilitary purposes, or that involve
       the manufacturing or sale of weapons, ammunition, or military infrastructure.

   •   Projects that fail to satisfy the applicable environmental impact assessment (EIA)
       requirements, water use licenses, air quality permits, or any other environmental
       regulatory approvals mandated by South African law.

   •   Any activity that is likely to cause reputational injury to CGV or its development
       partners, including those that are linked to unresolved community conflict, corruption
       or legacy environmental damage.

GOVERNANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION

A dual structure will be used to anchor the governance and implementation of the ESMS. This
structure will assure the institutional independence of the CGV while also maintaining
appropriate government oversight through the National Treasury.

   1. Oversight by the National Treasury through the Project Implementation Unit

A Project Implementation Unit (“PIU”) will be established under the National Treasury's
authority to serve as an oversight and coordination entity. During the CGV's design, early
operationalization, and implementation periods, the PIU will function as the institutional
interface between the CGV and the World Bank Group. Among its obligations will be:




                                                8


                                                                                              Official Use Only
   •   Ensure that the ESMS and associated procedures of the CGV comply with the IFC
       Performance Standards, World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety
       Guidelines and Equator Principles.

   •   Assisting the CGV in the establishment of fundamental ESG systems, the staffing of
       the ESG function, and the integration of safeguards into credit guarantee processes.

   •   The CGV's adherence to critical policy commitments associated with the World Bank's
       Investment Project Financing (IPF) and any corresponding legal agreements that is
       being monitored.

The PIU will not be involved in the day-to-day operations of the CGV; however, it will provide
strategic guidance, support institutional learning, and ensure accountability to both the
Government of South Africa and its development partners. The National Treasury will
maintain oversight of CGV’s adherence to the ESMS throughout the operational phase of
the CGV. An Implementation Agreement will be established to formalize and regulate the
interaction between the CGV and the National Treasury’s PIU, clearly defining roles,
responsibilities, and coordination mechanisms essential for fulfilling the obligations and
achieving the objectives of the ESMS.

   2. Institutional Governance at CGV

The Board of Directors of the CGV will be comprised of independent members and
shareholder-nominated directors, with representatives from development finance institutions
(DFIs). The Board will:

   •   Endorse the ESMS Policy and supervise the comprehensive sustainability and risk
       management strategy of CGV.

   •   Ensure that the performance of ESG is in accordance with the expectations of
       shareholders and regulators by receiving regular reports.

The Board's dedicated Risk and Audit Committee will evaluate ESG risks, compliance reports,
and mitigation measures, with a particular emphasis on high-risk infrastructure initiatives.

   3. ESG Implementation and Executive Management

The day-to-day implementation of the ESMS will be the responsibility of the CGV Senior
Management team, under the leadership of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or an equivalent
senior executive. The screening, due diligence, monitoring, and stakeholder engagement
processes necessary for sub-projects to comply with ESG standards will be overseen by a
designated Environmental and Social Officer (ESO) or team. The CEO will receive direct
reports from the ESO, who will also provide the Board's Risk and Audit Committee with regular
updates.




                                              9


                                                                                          Official Use Only
   4. Continuous Improvement and Feedback

In order to maintain accountability and promote best practices, CGV will periodically engage
independent evaluators to evaluate the efficacy of its ESMS. Updates to institutional capacity-
building initiatives and ESG procedures will be informed by external evaluation and feedback
from the National Treasury PIU, and project stakeholders.


STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES

The CGV is to implement the best ESG international practice appropriate for the nature of its
investments. This includes standards and guidelines as follows:

   •   Applicable country(s) ESG related legislation (National Environmental Management
       Act No. 107 of 1998, National Water Act No. 36 of 1998, Carbon Tax Act No. 15 of
       2019, Labour Relations Act No. 66 of 1995, Broad-Based Black Economic
       Empowerment Act No. 53 of 2003 to name a few).

   •   IFC Performance Standards, World Bank Environmental and Social Standards.

   •   World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines.

   •   ESG standards and requirements by other development partners.

   •   King IV Code for Corporate Governance.

CONCLUSION

The ESMS is a critical component of the CGV's institutional framework, ensuring that the
vehicle not only mobilizes private capital investments, but also contributes to the responsible
and sustainable development of infrastructure in South Africa. By means of this policy, the
CGV validates its commitment to environmental protection, social inclusion, and compliance
with both national regulations and international best practices, such as the IFC Performance
Standards, World Bank Environmental and Social Standards, and World Bank Group
Environmental, Health and Safety guidelines

The ESMS will function as a practical instrument for risk management, stakeholder
engagement, and continuous performance development as the CGV prepares to
operationalize its guarantee products. In order to guarantee that the ESMS remains adaptive,
impactful, and fit-for-purpose, the CGV will conduct regular reviews and enhancements in
collaboration with the National Treasury, development partners, and affected stakeholders.

The CGV endeavors to establish trust, attract long-term investment, and make a significant
contribution to South Africa's development and just transition objectives by incorporating
environmental and social sustainability into its governance and operations from the inception.




                                              10


                                                                                           Official Use Only
