                               CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




Public Disclosure Authorized     DRAFT (TO BE REVIEWED AND REVISED AS NEEDED BY DBSA)
                                                   DECEMBER 10, 2025




                                               STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                     Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure Project
                                                              (CGV Project)
                                      under Phase I of the Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable
                                          Infrastructure Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach




                                                                       (P508930)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                              Republic of South Africa




                                             DEVELOPMENT BANK OF SOUTHERN AFRICA
                                             as mandated by the Department of National Treasury




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                          1


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
  CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


  TABLE OF CONTENTS


1.  Introduction and Project Background ....................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
1.1 Implementation Arrangements of Phase I of the MPA and E&S Responsibilities . 7
1.2 Purpose and Objectives of SEP .................................................................................... 8
2   Regulations and Requirements ..................................................................................... 9
2.1 Applicable National Law and Regulations of South Africa ....................................... 9
2.2 World Bank Group (WBG) Requirements for Stakeholder Engagement .............. 11
3   Summary of Previous Stakeholder Engagement Activities ..................................... 12
4   Stakeholder Identification and Analysis .................................................................... 12
4.1 CGV Project Stakeholders........................................................................................... 12
4.2 Other CGV Interested Parties ..................................................................................... 16
4.3 Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups Impacted by CGV ................... 16
4.4 Summary of CGV Stakeholder Interest in and Influence over the CGV Project .. 17
5   Stakeholder Engagement Program ............................................................................ 18
5.1 Planned Stakeholder Engagement Activities ............................................................. 18
5.2 Details on Engagement Methods to be Used .............................................................. 20
5.2.1
    Meetings......................................................................................................................... 20
5.2.2
    Communication Materials ........................................................................................... 21
5.2.3
    Information Desks ........................................................................................................ 21
5.2.4
    Implementation of Grievance Redress Mechanism................................................... 21
5.2.5
    Capacity Building Trainings and Workshops ........................................................... 22
5.3 Proposed Strategy to Include Views of and Encourage Participation by Vulnerable
    Groups ........................................................................................................................... 22
5.4 Information Disclosure ................................................................................................ 22
6.  Roles and Responsibilities for Stakeholder Engagement ......................................... 23
6.1 Implementation Arrangements ................................................................................... 23
6.2 Timeframe ..................................................................................................................... 23
6.3 Roles and Responsibilities ............................................................................................ 23
6.4 Budget for SEP Implementation ................................................................................. 24
7   Grievance Redress Mechanism (PS1-External Communications Mechanism)...... 25
7.1 DBSA’s Existing Grievance Redress Mechanism ..................................................... 25
7.2 Grievance Logs ............................................................................................................. 26
7.3 Monitoring and Reporting on Grievances ................................................................. 27
7.5 Central Point of Contact – PIU ................................................................................... 27
7.6 World Bank Grievance Redress System..................................................................... 27
8   Minotiring and Reporting ........................................................................................... 27
8.1 Monitoring Reports in the Course of the Project ...................................................... 27
8.2 Reporting Back to Stakeholder Groups ..................................................................... 27
ANNEX 01: Preliminary ESMS Policy (October 2, 2025). ......................................................
ANNEX 02: Minutes of November 7, 2025 Consultations ...... Error! Bookmark not defined.




                                                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)



ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

 AP             Affected Person
 CBOs           Community Based Organizations
 CGV            Credit Guarantee Vehicle
 EHS            Environment, Health and Safety
 E&S            Environment and Social
 ESCP           Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
 ESF            Environmental and Social Framework
 ESMF           Environmental and Social Management Framework
 ESMP           Environmental and Social Management Plan
 ESP            Environmental and Social Policy
 ESS            Environmental and Social Standard
 FGD            Focused Group Discussion
 FPP            Focal Point Person
 GBV            Gender Based Violence
 GSA            Government of South Africa
 GRC            Grievance Redress Committees
 GRM            Grievance Redress Mechanism
 GRS            Grievance Redress Service
 IBRD           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
 IFC            International Finance Corporation
 LMP            Labor Management Procedures
 MDB            Multilateral Development Banks
 MoF            Ministry of Finance
 NEDLAC         National Economic Development & Labour Council
 NGO            Non-Government Organization
 NT             National Treasury
 OIP            Other Interested Parties
 PAP            Project-Affected Party
 PAP            Project Affected Person
 PIU            Project Implementation Unit
 SARB           South African Reserve Bank
 SEP            Stakeholder Engagement Plan
 SIA            Social Impact Assessment
 ToR            Terms of Reference
 WB             World Bank
 WBGRS          World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service




                                                                           3


                                                                        Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


1      INTRODUCTION AND PROJECT DESCRIPTION OF CGV PIU

South Africa (SA) has ambitious development goals but faces significant economic and social
challenges, worsened by climate change. The economy grew by about 1% per year over the
past decade, much lower than the 4.1% average growth of middle-income countries in 2024.
The country remains highly unequal due to entrenched legacies from apartheid, with high levels
of poverty and unemployment. In 2024, the poverty rate was about 63 %, with 37.9 % being
women, and the unemployment rate stood at 32.1% in Q3, with many job seekers unemployed
for over a year.

A threat to economic growth and development is the poor state of infrastructure which is facing
dual challenges. The first is about deteriorating performance, the second is about declining
investment. This is leading to a state of crisis in the electricity, transport, and water sectors.
The infrastructure crisis magnifies income inequality, by disproportionately affecting
vulnerable households and small firms who do not have the means to develop alternatives
sources such as off grid electricity solutions and road transport. Climate change is making the
aging infrastructure even more vulnerable.

Substantial Investment in infrastructure is also critical for SA’s competitiveness. Infrastructure
has forward linkages to green industries and backward linkages to renewable energy equipment
manufacturing and critical minerals, crucial for a just energy transition and maintaining
industrial competitiveness and jobs. The context of a potential ‘trade disruption’ with the
United States and the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) of the EU1 pose
additional challenges.

National Treasury has also focused on complementary policy efforts to encourage more
participation of the domestic financial sector, particularly aimed at institutional investors. For
example, the regulators have amended “Regulation 28”, enabling up to 45% of domestic
institutional investor assets to be invested in infrastructure. National Treasury is also giving
due consideration of tax incentives to new potential infrastructure investment vehicles for
institutional investors (infrastructure debt funds, infrastructure Real Estate Investment Trust).
To effectively increase availability of infrastructure finance, these efforts need to be
accompanied by de-risking instruments, such as a Credit Guarantee Vehicle, whilst the benefits
of reforms in the target real economy sectors materialize.

The World Bank aims to support a Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) operation
which consists of the following phases. The focus of this particular Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP) will be on the first Phase of the MPA, primarily aimed at establishing and
capitalization of the CGV.

The MPA Program Framework consists of 4 phases, implemented over a 10-year period.


    Phase 1 (FY27): Establish and Capitalize the CGV. The immediate focus is to create de-
    risking capacity and send a credible market signal for a pathway to private capital
    mobilization (PCM). The establishment of the CGV will follow a one-WBG approach.
    IBRD – in this phase - will deploy $350 million Investment Project Financing (IPF)


                                                                                                4


                                                                                             Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


   operation to the National Treasury (NT) as junior equity. This will support the launch of
   the CGV, which requires a total initial capital base of $500 million to mobilize up to $2
   billion in private infrastructure investment across eligible sectors, and initial scaling of the
   CGV after its launch. The exact amount of capital used for the CGV’s start-up will depend
   on the confirmed capital participation of development partners; their commitments will
   determine how much of the $500 million is contributed at inception. The remainer will be
   used for initial scaling of the CGV. A dedicated pipeline development window will be
   embedded within the CGV design to accelerate early-stage project readiness, improve
   bankability, and standardize risk assessment frameworks for initial transactions. IFC has
   tier 3 project committee clearance for senior equity participation of US$100 million and
   started its due diligence. MIGA is expected to receive early screening clearance in
   December 2025 for US$200 million risk transfer capacity to further protect the CGV.
   Phase 2 (FY28): Strengthen the BFI and Expand the Pipeline. Building on the
   foundation of Phase 1 and in parallel implementation of upstream reforms (e.g. PPP
   framework and IFISA), the program will improve project quality and ensure a scalable
   pipeline of bankable assets suitable for CGV-backed transactions. A US$250 million
   Program-for-Results (PforR) or Investment Project Finance (IPF) will support the
   transformation of the BFI into a more effective and scalable Viability Gap Fund (VGF),
   with clear mandate, governance, and allocation rules. The project design has yet to be
   developed. Concurrently, the operation will scale up and standardize project preparation
   practices across priority sectors, strengthening appraisal methodologies, procurement
   readiness, and environmental and social due diligence, thereby reducing time-to-close and
   increasing investor confidence.
   Phase 3 (FY29): CGV Capital Increase and Partner Mobilization. To further scale the
   de-risking capacity and accommodate larger, more complex transactions, the program will
   provide an additional US$150 million to NT for a follow-on capital injection into the CGV,
   contingent on satisfactory performance and governance outcomes. In parallel, the program
   will mobilize development finance institutions (DFIs) and climate funds to broaden the
   capital base and diversify risk-sharing, targeting a cumulative ~US$10 billion project
   pipeline. This phase will also focus on harmonizing guarantee products, pricing policies,
   and eligibility criteria, while expanding collaboration with commercial lenders and
   institutional investors to crowd in private capital at scale.
   Phase 4 (Post-FY30): Establish a Layered-Risk Co-Investment Vehicle. Subject to the
   CGV’s proof of concept, the maturity of the project pipeline, and prevailing market needs,
   a government-backed co-investment platform with risk-tiered capital structures will be
   launched with an initial US$250 million deployment. This layered-risk vehicle is designed
   to complement CGV and VGF instruments by providing equity and quasi-equity for
   strategic, higher-risk, or large-scale infrastructure projects. The platform will be structured
   to crowd in domestic and global institutional investors by offering appropriate risk
   tranching and governance safeguards, thereby deepening local capital markets and
   supporting long-term financing for transformative infrastructure.


The Project Development Objective of Phase I is to establish a Credit Guarantee Vehicle
to mobilize private capital for investment in resilient infrastructure (hereinafter, CGV
Project).


                                                                                                 5


                                                                                              Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




The CGV Project has three components:

Component 1: CGV Capitalization (US$368 million, of which IBRD US$338 million and
CTF US$30 million). This component will fund the GSA equity participation via the NT in
the CGV in three tranches: (i) US$5 million start-up capital from the IBRD loan; (ii) US$91
million initial capitalization from the IBRD loan; and (iii) US$272 million scale up
capitalization from the IBRD loan and the CTF. The initial CGV’s capital structure is set at
US$500 million and will be as follows: (a) tier of junior capital (first loss) for up to 40% of
the total capital of the CGV (US$ 200 million), (b) tier of senior capital for up to 30% of the
total (up to US$ 150 million), and (c) tier of callable capital for up to 30% (up to US$ 150
million). The IBRD-loan will be used for GSA’s equity participation in the CGV and will
cover the junior capital tier (first loss). The remaining part of the initial capital is expected to
be subscribed by domestic, regional, and international development financial institutions
(DFIs), specialized development funds, and philanthropic funds. The US$5 million start-up
cost of the CGV allows for the operationalization of the CGV and project preparation. The
operationalization includes hiring and developing a professional management team,
developing a business plan, governance structure and operating model. Project pipeline
development includes final and legal due diligence part of the project preparation. The
proposed capital structure may be revised based on commitments from development partners
and project pipeline readiness.
Component 2: Project Pipeline Development (US$ 9.5 million from IBRD). This
component will finance the development of the project pipeline for the CGV. This includes
client engagement, preliminary risk assessment, (pre)feasibility studies, legal, financial and
operational structuring of projects. The Infrastructure Finance and Implementation Support
Agency (IFISA) will be the implementer of this component.
Component 3: Project Coordination and Implementation (US$2.5 million from IBRD).
The Project Coordination and Implementation will be carried out by the PIU that will be
established at DBSA as they have been mandated by the NT. The PIU will perform fiduciary,
safeguards and M&E functions throughout the life cycle of the project, and will provide
operational support to establish the CGV.


When established, the CGV will be a non-bank financial entity structured as a private
corporation, with the Government of South Africa (GSA) as a relevant but minority shareholder
(represented by the National Treasury), that will offer partial credit guarantees required to
mobilize private capital in support of infrastructure development in South Africa. The CGV
will be run on a commercially viable basis by independent professional management appointed
by its Board. The CGV will be incorporated as a non-life insurance company domiciled in SA
and in compliance with relevant domestic regulations from the Prudential Authorities and the
South African Reserve Bank. The CGV will incorporate, as part of its private sector type of
corporate governance, a sound and robust risk management practice.

The Project Implementation Unit (PIU), will be located at the Development Bank of
Southern Africa, will be responsible for overseeing all aspects of the setting up and
operationalizing the CGV project, from initial design to operational launch and ongoing
monitoring and evaluation and reporting.


                                                                                                  6


                                                                                               Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




The Director General of the National Treasury will formalise the PIU for a period of 60 months,
by means of an agreement between the National Treasury and the Development Bank of
Southern Africa subject to the availability and approval of funding. The PIU is tasked with the
design, development, launch of a CGV to the South African Government’s Strategic
infrastructure investment priorities.

This document applies to the PIU and must be implemented by the PIU. The Stakeholder
Engagement Plan (SEP) will benefit the PIU and ultimately the CGV and other organizations
by building trust, managing risks, and improving decision-making through clear
communication and by aligning expectations. Key benefits include preventing delays,
increasing PIU implementation success, fostering innovation, and building stronger
relationships and reputation.


1.1    Implementation Arrangements of Phase I of the MPA and E&S Responsibilities
The implementation arrangements are expected to consist of three levels:
(i) Project Implementation Unit (PIU)/IFISA; (ii) the CGV; and (iii) the Special Purpose
Vehicles (SPVs) which is referring to the subprojects that will be guaranteed by the CGV. See
figure below for the hierarchy of implementing arrangements.
Table Hierarchy of implementing arrangements
 Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
 PIU sits at DBSA and will perform fiduciary, safeguards, and M&E functions throughout
 the project

  Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV)
  GCV will be managed by a professional management team

  Special Purpose vehicles (SPVs)
  SPVs (sub-projects) will be receiver of guarantees of CGV



The PIU is expected to be established within the DBSA, overseen by NT. The NT
mandated the DBSA to act as an agent of NT and establish the PIU. The PIU will perform
fiduciary, environmental and social risk management and M&E functions throughout the life
cycle of the project, and will provide operational support to establish the CGV, including the
licensing process and operationalization of the CGV. The PIU will consist of, among others,
project coordinator, financial management specialist, procurement specialist, monitoring and
evaluation specialist, legal specialist, environmental, health and safety and social specialists
and technical specialist. To guide its operations, the PIU will develop a Project Operations
Manual (POM). The first draft of the POM is already prepared and will be completed and
approved prior to the effectiveness of the Project.
The CGV will – in three phases - be established as a private, non-life insurance company
in South Africa, managed by an independent professional team. GSA will hold a minority
stake, with other initial shareholders including several development finance institutions, and
capitalization will occur through equity participation. The CGV Project will be established in
three phases. In the first phase, NT, with collaboration from DBSA, is expected to register the
                                                                                              7


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


 CGV with the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission (CIPC). In the second phase,
 NT, DBSA, IFC, MIGA and leading development partners will enter into Joint Development
 Agreement to establish an independent professional management team with adequate
 oversight that will prepare in the first quarter of 2026 for obtaining the necessary license from
 the SARB/PA (and other regulatory approvals) to operate as a non-life insurance company.
 This includes preparing a business plan, governance structure and operating model. In the
 third phase, the management team will work towards implementation of the CGV, where it is
 expected that the CGV will be fully operational and issuing guarantees by the second half of
 2026.
 The PIU environmental and social (E&S) specialists (one environment specialist and one
 social specialist) will be assigned from the existing resources within the DBSA, within the
 timeframe as set out in the Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP). The PIU E&S
 specialists will be responsible for overseeing the appointment and capacity building of the
 CGV environmental, social and health and safety specialists, as needed. The ESAP will
 require DBSA to further assess the capacity needs of the CGV, once established, and propose
 a capacity building plan. The PIU will further be responsible for facilitating the development
 of CGV Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) including operational
 policies and procedures inline with the IFC Performance Standards (PSs), World Bank Group
 Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (WBG EHSGs) and national requirements.
 DBSA has well developed environmental and social safeguards standards (ESSS) in line with
 the national legislation and IFC Performance Standards (PSs). The DBSA E&S capacity are
 considered adequate to implement complex projects inline with the IFC PSs.


1.2     Purpose and Objectives of SEP

This SEP will be implemented by DBSA, as mandated by NT, and will apply primarily to the
first and second phases of the CGV project as appropriate. The E&S responsibility of
downstream projects will sit with CGV and SPVs, and the requirements of stakeholder
engagement and external communication mechanisms that need to be part of downstream
projects will be reflected as part of the CGV’s Environmental and Social Management System
(ESMS). The initial draft ESMS Policy was prepared and disclosed by NT on October 2, 2025
(See Annex I). The overall objective of this SEP is to establish an overall program for
stakeholder engagement, including public information disclosure and consultation, throughout
the entire project cycle in line with PS1 principles:
● To establish a systematic approach to stakeholder engagement that will help the PIU and
     the CGV identify stakeholders and build and maintain a constructive relationship with
     them, in particular project-affected parties;
● To assess the level of stakeholder interest and support for the project and to enable
     stakeholders’ views to be taken into account in project design and implementation,
     including and environmental and social performance;
● To promote and provide means for effective and inclusive engagement with project-
     affected parties throughout the project life cycle on issues that could potentially affect them;
● To ensure that appropriate project information on environmental and social risks and
     impacts is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, transparent, understandable, accessible and
     appropriate manner and format for full stakeholder engagement in a timely manner;
● Meaningful consultations that will also early stage stakeholders of CGV Project to provide
     feedback on all aspects of the operation.

                                                                                                   8


                                                                                                Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




The SEP provides ways to identify potential different stakeholders, including disadvantaged
and vulnerable groups, to develop an approach for reaching each of the subgroups, to create a
mechanism by which Project Affected Parties (PAPs) and Other Interested Parties (OIPs) can
raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints, and to minimize and mitigate
environmental and social risks related to the proposed project including all subproject financed
directly and indirectly.

Overall, SEP serves the following purposes. Stakeholder identification and analysis;
(i) Planning how the engagement with stakeholders will take place;
(ii) Disclosure of information;
(iii) Consultation with stakeholders;
(iv) Addressing and responding to grievances; and
(v) Reporting to stakeholders.
The above will also include:
• Phase 1: Consultations on the scope, design, and policy structure of the CGV-- National
     Treasury, in close collaboration and participation of DBSA, will lead.
• Phase 2: Consultations on governance and operational structure of the CGV, project
     including the design of stakeholder engagement and GRM structures of the CGV entity the
     preparation of the ESMS, and project pipeline development which the PIU will lead. This
     phase will take place after the project approval.
• Phase 3: Consultations on specific projects under the CGV ESMS. As outlined above, the
     CGV ESMS will require on a project-by-project basis from both CGV and each project
     proponent (SPV) for project section, design, approval, implementation and grievance
     management.

The scope of this SEP will focus on Phases 1 and 2 and the CGV ESMS will focus on Phase 3.

2      REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS

2.1    Applicable National Law and Regulations of South Africa

In terms of the Republic of South Africa’s Bill of Rights, everyone has the right to access any
information held by the state. This is also emphasized in the Principles of Batho Pele.

The eight Batho Pele principles are Consultation, Service Standards, Access, Courtesy,
Information, Openness and Transparency, Redress, and Value for Money.

These South African guidelines, meaning "People First," serve as a framework for employers,
employees and citizens to deliver excellent service by prioritizing the public's needs, ensuring
accountability, and promoting ethical and efficient services.

Central to the provision of participatory democracy in South Africa is the South African
Constitution of 1996. Within the Constitution, public participation is considered a cornerstone
of democratic government with citizens (including the weak and unorganised) having a right
to participate in legislative processes.



                                                                                              9


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


In addition to the above, Section 15 of the South African Constitution makes the provision for
the freedom of religion, belief and opinion, whereby everybody has the right to freedom of
conscience, region, thought, belief and opinion. Thus, within the context of the SEP,
stakeholders are entitled under the Constitution to express their opinion in a free manner.

Crucially, Section 32 outlines the rights of individuals to access information held by the state
or another person that is required for the exercise or protection of any rights. Therefore,
stakeholders have the right to acquire information on the project should it restrict or impede
other rights as outlined in the Constitution.

The Protection of Personal Information Act 4 OF 2013 (POPIA) has been enacted to give effect
to the constitutional right to privacy by safeguarding personal information when processed by
the responsible party subject to justifiable limitations provided in the Act.
● The right to privacy includes the right to protection against the unlawful collection,
    retention, dissemination, and use of personal information.
● The PIU and CGV recognize the constitutional right to privacy of the stakeholders and
    hereby undertake to comply with the provisions of the Protection of Personal Information
    Act in the processing of personal information collected by means of attendance registers.
● The personal information must be collected directly from the stakeholders and the
    stakeholders must be informed about the reason for collecting personal information, the
    reason which will be the fulfilment of the department’s legitimate interest or public law
    duty.
● The stakeholders must be informed about consequences of failure to provide personal
    information.
● The registers used for the collection of personal information must reflect the Department’s
    letterhead and the end user details as a responsible party.
● The PIU and CGV must ensure integrity and confidentiality of personal information
    provided.

Although sections 59(1) (a) and 72(1) (a) of the South Africa Constitution refer to ‘facilitation
of involvement’, within the South African context it seems to be generally accepted that
“involvement” and “participation” are used interchangeably.

There may be several and different definitions of public participation, but central to the
definitions is the acknowledgement that institutions with decision-making powers must involve
in the decision-making process those who are likely affected by such decisions. The
International Association for Public Participation defines public participation as “to involve
those who are affected by a decision in the decision-making process. It promotes sustainable
decisions by providing participants with information they need to be involved in a meaningful
way, and it communicates to their participants how their input affects the decision.

Some of the practices include involvement in public meetings, surveys, workshops, polling,
citizen advisory committees and other forms of direct involvement with the public.
Furthermore, public participation includes all aspects of identifying problems and
opportunities, developing alternatives and making decisions. It uses tools and techniques that
are common to a number of dispute resolution and communication fields.”



                                                                                              10


                                                                                            Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


The National Policy Framework for Public Participation 2007 defines public participation as
“an open, accountable process through which individuals and groups within selected
communities can exchange views and influence decision-making.

Further, as a democratic process of engaging people, deciding, planning, and playing an active
part in the development and operation of services that affect their lives.” In simple terms, public
participation/stakeholder engagement may be defined as a process by which organizations such
as the PIU and CGV consult with the people (interested or affected individuals), groups,
communities, organizations, and civil society (e.g. NEDLAC) and government entities before
making decisions to enable them to participate in the processes leading to that decision. Public
participation is a two-way communication process with the goal of reaching better and more
acceptable decisions.

2.2    World Bank Group (WBG) Requirements for Stakeholder Engagement

In terms of scope of stakeholder engagement, this SEP primarily applies to the first two phases
of the CGV project. The World Bank will enter into an Environmental and Social Actions Plans
with CGV when the latter is established, and said ESAP will include necessary requirements
for stakeholder engagement for CGV shareholders, including establishment of ESMS that will
need to have stakeholder engagement aspects and GRM in place in the context of each
downstream investments that will be implemented by SPVs.

WBG maintains that stakeholder engagement is an inclusive process conducted throughout the
project life cycle to support the development of strong, constructive, and responsive
relationships that are important for successful management of a project’s environmental and
social risks.

In the context of IFC’s E&S Performance Standards, PS1 provides that effective stakeholder
engagement can significantly improve the environmental and social sustainability of projects,
enhance project acceptance, and make a significant contribution to successful project design
and implementation.

Stakeholder engagement under PS1 is built on transparency and inclusiveness throughout the
project life cycle. Information disclosure is a cornerstone: project sponsors must provide
timely, relevant, and understandable information about the project’s purpose, scale, potential
environmental and social risks, and proposed mitigation measures. Disclosure should occur
early enough to allow stakeholders to understand impacts and participate meaningfully, using
formats and languages that are accessible and culturally appropriate. This ensures that affected
communities and other interested parties can make informed decisions and contribute to project
design.

Consultation under PS1 goes beyond one-way communication; it requires a structured, two-
way dialogue that is free from coercion or intimidation. Sponsors must engage stakeholders in
a manner that respects local customs and social dynamics, enabling them to express concerns,
ask questions, and provide feedback. These consultations should be iterative, starting at the
planning stage and continuing through implementation and monitoring. The process must


                                                                                                11


                                                                                              Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


demonstrate responsiveness by documenting stakeholder inputs and showing how they
influence project decisions, thereby fostering trust and accountability.

Finally, PS1 requires an effective grievance mechanism to address complaints and external
concerns promptly and fairly. This mechanism should be accessible to all affected parties,
including vulnerable groups, and allow for confidential or anonymous submissions without
fear of retaliation. It must be transparent, predictable, and culturally appropriate, with clear
procedures for receiving, assessing, and resolving grievances. The goal is to provide a channel
for resolving issues before they escalate, reinforcing the project’s commitment to
accountability and continuous improvement.


3      SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

For the purposes of Phase 1 and 1 of the CGV Project, a consultation event was held on 7
November 2025. The Minutes are attached in Annex 2. Consultations were held prior to formal
Appraisal stage of the CGV project.

For Phase 3 of the CGV project, each specific CGV guaranteed infrastructure project team will
design an outreach strategy and external communications mechanism in line with PS1
requirements. Each outreach strategy will have the appropriate resources, personnel, budget,
and accountability. Representative groups and focus groups will be involved in designing the
outreach strategy, especially for traditional and indigenous communities in which the specific
infrastructure project is located. The ToRs for CGV’s ESMS will have necessary requirements
on ensuring that downstream stakeholder engagement activities are implemented and
monitored in line with PS1 and South Africa’s national laws.


4      STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS
4.1    CGV Project Stakeholders

International best practices provide the definition of “stakeholder” that refers to individuals or
groups who: (a) are affected or likely to be affected by the project (project-affected parties);
and (b) may have an interest in the project (other interested parties.

Project-Affected Parties (PAPs) are those that are affected or likely to be affected by the project
and because of their particular circumstances, may be disadvantaged or vulnerable. This group
are likely to be adversely affected by the project impacts and/or more limited than others in
their ability to take advantage of a project’s benefits. This group of stakeholder will need to be
further identified and analyzed at downstream project level, when CGV and SPVs are in place.
For the purposes of first two phases of CGV Project, the Project-Affected Parties and Interested
stakeholders are shown in the Table below.

 Table 1: Direct Stakeholders of Phase 1 and 2 of the CGV Project

 Stakeholder Major Group                      Project Stakeholder
 The Presidency                               Office of the President and Cabinet of Ministers

                                                                                                12


                                                                                              Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


 Ministry of Finance                        Office of the Minister
                                            Office of the Deputy Minister
                                            Office of the Director General
                                            Assets & Liability Division
 National Treasury                          Public Finance Division
                                            Budget Office
                                            Communication Chief Directorate
 South African Reserve Bank                 Prudential Authority
                                            Financial Sector Conduct Authority
 Ministry of Electricity and Energy         Office of the Minister
                                            Office of the Director General
 Department of Electricity and Energy       Electricity and Energy Policy Division
                                            Electricity and Energy Regulation Division
                                            Grid Code Determination
 National Energy Regulator of South
                                     National Grid Tariff Determination
 Africa (NERSA)
 CGV Capital Raising                 National Treasury
                                     Development Partners (MFIs, DFIs)
                                     Additional Shareholders
 Electricity Transmission            National Grid Independent Transmission Projects
                                     National Transmission Company of South Africa
                                     (NTCSA)
                                     Eskom SoC
 Development Bank of Southern Africa Project Implementation Unit
 Development Partners                Capital Contributions to CGV
                                     Department of Water & Sanitation, Department
 Sector Departments Implementing of Transport, Department of Cooperative
 Infrastructure                      Government        &      Traditional    Affairs
                                     (Municipalities)

Component 2 will finance the development of the CGV project pipeline development for the
CGV. This includes client engagement, preliminary risk assessment, (pre)feasibility studies,
legal, financial and operational structuring of projects. The Project-Affected Parties are shown
in the Table below:

 Stakeholder Major Group                    Project Site Stakeholder
                                            Development Partners & Capital Contributors to
 Shareholders
                                            CGV
                                            Legal & Governance Specialists
                                            Engineering Specialists
                                            Environmental Specialists
                                            Climate Change Specialists
 Advisory                                   Social Impact Specialists
                                            Project Finance and Structuring Specialists
                                            Financial Modelling Specialists
                                            Cost Benefit Analysis Specialists
                                            Financial Sector Specialists (Investment Banks)

                                                                                             13


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


 Stakeholder Major Group                    Project Site Stakeholder
                                            Development Partners & Capital Contributors to
 Shareholders
                                            CGV
                                            Land Acquisition Specialists
                                            Project Management Specialists
                                            Regulatory Economists
                                            Information Technology Specialists
                                            Contract Management Specialists



Component 3, the PIU within DBSA will perform fiduciary, safeguards and M&E functions
throughout the life cycle of the project, and will provide operational support to establish the
CGV. The output of the TA will be to successfully design, develop, and launch a fully
operational PIU in the DBSA and CGV. This includes:
● Coordination with Shareholders: The PIU is a coordinating mechanism with the
    development partners and other shareholders of the CGV in terms of the operational
    requirements and the governance structure. In addition, the PIU will focus on some CGV
    operationalization elements that will be finalized with the CGV development partners and
    other shareholders.
● Shareholders Engagement (i,e. Development Partners): The PIU with the support of the
    Steering Committee and National Treasury will continue the engagement with the CGV
    development partners and shareholders in terms of reporting to the development partners
    and other shareholders.
● Integration with CGV: Some of the operational responsibilities are likely to be at the
    project level (i.e CGV level) for example the Joint Development Agreement (JDA), the
    PIU should coordinate the integration of the JDA with possible development partners.
● Compliance: The PIU should ensure CGV’s compliance with requirements to maintain the
    Prudential Authority license through the operating life of the CGV.
● Design and Legal Framework: Developing a robust and viable business plan (and model),
    legal structure, Prudential Authority licensing and governance framework (with a Board of
    Directors and key governance committees) for the CGV.
● Operational Setup of CGV: Establishing the necessary operational and administrative
    processes and procedures, including risk management, IT infrastructure, and human
    resources.
● Stakeholder Engagement of CGV: Securing buy-in and collaboration from key
    stakeholders, including government bodies (e.g. regulators, municipal governments that
    might have to issue permits and confirm land use changes etc) financial institutions, and
    international development partners.
● Development of Stakeholder Engagement Standards for CGV. IFC Performance
    Standards (PS) for undertaking stakeholder engagement must be considered for the CGV
    Company.
● Launch and Monitoring of CGV: Overseeing the successful launch of the CGV and
    establishing initial monitoring and evaluation mechanisms and risk management systems..
● Communications: Communications of strategy, and other core issues through roadshows.
    Key stakeholder for these outputs are:




                                                                                            14


                                                                                          Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




 Stakeholder Major Group                    Project Site Stakeholder
 Regulators                                 Financial Conduct Authority
                                            Prudential Authority
 National Treasury                          CGV Steering Committee
                                            Chief Financial Officer
                                            Assets & Liability Division – National Treasury
                                            Shareholder Representative & ESAP Reporting
                                            CGV – Operational Support to Establish the CGV
                                            Monitoring      &     Evaluation for Capital
 Shareholders
                                            Contributors to CGV
                                            • Civil society and labor are categorized as PAPs
                                              and a process will be undertaken on a project-
                                              by project basis to ensure adequate
                                              representation of key sectors and vulnerable
 Civil Society
                                              groups.
                                            • The engagement program with these groups
                                              will robust and frequent as infrastructure
                                              projects are implemented




                                                                                           15


                                                                                         Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




4.2    Other CGV Interested Parties

Other Interested Parties (OIPs) are those who may have an interest in the project and would
have different concerns and priorities about project impacts, mitigation mechanisms and
benefits, and who may require different, or separate, forms of engagement.

Generally, these are people, social groups and organizations who may have a possibility to
influence and make decisions on implementation of the project and/or may have an interest in
the Project. This group includes governmental entities, NGOs and private businesses, who may
benefit from the project.

 Table 2: Other Interested Parties for CGV Project

 Stakeholder Major Group               Project Stakeholder
 Ministries and Government State Owned
                                       Ministry of Trade, Industry and Competition
 Company (SoC)
                                       Eskom SoC
                                       Ministry of Forestry, Fisheries and the
                                       Environment (DFFE)
                                       Ministry of Small Business
                                       Minister of Employment and Labour
 Civil Society Organizations           Local NGOs, Trade Unions; Foundations;
                                       Social Enterprises; Cooperatives and Credit
                                       Unions. Community Leaders (formal and/or
                                       informal)
 Project Developers                    Other      Project      Developers     and
                                       Implementation Agencies


4.3    Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups Impacted by CGV

Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals and groups are those who may not have the voice and
agency to express their concerns or understand the impacts of project, and can thus be excluded
from stakeholder engagement or project benefits.

Vulnerable groups under this project may include persons with disabilities, large families with
more than five dependent children below 15 years (legal employable age with some
limitations), youth, women and women-headed households, households registered as poor,
elderly households with no means of livelihood (or not earning) and households with disabled
members, as well as internally displaced persons).

The project will incorporate differentiated measures to ensure that these groups receive project
related information, are consulted with, and have the means to participate and express their
views and concerns on the project.

Issues and concerns expressed by vulnerable and disadvantaged groups will be included in the
next iteration of the SEP. These groups will need to be further identified and consulted with,

                                                                                             16


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


in line with PS1 requirements, at the downstream guarantee projects level as part of the ESMS
requirements of CGV and SPVs’s E&S responsibilities.

4.4    Summary of CGV Stakeholder Interest in and Influence over the CGV Project

Based on current information, the stakeholders’ interest and project impacts were identified in
order to better comprehend their situation and manage them appropriately.

Consultations and discussions will be undertaken in project affected areas commencing such
engagement as early as possible in the project development process and in a timeframe that
enables meaningful consultations with stakeholders on project design.

In the public consultation, significant stakeholders were consulted and discussed with to gain
their views and notions about the CGV company and its objectives. The potential significant
stakeholders with their interest and influence on the project are presented below.

 Table 3: Stakeholders with Interest and Influence on the Project

                             Ability or Likelihood to Influence or Impact the Project

                             High                  Medium                  Low
  Level                      Political
  of                         Economy
  Interes                    Ministry         of
  t in the                   Energy           & NERSA
  Project                    Electricity         NCTSA
                High                                                  Advisory PAPs
                             Ministry         of Technical Assistance
                             Finance             ESKOM (SoC)
                             SARB
                             Shareholders

                Engage       Semi-annual           Semi-annual special
                ment         special meetings      meetings

                Mediu        NEDLAC                Other Civil Society Service Providers
                m            Labour Unions         Organizations

                Engage       Public meetings – Pubic meeting – semi Semi-annual                special
                ment         semi annual       annual               meetings

As and when required materials, (such as project description, duration, and job opportunities)
will be presented in local languages where the project is being implemented. In addition,
information desks will be used as a communication tool and the specific project will include
regional coverage and dissemination information. The GRM process in Section 7 will be
tailored for the stakeholder engagement process.
Suggestion boxes will also be available regionally at participating infrastructure project entities
offices. The project offices will have representative for stakeholder organizations and
community gathering places will be identified (as communities that are identified and can be
as affected by the specific project).


                                                                                                17


                                                                                              Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




5      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM

5.1    Planned Stakeholder Engagement Activities

The table below presents the stakeholder engagement activities envisaged under the project.




                                                                                          18


                                                                                        Official Use Only
          CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


           Table: Planned Stakeholder Engagement Activities

Project    Target                  Topic(s)         of      Method(s) Used Location/             Responsibilitie
Stage      Stakeholders            Engagement                                 Frequency          s
           Ministry        of      Assistance       in      Separate          Project launch     PIU
           Finance,                gathering  official      meetings,         meetings
           National                documents                trainings/works
           Treasury, South                                  hops,
           African Reserve                                  specifically to
           Bank, Ministry                                   inform on CGV
           of Energy and                                    and        gather
           Electricity,                                     response
           Department of           Regulatory               Meetings       to Quarterly          PIU
           Energy        and       Environment              present     CGV meetings        in
           Electricity,            documents                Project       and affected
Component
           National Energy                                  finalise          institutions;
1 – PIU
           Regulator       of                               regulations
Activities
           South       Africa      CGV project scope        Disclosures     - Survey of          PIU
           (NERSA), CGV            and rationale            Brochures,
           Capital Raising,                                 posters, flyers,
           National                                         website
           Transmission            Project         E&S      Information       Communicatio       PIU
           Company         of      Standards;               sharing     using n           with
           South       Africa                               presentations     stakeholders
           (NTCSA)                 Grievance                Grievance         Information        PIU
           DBSA                    mechanism process        mechanism         desks       with
                                                                              brochures/
                                                                              posters
                                   Assistance          in   Separate          Project launch     PIU & CGV
                                   gathering     official   meetings,         meetings
                                   documents                trainings/works
                                                            hops,
                                                            specifically to
                                                            inform on CGV
                                                            and        gather
                                                            response
                                   Regulatory               Meetings       to Quartely           PIU & CGV
                                   Environment              present     CGV meetings        in
                                   documents                Project       and affected
Component                                                   finalise          institutions
               Advisory
1                                                           regulations
                                   CGV project scope        Disclosures     - Survey        of   PIU & CGV
                                   and rationale            Brochures,        stakeholders
                                                            posters, flyers,
                                                            website
                                   Project         E&S      Information       Communicatio       PIU & CGV
                                   Standards;               sharing     using n           with
                                                            presentations     stakeholders
                                   Grievance                Grievance         Information        PIU & CGV
                                   mechanism process        mechanism PAP desks           with
                                                            survey            brochures/

                                                                                                        19


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
         CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


                                                                              posters      in
                                                                              affected
                                                                              stakeholde
               Interested Parties Assistance         in Separate              Project launch PIU & CGV
               (External)         gathering    official meetings,             meetings
                                  documents             trainings/works
                                                        hops,
                                                        specifically to
                                                        inform on CGV
                                                        and        gather
                                                        response
               Organised          Assistance         in Separate              Project launch PIU & CGV
               Labour & NGOs      gathering    official meetings,             meetings
                                  documents             trainings/works
                                                        hops,
                                                        specifically to
                                                        inform on CGV
                                                        and        gather
Other                                                   response
Interested     Business           Assistance         in Separate              Project launch PIU & CGV
Parties        Organizations      gathering    official meetings,             meetings
                                  documents             trainings/works
                                                        hops,
                                                        specifically to
                                                        inform on CGV
                                                        and        gather
                                                        response
               National           Assistance         in Separate              Project launch PIU & CGV
               Government         gathering    official meetings,             meetings
               Ministries         documents (ongoing trainings/works
                                  work           since hops,
                                  government            specifically to
                                  regulations      and inform on CGV
                                  requirements     and and         gather
                                  strategies   change response
                                  over time)


         5.2    Details on Engagement Methods to be Used

         In conformance with PS1, stakeholder engagement will be in place throughout the entire
         project implementation through a number of possible methods.

         5.2.1 Meetings

         At the time of disclosure of relevant project documentations and this SEP, PIU and/or CGV
         will arrange for a project briefing meeting on a national level, involving the stakeholder
         agencies. As the need arises, the briefing meeting can be done once at the start and another can
         be arranged if the need arises or if there will be major changes in the project.


                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


PIU and/or the CGV will facilitate meetings with stakeholders and OIPs. These meetings will
be unrestricted but may prioritize on those certain groups and in which the general public can
raise concerns and provide comments.

Depending on the level of interest on the CGV separate meeting for organized business,
organized labour, and stakeholders in key sectors for a more focused discussion, including with
potentially vulnerable groups. These, meetings can be scheduled on a semiannual basis.

5.2.2 Communication Materials

PIU and CGV information will be disclosed to the public via a variety of means of conveying
project information and updates via printed materials consisting of brochures, flyers, posters,
etc. The communication materials will be produced by the PIU and to be made available at the
DBSA’s Communications Team.

A “Public Relations Kit” will be designed specifically and be made available both in print and
online form. PIU will also update its website regularly (at least on a quarterly basis) with key
project updates and reports on the project’s performance both in English. The website can also
provide information regarding the grievance mechanism for the project.

5.2.3 Information Desks

During the initiation of the PIU, an “Information Desk” will be arranged with PIU to provide
information on stakeholder engagement activities, project interventions, contact details of the
Focal Point Person, etc. PIU and CGV brochures on various project related social and
environmental issues will be made available at these information desks

5.2.4 Implementation of Grievance Redress Mechanism

Specific for the CGV, a GRM (or External Communication Mechanism) pamphlet will be
developed to help local residents become familiar with the grievance redress channels and
procedures.

Locked suggestion boxes will be installed in the PIU office, and the PIU will maintain a
grievance register in order to capture and track grievances from submission to resolution and
communication with complainants. In addition, other channels will be set-up by the PIU for
people to log in project related grievances such as DBSA-PIU website, e-mails.

Grievances will be addressed as follows:
(i) PIU staff to initially record the grievance
(ii) Provision of contact data of PIU for grievances
(iii) The grievance redress book will contain records of all grievances and updated
(iv) Provision of summary in a semiannual or quarterly report.

In addition, citizen and stakeholders surveys will be conducted. Frequent and regular
community meetings and interactions will be held with PIU and CGV staff.



                                                                                             21


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


DBSA has an existing complaints handling mechanism, in line with key PS1 requirements.
Information on this mechanism is outlined below in Section 7.
5.2.5 Capacity Building Trainings and Workshops

Capacity Building Trainings and Workshops on a variety of topics and issues may be provided
to the PIU and issues covered will include sensitization to inclusion/exclusion, labor issues,
gender, etc.

Beneficiaries of Component 1 may be scheduled for some capacity building activities which
can also serve as part of SEP activities and IFC Performance Standards (PS) for undertaking
stakeholder engagement.

Technical skills training courses can be designed and offered to Component 1 participants, in
line with the activities they intend to carry out as part of the program. Other supplementary
topics may be determined in the course of the CGV implementation.


5.3   Proposed Strategy to Include Views of and Encourage Participation by Vulnerable
      Groups



To this end, the project will take special measures to ensure that disadvantaged and vulnerable
groups have equal opportunity to access information, provide feedback, or submit grievances.

Focus group discussions (FGD) tailored to the groups’ circumstances may also be envisaged
as appropriate and information will be provided in the language that can be understood by
them. Accordingly, people with restrictions on physical mobility (persons with disabilities, or
limited mobilities), who may be affected even indirectly should be provided facilitation to
voice out their opinions and their views appropriately considered.
As mentioned above, a detailed social analysis of Vulnerable and Disadvantaged Groups will
need to be carried out as part of CGV’s issuance of guarantee processes, and necessary
requirements and procedures will be put in place through CGV ESMS to ensure this.

5.4    Information Disclosure

The DBSA PIU website will be used to disclose project documents, including those on social
performance in English.

All future project CGV related infrastructure projects will have to prepare and submit to the
PIU regular social and environmental monitoring reports for the specific infrastructure projects.
These reports will be disclosed on the same PIU webpage, including project updates, an easy-
to-understand guide to the terminology used in the social and environmental reports or
documents, and all relevant information as also found in printed materials.

The details about the Project Grievance Resolution Mechanism will have a special with an
electronic grievance submission form will also be made available on the website. Contact
details of the Social Safeguard Specialist (the Focal Point Person in this case) and contact office


                                                                                                22


                                                                                              Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


particulars shall be made available on the website. The PIU website will be updated for PAPs
and other stakeholders.

6.    ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES              &    RESOURCES          FOR     STAKEHOLDER
      ENGAGEMENT

6.1    Implementation Arrangements

The project will be implemented by the PIU. An established Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
housed in the DBSA will be responsible for the day-to-day project management, including
environmental and social management and addressing potential environmental and social risks.
The PIU will be responsible for engaging with the stakeholders.

Once the CGV company is operating, an M&E specialist and E&Sspecialists (including social
specialist) will also join the PIU to ensure the regular monitoring of the project result
framework and adherence with WB’s ESS, including management of the SEP.

6.2    Timeframe

This project SEP will be regarded as a living document and needs to be updated and refined
throughout the lifecycle of the Project to incorporate and reflect any changes in the project.
Any changes in the focus and scope of the SEP will be communicated by the PIU and
subsequently by the CGV to stakeholders. The crucial project-cycle phases to be considered
when implementing SEP are.
• Design/Plan: The process of assuring that systems and components of the Project are
   designed, provided, and maintained to prescribed / agreed requirements in technical terms
   as well as WB ESSs;
• Implementation: The process and activities are realized as intended with all the
   requirements as per WB’s ESSs.

6.3    Roles and Responsibilities

For the implementation of the SEP, a PIU SEP Team will be comprised of PIU social safeguard
specialist as an overall safeguard manager and actively supported by SE staff. The Social
Safeguard Specialist shall take responsibility for and lead all aspects of the stakeholder
engagement.

The PIU SEP Team will include Social Specialists, Communication Specialists, Community
Liaison Officers, and Environmental Specialists, who will work to build trust and manage
risks.

However, to implement the various activities envisaged in the SEP, the Communications and
Community Coordinator/s (possibly two (2) staff) will need to closely coordinate with other
key stakeholders. The roles and responsibilities of these actors/stakeholders are summarized in
the Table below.

 Table 4: Responsibilities of Key Actors/Stakeholders in SEP Implementation

                                                                                            23


                                                                                          Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




 Actor                          Stakeholder Responsibilities
 Role for PIU project management to oversee the SEP and with authority to adjust the project
 stakeholder engagement to respond to stakeholders’ concerns if they should arise
 PIU - Lead: Social Specialist Project Level:
                                ● Planning and implementation of the SEP;
                                ● Leading stakeholder engagement activities;
                                ● Management and resolution of grievances;
                                ● Ensure proper recording and tracking of logged
                                   grievances;
                                ● Coordination/supervision of contractors on SEP activities;
                                ● Monitoring of and reporting on social performance to
                                   GSA and the World Bank.
 Under PIU - Lead: Social ● Inform PIU of any issues related to their engagement with
 Specialist                        stakeholders;
                                ● Provide report on all complaints to the PIU GRM Focal
                                   Point (Social Safeguard Specialist);
                                ● Transmit and resolve complaints caused by the project
                                   interventions in close collaboration with and as directed
                                   by PIU and by participating in the local Grievance
                                   Resolution Committee;
 Social Specialist              ● As necessary, to assist in facilitation of raised grievances
                                   from Stakeolders
                                ● Under the direction of the Social Safeguard Specialist -
                                   Disclose and implement various plans (e.g., SEP, Labor
                                   Management Plan, etc.).
                                ● Communicate and coordinate with Disadvantaged and
                                   Vulnerable Groups
                                ● Be in communication for any raised grievances by the
                                   PAPs
 Communication Specialist ● Invite to engage and ask questions about the Project at
 Project-affected      parties,    Meetings where it is of interest or of relevance to them;
 Stakeholders and OIPs. (       ● Lodge their grievances using the Grievance Resolution
                                   Mechanism defined in the SEP;
                                ● Help the Project to define mitigation measures;
 Other project specialists      ● Engage with PIU regarding project design;
                                ● Raise concerns to help the project to be inclusive.


6.4    Budget for SEP Implementation

The PIU will be responsible for designing/planning and implementation of stakeholder
engagement activities for the CGV Project, as well as other relevant communications, outreach
and information disclosure activities.

Stakeholder Engagement Plan – Estimated Budget

The budget will be reconsidered once the scope of the SEP is clarified and specific
infrastructure projects have been identified and their location detailed. R South is a large
country with significant distance to travel to a project. In reconsidering the budget, the


                                                                                            24


                                                                                          Official Use Only
 CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


 following will be assessed regional coverage, local languages, community and stakeholder
 participation, specific project outreach strategy and SEP iterations.

                                                Person
                                           No               Unit Cost, № of Total cost
Stakeholder Engagement Activities               Months/y
                                           .                USD        years (USD)
                                                r.
National Social Specialist (per month)     1    12          1,900          2          55,600
Communications Coordinator                 2    2           1,500          2          22,000
Local Travel expenses of staff (cost per                     2,000         2          4,000
year)
Communication materials (leaflets &
                                           50               Sum            2          10,000
design)
Public / community meetings                2                400            2          1,600
Suggestions / GRM boxes (in each
                                           3                10                        30
Region)
CGV management information system
(MIS) / GRM data base (including web/
                                           1                2,000          2          4,000
mobile application with online and
offline links)
Subtotal                                                                              68,230
Contingency (10%)                                                                     6,823
Total                                                                                 105,053

 7       GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM
 7.1     DBSA’s Existing Grievance Redress Mechanism

 The DBSA has an Independent Grievance Redress Mechanism (IGRM) to address complaints
 from individuals or communities who believe they are negatively affected by DBSA-financed
 projects. The mechanism is designed to be impartial, transparent, and accessible, promoting
 dialogue and fair resolution without fear of retaliation.
 To lodge a complaint, affected parties must provide details such as their contact information,
 project name, description of harm, desired outcome, and any confidentiality requests.
 Supporting documents can be attached.

 Complaints can be submitted online via DBSA’s website, by email to webmaster@dbsa.org,
 by post to DBSA’s Midrand office, or through hand delivery.
 Once received, the IGRM Secretariat acknowledges the complaint within 10 days and may
 request clarification. The Chairperson reviews eligibility and determines the appropriate
 resolution approach, which may include problem-solving, compliance review, or monitoring.
 If unresolved at the client level, issues can be escalated within DBSA’s framework.
 The mechanism ensures confidentiality and protection against retaliation. Anonymous
 complaints are accepted, and the process does not limit access to courts or other remedies.
 Translation services are available to accommodate language needs.

 For contact, DBSA’s main switchboard is +27 11 313 3911, and general inquiries can be sent
 to webmaster@dbsa.org.

 The physical address is 1258 Lever Road, Headway Hill, Midrand, South Africa, and postal
 correspondence can be directed to PO Box 1234, Halfway House, 1685.


                                                                                              25


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


On environmental and social (E&S) capacity, DBSA applies Environmental and Social
Safeguard Standards (ESSS) aligned with international frameworks such as IFC Performance
Standards and the World Bank ESF. These standards cover areas like risk assessment,
stakeholder engagement, gender, indigenous peoples, labour, resettlement, biodiversity,
cultural heritage, health and safety, and resource efficiency.

DBSA requires all its clients to establish and maintain an Environmental and Social
Management System (ESMS) that is proportionate to the scale and risk of their projects, in line
with PS1 principles. The ESMS serves as the operational framework for managing
environmental and social risks throughout the project lifecycle. It includes policies, procedures,
and resources to ensure compliance with DBSA’s Environmental and Social Safeguard
Standards (ESSS). A critical component of the ESMS is the requirement for clients to
implement a GRM at the project level. This mechanism must be accessible, transparent, and
culturally appropriate, allowing affected communities and stakeholders to raise concerns and
seek resolution in a timely manner. Clients are also required to document grievances, track
responses, and report outcomes to DBSA as part of ongoing monitoring.
In addition to grievance handling, the ESMS must incorporate stakeholder engagement and
consultation processes. Clients are expected to identify stakeholders early, disclose relevant
project information, and conduct meaningful consultations throughout the project cycle. These
consultations should be inclusive, gender-sensitive, and adapted to local contexts, ensuring that
vulnerable groups have a voice. Feedback from consultations must be integrated into project
design and implementation, and records of engagement activities should be maintained for
DBSA’s review. By embedding these requirements in the ESMS, DBSA ensures that projects
uphold principles of transparency, accountability, and social inclusion while mitigating
environmental and social risks. This is also in line what is planned for CGV in terms of
establishing its ESMS.


7.2    Grievance Logs

The PIU will maintain a grievance log as part of the SEP implementation, which will contain,
at the minimum, the following information:
● Individual reference number;
● Name of the person submitting the complaint, question, or other feedback, address and/or
     contact information (unless the complaint has been submitted anonymously);
● Details of the complaint, feedback, or question/her location and details of his / her
     complaint;
● Date of the complaint;
● Name of person assigned to deal with the complaint (acknowledge to the complainant,
     investigate, propose resolutions, etc.);
● Details of proposed resolution, including person(s) who will be responsible for authorizing
     and implementing any corrective actions that are part of the proposed resolution;
● Date when proposed resolution was communicated to the complainant (unless anonymous);
● Date when the complainant acknowledged, in writing if possible, being informed of the
     proposed resolution;
● Details of whether the complainant was satisfied with the resolution, and whether the
     complaint can be closed out; and
● Date when the resolution is implemented (if any).




                                                                                               26


                                                                                             Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


7.2    Monitoring and Reporting on Grievances

Details of monitoring and reporting are described above. Day-to-day implementation of the
GRM and reporting to the World Bank will be the responsibility of the PIU. To ensure
management oversight of grievance handling, an internal audit review will be done
spearheaded by PIU management for monitoring the overall process, including verification that
agreed resolutions are actually implemented


7.3    Central Point of Contact – PIU
7.4    World Bank Grievance Redress System

Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress
mechanisms of the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (WBGRS).

The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-
related concerns. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought
directly to the World Bank’s attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity
to respond.

For information on how to submit complaints to the WBGRS, aggrieved persons or with people
with complaints may visit: https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-
andservices/grievance-redress-service. For information on how to submit complaints to the
World Bank Inspection Panel may be obtained at www.inspectionpanel.org.

8      MONITORING AND REPORTING

8.1    Monitoring Reports in the Course of the Project (By Component, As Relevant)

Monitoring and evaluation of the stakeholder process is considered vital to ensure PIU is able
to respond to identified issues and alter the schedule and nature of engagement activities to
make them more effective. Specialist in charge of monitoring and reporting of SEP from PIU
will be the Social Specialist. Monitoring of the stakeholder engagement process allows the
efficacy of the process to be evaluated. Two distinct but related monitoring activities in terms
of timing will be implemented:
● During the engagement activities: short-term monitoring to allow adjustments/
     improvements to be made during engagement; and
● Following completion of all engagement Stakeholder Engagement activities: review of
     outputs at the end of engagement to evaluate the effectiveness of the SEP as implemented.

8.2    Reporting Back to Stakeholder Groups

Reporting to stakeholder groups and evaluating the stakeholder process is considered vital to
ensure that PIU can respond to identified issues and change the schedule and nature of
engagement activities to make them more effective. It is desirable that all issues must be
resolved at all levels and professionally. For a clear and understandable review, everything

                                                                                             27


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


should be used as informational and in the form of presentation. All interested parties should
be informed of all stages and the solution of all problems.

PIU Safeguards Specialist will report back to PAPs and other stakeholder groups, primarily
through meetings. Minutes of meetings will be shared during subsequent public meetings.
Feedback received through the GRM will be responded to in writing and verbally, to the extent
possible. Key Project updates will be posted on DBSA & PIU website.

The feedback process through meetings will be aligned with meetings only at launch as set out
in the engagement program. Frequency and transparency of the feedback and related process
will be detailed at the launch of the PIU and when the CGV commits to a specific project.

The KPIs for the SEP will be detailed and agreed with the Bank once the PIU is operational.



END




                                                                                           28


                                                                                         Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


ANNEX1: Preliminary Draft Environmental and Social Management System Policy




                                                                               29


                                                                              Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        30


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        31


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        32


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        33


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        34


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        35


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        36


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        37


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        38


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        39


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        40


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)




                                                        41


                                                       Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


ANNEX 02: MINUTES OF CONSULTATION EVENT WITH STAKEHOLDERS.




                                   MINUTES OF MEETING

     NATIONAL TREASURY CREDIT GUARANTEE VEHICLE (CGV) - CONSULTATION
                                 EVENT

                                   Date: 7 November 2025

          Venue: Hybrid (Microsoft Teams Meeting and World Bank, Pretoria Office)

PURPOSE

To brief stakeholders on the progress of the CGV, obtain technical inputs, and align with World
Bank requirements as part of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) process.

1.   WELCOME AND OPENING REMARKS

National Treasury (NT) opened the session by highlighting the strategic importance of the
CGV in reducing sovereign contingent liabilities and supporting investment in South Africa’s
infrastructure pipeline, particularly the Independent Transmission Projects (ITPs).

NT noted ongoing concerns raised by ratings agencies about government’s significant
exposure under existing sovereign guarantees and underscored the importance of shifting
toward market-based credit enhancement mechanisms. The session then commenced with a
presentation outlining the key features of the CGV as summarized below.

2.   BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR CGV

NT briefly recapped Eskom’s Transmission Development Plan (TDP), noting implementation
delays and the need for additional mechanisms to accelerate transmission infrastructure
rollout.
The CGV was presented as a structured, independent non-life insurance entity that will:

•    Provide payment and termination guarantees to project SPVs;
•    De-risk large infrastructure PPPs;
•    Mobilize private capital;
•    Reduce government’s direct guarantee exposure;
•    Operate with an independent board, executive team, and balance sheet.

3.   CGV STRUCTURE, CAPITALIZATION AND GOVERNANCE

The CGV will be established as an independent, privately governed non-life insurance
company with a multi-layered capital structure designed to balance risk and long-term
sustainability. The initial capital raise targets US$500 million, scalable to US$2.5 billion over
four to five years, supported by an NT equity commitment of US$100 million (already provided
for in the MTBPS).


                                                                                              42


                                                                                            Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


The vehicle will target a AAA local credit rating, using a combination of junior, senior and
callable capital, complemented by reinsurance to strengthen capital adequacy. Once fully
capitalized, the CGV is expected to leverage its balance sheet at 3:1 to 5:1, enabling the
issuance of US$7.5–10 billion in guarantees. To preserve market confidence and ensure
impartial risk assessment, government will hold a minority share and will not participate in the
CGV’s board or management, which will comprise an independent professional team
responsible for operational and financial oversight.

4.   ALIGNMENT OF CGV AND ITP PROCESSES

NT, the Department of Electricity and Energy (DEE), the Independent Power Producers Office
(IPPO), and the World Bank are closely coordinating the CGV establishment with the
procurement timeline of the ITP pilot project to ensure bankability. This alignment includes
synchronizing the release of the ITP draft and final RFPs with progress on CGV licensing,
capital commitments, pricing methodology, and guarantee product design.

Key regulatory reforms, such as the Transmission Regulation, the National Energy Regulator
of South Africa’s (NERSA) cost recovery and pricing rules, and the Electricity Regulation Act
(ERA) amendments, are being integrated into the process to strengthen payment security and
sector sustainability. The objective is to ensure that by the time the final ITP Request for
Proposal (RFP) is issued (expected Q3 2026), the CGV will be sufficiently advanced to provide
credible, market-ready credit enhancement that bidders and lenders can rely on for transaction
structuring.

5.   CGV OPERATIONAL READINESS AND NEXT STEPS

The CGV is progressing toward operationalization, with current efforts focused on securing
conditional capital commitments from development partners, finalizing the licensing
application with the Prudential Authority, and completing the vehicle’s organizational design,
governance framework, and risk management systems.

Parallel work includes developing operational manuals, credit and pricing models, and the
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), as well as establishing a Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) in partnership with the Development Bank of Southern Africa
(DBSA) to support early project preparation and pipeline development.

Once capital commitments are formalized, the licensing process will be initiated, with the CGV
targeted to become fully operational by Q3 2026, enabling it to issue guarantees in time to
support the ITP procurement process.

6.   PROJECT PIPELINE PRESENTATION

NT presented a cross-sector pipeline of potential projects that the CGV may underwrite in
future, prioritizing those with strong prospects for bankability and advanced preparation. The
initial focus remains on ITP Phase 1 as the pilot, complemented by select energy projects,
including Eskom repowering initiatives, future renewable rounds, and credible municipal
energy programs.

Additional opportunities exist in the water sector (such as desalination and wastewater
treatment projects) and in transport, including rail, port, and strategic road upgrades. While
the pipeline is broad, final eligibility will depend on project readiness, sector reforms, and
alignment with the CGV’s capital capacity and risk appetite.




                                                                                             43


                                                                                           Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


7.   KEY INPUTS AND REFLECTIONS FROM STAKEHOLDERS

Stakeholders provided the following feedback:

•    Offer of technical support: Banks are willing to test CGV proposals confidentially,
     especially capital adequacy, regulatory compliance, and pricing methodologies.
•    Capital relief: Banks stressed the importance of unconditional and irrevocable guarantee
     language to qualify for Basel III capital relief.
•    Contract flexibility: Banks requested some flexibility in contractual terms to align with
     internal risk assessments.
•    ESG standards: While high ESG standards are supported, banks cautioned against setting
     thresholds that may unintentionally exclude South African service providers.
•    Market communication: stakeholders encouraged more proactive, collaborative
     communication to create positive sentiment about CGV progress.
•    Exposure limits: Questions were raised regarding concentration risk and regulatory
     exposure limits when lending against CGV guarantees.
•    Future REIPPPP rounds: stakeholders requested clarity on whether future renewables
     procurement would still include sovereign guarantees or transition fully to CGV cover.

8.   RESPONSES FROM NATIONAL TREASURY AND THE WORLD BANK

Key responses included:

•    Optionality in CGV guarantees: Different coverage levels (e.g., 80–100%) may be offered
     to bidders depending on their risk appetite.
•    No sovereign backstopping: Government will avoid issuing temporary guarantees as this
     defeats the purpose of the CGV.
•    Capital relief: NT and World Bank are working with the Prudential Authority on regulatory
     treatment.
•    Project preparation: CGV will incorporate a project preparation window funded through the
     PIU for projects it intends to underwrite.
•    Cost recovery and counter-indemnities: NT is ensuring counter-indemnity mechanisms do
     not disrupt Eskom’s loan covenants or create unintended balance-sheet impacts.
•    Water sector timing: CGV support for water projects is feasible once the vehicle is
     operational and project preparation has sufficiently advanced.
•    Sector reforms: CGV participation will only be possible where sector reforms ensure
     sustainability (e.g., water and electricity revenue models).
•    One of the key milestones achieved by NT was the publication of the draft ESMS policy
     on its website, signalling its strong commitment to meeting the highest environmental and
     social standards consistent with World Bank and IFC performance requirements.

9.   ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS RAISED

•    When CGV products will be available for projects – NT confirmed Q3 2026 is the earliest
     operationalization.
•    How default events will be treated – CGV will rely on both reinsurance (back-end) and
     counter-indemnities (front-end) for recovery; a 30-day cure period is likely.
•    Whether NT will recapitalize CGV in future – possible but intended to remain minority
     shareholder.
•    Whether NERSA has capacity to oversee new private players – NT acknowledged the
     concern and noted ongoing regulatory strengthening.

10. CLOSING REMARKS

NT thanked stakeholders for their constructive input and reiterated that:


                                                                                           44


                                                                                         Official Use Only
CGV Project: DRAFT Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


•     Continuous engagement will be maintained;
•     Commitment letters from DFIs are the next critical step;
•     CGV success relies on strong collaboration with stakeholders;
•     Stakeholders must refer to the Draft ESMS policy published on NT’s website;
•     Presentations will be shared with attendees; and
•     Follow-up bilateral engagements will be scheduled where deeper technical issues arise.

LIST OF ATTENDEES

In person

              NT                        World Bank               BASA                     ISA
    Ravesh Rajlal                   Marc Schrijver        Mark Brits           Nxalati Baloyi
    Thabang Masoga                  Aimonchok Tashieva    Hlatse Nkune         Nomfundo Mbatha
    Lungelo Nkwanyane               Malcolm Simpson       Bukiwe Pantshi       Mbasa Tshombe
    Obakeng Hlongwa                                       Keith Webb           Lerato Sole
    Tumelo Nyalungu                                       Hendrik Ackermann    Dorette Loggenberg
                                                          Confidence Komane    Theresa Stewart
•    NT: National Treasury
•    BASA - The Banking Association South Africa
•    ISA - Infrastructure South Africa (ISA)


Virtual – the list included

    Mameetse Masemola (ISA)                              Gilly Dlamini (BASA)
    Lebogang Maleka (IDC)                                Mark Brits (BASA)
    Smilo Memela (IDC)                                   Mosidi Melamu (BASA)
    Johan Koorts (ABSA)                                  Amit Mohanlal (FirstRand)
    Nicolaas Schutte (ABSA)                              Cameron Gough (FirstRand)
    Theuns Ehlers (ABSA)                                 Keith Webb (FirstRand)
    Bukiwe Pantshi (Investec)                            Hendrik Ackermann (Nedbank)
    Confidence Komane (Investec)                         Veruschka De Wet (Nedbank)
    Martin Meyer (Investec)                              Hlatse Nkune (Nedbank)
    George Kotsovos (SBSA)                               Kiresh Raju (SBSA)
    Vaughn Nathanson (SBSA)




                                                                                                    45


                                                                                                Official Use Only
