Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

                                       Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLs)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                   Environmental and Social Management
                                           Framework (ESMF)



Public Disclosure Authorized




                                   Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Production (P506818)



                                                        Final Draft


                                                     28 January 2026



                               1
List of Content


LIST OF CONTENT                                           2

LIST OF TABLES                                            5

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS                                5

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                         8

1.    INTRODUCTION                                        11

2.    PROJECT DESCRIPTION                                 12

3.    LEGAL, REGULATORY AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK       16

3.1 Legal and Policy Framework                            16

3.2 International Conventions                             21

3.3 World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS)   21

3.4     Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines                23


4.    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE                   24

5.    PROCEDURES AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS          26

4.1 E&S Risk Management Procedures                        27

4.2 Implementation Arrangements                           35

4.3 Resettlement Framework                                38


6.    STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT                              44

6. GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM                            45

6.1 Principles of Grievance Redress                       45

6.2 Grievance Handling Mechanism                          47




2
6.3 Addressing SEA/SH Cases                                                    49

6.4 WB Grievance Redress Service (GRS)                                         50


7.   CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING                                            50

8.   ESTIMATED BUDGET                                                          52

ANNEX 1: EXCLUSION LIST AND E&S SCREENING FORM                                 54

ANNEX 2: E&S RISK ASSESSMENT AND GENERIC ESMP                                  59

ANNEX 3: CHANCE FIND PROCEDURES                                               100

ANNEX 4: WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN                                                101

ANNEX 5: LABOR MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES                                          106

ANNEX 6: SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE (SEA) AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT (SH) ACTION
PLAN                                                                         125

ANNEX 7: E&S REPORTING FORM                                                   138

ANNEX 8: INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK (IPMF)                          142

ANNEX 9: GAP ANALYSIS BETWEEN THE WORLD BANK ESF AND THE NATIONAL LEGISLATIONS
                                                                            149

ANNEX 10: ENTITLEMENT MATRIX FOR INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT                      0

ANNEX 11: VOLUNTARY LAND DONATION PROCEDURES                                   7

ANNEX 12: TOR FOR ESIAS UNDER COMPONENT 1 ACTIVITIES                           8

ANNEX 13: TERMS OF REFERENCE AND OUTLINE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
MANAGEMENT PLAN (ESMP)                                                         22

ANNEX 14: TERMS OF REFERENCE AND OUTLINE FOR RESETTLEMENT ACTION PLAN (RAP)    27

ANNEX 15: STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS                                            32




3
ANNEX 16: LIST OF REGIONAL SSI REHABILITATION & MODERNIZATION PROPOSAL AND
SELECTED NEW PROJECTS                                                        49




4
List of Tables
Table 1 Project Cycle and E&S Management Procedures for Components 2-4 ......................................... 27
Table 2 Baseline data to be collected ......................................................................................................... 29
Table 3. Risk Categories and Classification ................................................................................................. 30
Table 4 E&S risk mitigation procedures and plans ..................................................................................... 31
Table 5 Implementation Arrangements...................................................................................................... 37
Table 6 Project GRM Management Process .............................................................................................. 47
Table 7 Capacity development and training plan ....................................................................................... 51
Table 8 Estimated Costs of ESMF implementation ..................................................................................... 52
Table 9 Risk assessment methodology ....................................................................................................... 59
Table 10 E&S risk assessment ..................................................................................................................... 59
Table 11 Project Generic ESMP and Monitoring Table ............................................................................... 63
Table 12 Waste Generated Proposed Management Method .................................................................. 101
Table 13 Waste Disposal Methods............................................................................................................ 103
Table 14 Labor Risk Identification and Analysis ........................................................................................ 108
Table 15 SEA/SH Action Plan..................................................................................................................... 132
Table 16 Incident Report Form for SEA/SH cases ..................................................................................... 136
Table 17 SEA/SH incident report form after investigations ...................................................................... 137
Table 18 Gap analysis between World Bank ESS and national legislation................................................ 150
Table 19 Entitlement Matrix for involuntary resettlement .......................................................................... 0



Abbreviations and Acronyms
    BMP                        Biodiversity Management Plan
    BoQ                        Bill of Quantities
    C-ESMP                     Constructor – Environmental and Social Management Plan
    CEDAW                      Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Violence Against Women
    CoC                        Code of Conduct
    CRC                        Compensation and Resettlement Committee
    CRISP                      Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production
    CSA                        Central Statistical Agency
    E&S                        Environmental and Social
    EDHS                       Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey
    EHS                        Environmental Health and Safety
    EHSG                       Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines
    EIA                        Environmental Impact Assessment
    ESCP                       Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
    ESIA                       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
    ESMF                       Environmental and Social Management Framework
    ESMP                       Environmental and Social Management Plan
    ESF                        Environmental and Social Framework
    ESIRT                      Environmental and Social Incident Response Toolkit
    ESRM                       Environmental and Social Risk Management System
    ESS                        Environmental and Social Standard



5
    FAO           Food and Agricultural Organization
    FCV           Fragility, Conflict and Violence
    FPIC          Free Prior and Informed Consultation
    FPIU          Federal Project Implementation Unit
    GBV           Gender Based Violence
    GIIP          Good International Industrial Practice
    GoE           Government of Ethiopia
    GRM           Grievance Redress Mechanism
    HUTLC         Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
    IEC           Information, Education and Communication
    IFC           International Financial Corporation
    ILO           International Labor Organization
    IPM           Integrated Pest Management
    IPMF          Integrated Pest Management Framework
    IPMP          Integrated Pest Management Plan
    IP/SSAHUTLC   Indigenous People / Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional
                  Local Communities
    IWUA          Integrated Water User Association
    M&E           Monitoring and Evaluation
    MILLS         Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands
    MIS           Management Information System
    MOA           Ministry of Agriculture
    MoH           Ministry of Health
    MoWE          Ministry of Water and Environment
    MoWSA         Ministry of Women and Social Affairs
    NBSAP         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
    NIIS          National Irrigation Information System
    NIP           National Irrigation Plan
    NSPP          The National Social Protection Policy
    OHCHR         Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights
    OHS           Occupational Health and Safety
    OSC           Once Stop Center
    QMS           Quality Management System
    PAP           Project Affected Person
    PDO           Project Development Objective
    PIR           Policy, Institution and Regulation
    POP           Persistent Organic Pollutants
    PPE           Personal Protective Equipment
    RAP           Resettlement Action Plan
    RF            Resettlement Framework
    RPIU          Regional Project Implementation Unit
    SEA           Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
    SEP           Stakeholder Engagement Plan
    SESA          Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
    SH            Sexual Harassment
    SOP           Standard Operating Procedures




6
    SRAMP      Security Risk Assessment and Management Plan
    SSAHUTLC   Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
    SSI        Small Scale Irrigation
    TA         Technical Assistance
    TOR        Terms of Reference
    UN         United Nations
    UNESCO     United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
    UNFPA      United Nations Population Fund
    USD        United States Dollar
    VLD        Voluntary Land Donations
    WHO        World Health Organization
    WMP        Waste Management Plan




7
Executive Summary
The Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRIPS) Project will support the preparation and
implementation of the National Irrigation Plan (NIP) in Ethiopia, transitioning the sector from the project-
based approach to a more comprehensive, program-based model. The Project is World Bank-financed and
will be implemented by the Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLs) at federal level with regional
irrigation bureaus and collaborating agencies (Ministry of Water and Energy - MoWE for dams/storage;
Ministry of Agriculture - MoA for value chains). The Project will be implemented in all 13 regions of
Ethiopia.

The PDO is to improve access to resilient irrigation services in selection areas in Ethiopia, which should
be achieved through the following components; Component 1: Irrigation Rehabilitation and
Modernization; Component 2: Small-Scale Irrigation Development; Component 3: Irrigation Service
Improvement; Component 4: Project Management and Capacity Building; and Component 5: Contingency
Emergency Response Component. The Project will be implemented mainly by the MILLs at federal level
with regional irrigation bureaus and collaborating agencies (MoWE for dams/storage; MoA for value
chains).

This ESMF was prepared for the Project as specific project sites as well as detailed designs are not known
yet. Multiple subprojects will be identified during Project implementation. The role of the ESMF is to guide
the environmental and social (E&S) risk management for the Project.

The environmental risk classification for the project is High. The environmental risks and impacts of the
Project are mainly associated with the rehabilitation or construction of large, medium and small Scale
Irrigation infrastructre, the rehabilitation of dams and the construction of small dams and haffirs. The
rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation schemes could lead to altered hydrological regimes,
affecting downstream water availability and potentially impacting aquatic ecosystems. Some activities
include construction-related risks and impacts, such as air pollution and dust emission during the works;
soil and water contamination and degradation of water bodies through the discharge of waste; pollution
of local surface water sources; generation of domestic and construction waste; generation of hazardous
materials through improper handling of fuels lubricants or concrete additives; and waste generation
through inadequate disposal of excavated materials and demolition waste.

Poorly rehabilitated and designed canals may cause erosion and sedimentation during the operational
phase. Through increased agricultural activities, there may be agrochemical runoff through increased
fertilizers and pesticides; and water depletion through excessive pumping from rivers and aquifers.
Further, poor siting of dams or haffirs may disrupt the natural drainage and reduce downstream water
flows or cause flooding. There are potential impacts of dams and haffirs on biodiversity, such as ecosystem
disturbance through temporary dewatering or altered river flow that affects aquatic life, fish migration
and water quality; and other impacts on terrestrial and aquatic species. The activities in relation to dam
safety may pose risks to local ecosystems and water resources if activities involving large dam
rehabilitation, and small dam construction isare not carefully planned and implemented.

The social risk rating is Substantial. The identified social risks and impacts include those related to labor
and working conditions, such as the use of forced labor or child labor, as well as the general risk of non-
compliance with labor and working conditions. Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks relate to
excavation, noise and vibration of machinery, demolition, handling of solar panels, electrical works and




8
lifting of heavy materials. There may be a general risk in relation to a lack of understanding of EHS issues
and injuries and accidents. Community Health and Safety risks include risks through potential dam failure,
as well as Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment SEA/SH between workers and between
workers and community members, as well as security-related risks in conflict areas. Furthermore, the
Project activities can both trigger water access conflicts among community members. Women can be
excluded from water ownership and governance structures, and discriminatory practices may prevent
access of certain groups to project services and benefits. Activities may cause disruptions of livelihoods
for farmers, fishers or downstream river users. Social tension can occur based on work scheduling that
interrupts irrigation during critical periods. The Project components may pose risks of land acquisition and
involuntary resettlement, as irrigation canals, dam or haffir sites may require private land. Land use for
canals, storages and ancillary works can lead to temporary or permanent economic displacement. Project
areas may also include communities under ESS7, Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional
Local Communities (SSAHUTLCs), who may be disadvantaged through different concepts of land and water
usage.

The applicable World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) for the Project are ESS1 on
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, ESS2 on Labor and Working
Conditions; ESS3 on Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention, ESS4 on Community Health and Safety,
ESS5 on Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement, ESS6 on Biodiversity
Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources, ESS7 on Indigenous Peoples/Sub-
Saharan Africa Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities, ESS8 on Cultural Heritage, and
ESS10 on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure.

The ESMF presents measures and plans to reduce, mitigate and/or offset adverse risks and impacts,
provisions for estimating and budgeting the costs of these measures, and institutional arrangements and
capacities for the implementation of the E&S measures, and presents a guiding framework for inclusive
and sustainable irrigation development in Ethiopia.

The Project will be implemented by the MILLS as the lead implementing agency through the Federal
Project Implementation unit (FPIU). The FPIU will be responsible for day-to-day coordination, oversight of
implementation, and consolidation of project reporting and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). A Federal
Steering Committee (FSC) will provide strategic guidance and ensure effective multi-ministry and federal–
regional coordination. The FPIU will coordinate with the Ministry of Water and Energy (MoWE), the
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and regional Governments on the implementation of Component 2 and 3.
At the regional level, CRISP will use a hybrid implementation approach that leverages the existing capacity
of Bank-financed projects, while establishing dedicated structures where needed. CRISP will operate
across all 13 regions and will set up dedicated Regional Project Implementation Units (RPIUs) within the
Bureaus of Irrigation to oversee small-scale irrigation (SSI) and related activities. For Component 3, the
MILLS FPIU directly and the MoA and regional governments will act as key proposers of sub-projects.

The ESMF lays out the E&S management process of the Project. The procedures include an assessment
and analysis stage during which an E&S eligibility check against the Project exclusion list and an E&S
screening of proposed sub-projects will be conducted. Screening will help assign an E&S risk rating to each
activity / sub-project. This will allow the identification of appropriate mitigation measures for the sub-
project as well as the relevant E&S instruments required, such as Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (ESIA), Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) and/org Resettlement Action
Plans (RAP). All site-specific instruments will be submitted to the FPIU for clearance. During the
implementation and monitoring stage of sub-projects, the previously adopted E&S procedures and site-



9
specific plans will be implemented. Project teams will undertake regular site visits, receive regular
reporting from the field, track grievances and continue awareness raising of all implementers and
communities.

Stakeholder engagement has been conducted for the preparation of the overall Project, and will be
implemented during the design phases of each subproject and will accompany the implementation of
subprojects. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will support the implementation of the Project. This
Project GRM facilitates the project to respond to concerns and grievances of the project-affected parties
related to the environmental and social performance of the project. The Project will provide mechanisms
to receive and facilitate resolution to such concerns. The goal of the GRM is to strengthen accountability
to beneficiaries and to provide channels for project stakeholders to provide feedback and/or express
grievances related to project supported activities.

The main monitoring and supervision responsibilities rest with the FPIU, which will administer the overall
project-related E&S monitoring and implementation. TheRPIUs will be responsible for day-to-day
monitoring and inspection of E&S mitigation measures in relation to construction and rehabilitation of
irrigation schemes. The responsible party will monitor and supervise contractors and will be responsible
for the monitoring and supervision of contractors and sub-contractors and suppliers as stipulated in the
ESMP.

Throughout Project implementation, the responsible party will provide training and awareness raising to
relevant stakeholders, such as staff, selected contractors, and communities, to support the
implementation of the E&S risk management mitigation measures.




10
     1. Introduction
Irrigation coverage in Ethiopia is low and most existing schemes perform poorly due to weak design and
construction. They are therefore more vulnerable to floods and droughts. There is also an absence of
quality management systems, limited institutional and community capacity, and insufficient operation
and maintenance (O&M). Underperformance is observed across all types of schemes (small, medium, and
large schemes), and across different governance levels. Many schemes have deteriorated significantly,
with performance typically below 50 percent in terms of irrigated areas, crop intensity, and yields.

Compared to developing new irrigation schemes, rehabilitating and modernizing the existing schemes can
boost irrigation performance and increase flood and drought resilience more quickly and at a lower cost.
Irrigation provides a reliable and drought resilient water supply to farms, reducing dependence on erratic
rainfall and enabling more stable crop production. Irrigation also allows farmers to cultivate multiple
cropping seasons and a wider variety of crops, including high-value and drought-resistant species, thereby
diversifying diets and income sources and strengthening resilience to market and climate shocks.
Irrigation is also a key enabler of private sector engagement.

The Government of Ethiopia and development partners have reached a consensus to prioritize the
rehabilitation and modernization of existing schemes—addressing the root causes of their decline and
strengthening sector capacity—before significantly expanding to new investments. The Project will
support the preparation and implementation of the National Irrigation Plan (NIP) in Ethiopia, transitioning
the sector from the project-based approach to a more comprehensive, program-based model. It is
expected that the NIP will be developed and launched within the first years of the CRISP Project
implementation, and then further implemented and operationalized during the remaining
implementation period, ensuring that the NIP will serve as a practical, implementable program, rather
than a high-level strategy.

The PDO is to improve access to resilient irrigation services in selection areas in Ethiopia, which should
be achieved through the following components: Component 1: Irrigation Rehabilitation and
Modernization; Component 2: Small-Scale Irrigation Development; Component 3: Irrigation Service
Improvement; Component 4: Project Management and Capacity Building; and Component 5: Contingency
Emergency Response Component (See Section 2).

This ESMF has been developed as the key E&S instrument to examine the risks and impacts as the Project
consists of a series of subprojects for which risks and impacts cannot be determined until their details
have been identified. It is developed to ensure compliance with the World Bank Environmental and Social
Framework (ESF) and the national laws of Ethiopia, and it guides the preparation of site-specific E&S
instruments. It sets out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the risks and impacts of
the project. It presents measures and plans to reduce, mitigate and/or offset adverse risks and impacts,
provisions for estimating and budgeting the costs of these measures, and institutional arrangements and
capacities for the implementation of the E&S measures. It further includes E&S information on the Project
area and assesses risks and impacts that may occur and mitigation measures that might be expected to
be used.

The ESMF establishes the screening processes and tools as well as exclusion criteria for specific activities
- to be directly implemented by the FPIU in the MILLS in assessing the risks and impacts of the sub-projects




11
or activity. This will facilitate the recommendation of appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures for
each sub-project, including the preparation of site-specific ESMPs and ESIAs and/or RAPs where required

There are three prioritized irrigation schemes under Component 1 (Gode, Gidabo, and Ada’a Becho), for
which ESIAs will be prepared. Screening modalities and TOR for the ESIAs have been developed for this
purpose. For the Technical Assistance (TA) activities of the Project that relate to the national irrigation
program and policies and regulations on irrigation water management, a Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for the entire Project
has been prepared as a separate document to ensure broad and inclusive consultations with all Project
stakeholders. In addition a Security Risk Assessment and Plan (SRAMP) will also be prepared for the
Project, not later than 6 months after effectiveness. For the dam safety measure activities, Dam Safety
Plans will be prepared by a panel of experts for relevant dams and water storage structures of the Project.
An institutional Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Capacity Assessment will be
conducted for the development of Component 2 activities.

For activities under Component 2, involving multiple new and rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation as
well as other components, this Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will provide
guidance on E&S risk management procedured.

The ESMF further includes Labor Management Procedures (LMP), a Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA)
and Sexual Harassment (SH) Action Plan, an Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF), a Waste
Management Plan (WMP), Chance Find Procedures, and a Resettlement Framework (RF).

This ESMF was prepared through a desk review of national policies and legislation, the World Bank ESF,
relevant project documentation. Furthermore, stakeholder consultations were undertaken throughout
November – December 2025 at the national level and in all regions, with a variety of stakeholder.




     2. Project Description
Project Development Objective (PDO): The PDO is to improve access to resilient irrigation services in
selected areas in Ethiopia.

Project Components: Component 1: Irrigation Rehabilitation and Modernization.

Component 1 will support the rehabilitation and modernization of existing federal-level large- and
medium-scale irrigation schemes1, as well as improving their Operational & Maintenance (O&M) and
performance. It will also support the development of the Investment Plan by financing the necessary
studies and designs for pipeline projects. In addition, Component 1 will support institutional strengthening
and capacity building for dam safety management and pilot water security initiatives. Component 1 will
be implemented mainly by the federal government.




1 Large- and Medium-Scale Irrigation: MILLs, a federal government agency, owns and manages several large- and medium-scale schemes. CRISP

will support the rehabilitation and modernization of existing large-scale (>3,000 ha) and medium-scale (500–3,000 ha) schemes, along with the
improvement of O&M and performance.




12
Subcomponent 1.1: Large- and Medium-Scale Irrigation Rehabilitation and Modernization: Three
schemes—Gode, Gidabo, and Ada’a Becho—have been selected as the first batch to be supported under
CRISP. These schemes have high potential and readiness. During project implementation, if the security
situation improves and resources permit, additional high-potential schemes from subsequent batches
may also be considered for support under CRISP. CRISP will support the rehabilitation and extension of
the infrastructure to enable effective water delivery to farmland, and to increase farmers with enhanced
drought and flood resilience. CRISP will finance critical extension works to complete distribution networks
and to ensure source-to-end functionality of irrigation systems. The activities will include the
rehabilitation of headworks and main canals; the rehabilitation and construction of secondary and tertiary
canals, pumping stations, grids, regulating/control and safety structures; the improvement of access roads
and crossing structures; the strengthening of flood protection structures (such as dikes); the replacement
of gates, pumps, generators, and other critical equipment, as well as the installation of water
measurement facilities and devices.

CRISP will further support the modernization of the schemes to enhance water use efficiency thus
reducing drought impacts, optimize energy use, and improve agricultural productivity. The activities will
include the introduction of appropriate advanced technologies (e.g. drip, sprinkler, and center pivot);
irrigation energy improvements (e.g., solar); canal linings and land leveling; instrumentation and SCADA
systems; and water measurement facilities.

Activities will further include climate and water availability assessments to inform the design of irrigation
rehabilitation, modernization, and investment planning activities. This will include the development of
climate scenarios and adaptation analyses to guide infrastructure improvements to enhance flood and
drought resilience, improve water use efficiency, and integrate climate-resilient practices into projects.
These climate-informed analyses will be embedded in the planning process, as well as in the feasibility
studies and detailed designs.

Under this subcomponent, CRISP will support the preparation of pipeline projects to roll out
rehabilitation and modernization investments under the Investment Plan of NIP, including preparing
feasibility studies, detailed designs, related environmental and social safeguard documents, and bidding
documents.

Subcomponent 1.2: O&M and Agricultural Production for Large- and Medium-Scale Irrigation Schemes:
Under this subcomponent, CRISP will support the strengthening of O&M for the three prioritized federal-
level schemes through dedicated consultancy services. The activities will include the O&M consultancy
services to establish O&M arrangements (including O&M arrangements addressing extreme droughts
and floods), support Integrated Water User Association (IWUA) formation and operation, introduce
irrigation service fee systems, develop Asset Management Plans, and prepare scheme-specific O&M
guidelines and manuals for each of the three prioritized schemes.

CRISP will pilot irrigation service fees across three schemes under Component 1, supported by O&M
consultancy services, which should promote water conservation (increasing drought resilience) and thus
lower energy usage and GHG emissions. The activities will include the provision of essential instruments
and equipment for the pilots, such as water measurement devices and fee billing and collection
information systems.




13
In Gode and Gidabo, CRISP will pilot salinity management. The activities will include the demonstration
of appropriate salinity management practices to improve soil and water management, and the
promotion of suitable salinity-resilient crop types.

In addition, the subcomponent will strengthen agricultural production, market, and value chains linked
to project irrigation investments. The activities will include enhancing extension services for irrigated
agronomy, engaging private and gender-sensitive extension service providers, supporting essential
input/output value chain facilities and equipment through enhanced access to agricultural microfinance,
providing market linkage services and building the technical and organizational capacity of farmers,
cooperatives, and community enterprises.

This will be accompanied by strengthening the technical and financial management capacity of IWUAs
and government scheme administration offices to improve O&M. Under this subcomponent, the Project
will provide essential O&M machinery, goods, and office equipment to support these IWUAs and admin
offices. In particular, the project will enhance the capacity of female farmers and promote inclusive
participation in irrigation and agricultural production. Gender activities will focus on enhancing women’s
roles in decision-making and improving their access to training, productive resources, and financing.

Subcomponent 1.3: Dam Safety and Water Security: CRISP will strengthen coordination between the
irrigation and water sectors to ensure water security for irrigation, and enhance the country’s capacity for
dam safety management and irrigation water resources management. Key activities include:
strengthening the institutional arrangements and building capacity within MILLs, MoWE, dam owners and
operators. The activities will support dam safety assessments for project-relevant dams, update Dam
Safety Regulation, support dam safety equipment and instrumentation, develop an inventory of irrigation
dams in Ethiopia. It will also provide training and capacity building on dam O&M, instrumentation
monitoring, and emergency preparedness in the case of floods or other shocks. In addition, Technical
Assistance (TA) will pilot irrigation water management mechanisms which promote drought resilience,
such as water allocation, permitting, water use monitoring, and abstraction charges in one large-scale
scheme under Component 1.


Component 2: Small-Scale Irrigation (SSI) Development.

Component 2 will support the rehabilitation and modernization of existing SSIs and the development of
new ones, as well as improving their O&M and performance, and financing the preparation of pipeline
SSI projects under the Investment Plan.

Subcomponent 2.1: SSI Development: CRISP will support the rehabilitation and modernization of 136
existing SSIs in all 13 regions (see Annex 16 for a list of selected sites). Modernization will include water-
efficient application technologies, solar pumps, and enhanced O&M capacity, which will increase drought
resilience and lower energy usage and therefore GHG emissions. Given the high cost and limited
availability of diesel in Ethiopia, the project will promote the use of solar-powered systems where
technically and economically feasible.

CRISP will also support 51 new SSIs in all 13 regions, in areas that are chronically food-insecure, lack
existing infrastructure, or where rainfed agriculture is highly vulnerable to climate risks (see Annex 16
for a list of selected sites).




14
This will include support to the development and rehabilitation of small water storage systems, such as
rainwater harvesting facilities, haffirs,2 and small dams.

Subcomponent 2.2: O&M and Agricultural Production for SSIs: CRISP will systematically integrate all SSIs
with O&M strengthening and agricultural production support to enhance sustainability and productivity.
CRISP will strengthen O&M for SSIs through dedicated consultancy services in each region. The activities
will include establishing tailored O&M mechanisms (including arrangements to maintain drought and
flood resilience), supporting IWUA formation and operation, piloting irrigation service fees at selected
schemes, strengthening community management models, and exploring innovative O&M models such as
the professionalization of irrigation services.

CRISP will further strengthen agricultural production and value chain development linked to SSI
investments to improve productivity, commercialization, and incomes. The activities will include
establishing demonstration sites for farmer training on irrigated agronomy, providing training-of-trainers
programs to support smallholder farmers, strengthening extension services, and engaging private service
providers and contracted experts to deliver targeted capacity building. The project will also improve
farmers’ access to inputs and machinery through enhanced access to agricultural microfinance, support
the formation and strengthening of cooperatives and production clusters, and strengthen linkages with
off-takers, aggregators, and markets. CRISP will also strengthen the technical, organizational, and
financial management capacity of IWUAs and smallholder farmers. CRISP will also provide essential tools,
equipment, and machinery to support community-based O&M.


Component 3: Irrigation Service Improvement.

Component 3 will strengthen the enabling environment for improving irrigation services. It will also
promote agricultural production and value chain integration linked to irrigation investments, and
encourage private sector engagement in both irrigation and agricultural sectors.

Subcomponent 3.1: Enabling Environment for Irrigation Service Improvement : The Project will support
the development of a national O&M Directive to guide irrigation O&M and service delivery; the
formulation of policy and regulatory instruments related to irrigation water management and irrigation
service delivery models; and TA activities including a comprehensive assessment of irrigation-related PIR
issues, and identify gaps for future support.

This subcomponent will support the development and early implementation of the NIP, including
subprograms for large-, medium-, and small-scale irrigation, as well as Farmer-Led Irrigation
Development. Furthermore, it will strengthen the national irrigation information system and database
mapping for decision making. It will develop and deploy the NIIS as an integrated platform to consolidate
and manage information on irrigation assets, water use, and performance.

CRISP will support the development and institutionalization of a comprehensive QMS across the entire
project cycle. The QMS will address common challenges, such as poor design, delayed or incomplete


2 Haffirs are traditional water harvesting systems used in the arid regions of the Horn of Africa, particularly in the pastoral areas of Ethiopia

(e.g., Afar, Somali, Oromia), as well as in Sudan and South Sudan. A typical haffir is a pond that collects rainwater and surface runoff during the
wet season for use in dry periods. (link)




15
construction, and high investment and O&M costs, by strengthening quality assurance and enhancement
during planning and design, and improving technical oversight, procurement and contract management,
financial management, and environmental and social safeguards throughout implementation. CRISP will
support the establishment and operationalization of the QMS at the federal level, and also enable federal–
regional quality support. The project will also facilitate the establishment of an institutional unit for quality
management and equip it with essential goods, IT tools, equipment, and technical expertise. In addition,

Subcomponent 3.2: Private Sector Participation: CRISP will enhance private sector participation in both
irrigation and agriculture. It will pilot innovative models and create stronger market linkages to improve
sustainability, efficiency, and farmer incomes. The project will pilot models with private O&M service
providers in irrigation, apply irrigation service fees that are adaptable for both federally and regionally
supported schemes, and explore broader approaches such as pay-per-use services and insurance. The
project will provide capacity building, transaction advisor services, and other technical assistance to
support the design and implementation of these pilots. In agriculture, CRISP will leverage irrigation
investments to strengthen agribusiness linkages, attract private investment, improve value chains,
promote contract farming, and expand access to equipment, financing solutions, private extension
services, and AgTech platforms.


Component 4: Project Management and Capacity Building

Component 4 will provide institutional support to improve overall project management and coordination
activities, including Project Management; improving sector E&S governance, institutional capacity and
E&S risk management.


Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC)

This component will enable the rapid reallocation of project funds to support an eligible response in the
event of a crisis or emergency.




     3. Legal, Regulatory and Institutional Framework
For substantial and high risk projects, the World Bank’s ESF applies in full. National E&S laws and
regulations are also followed, but the stricter standard prevails. This Project is rated High.


3.1 Legal and Policy Framework
The 1995 Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia considers environmental and social
impacts while implementing development projects. The Constitution is the basis for policies and strategies
relevant to social development, environmental protection and economic growth, in Articles 43, 44 and 92
and articles 40, 41, 42, 89 and 90, which refer to environmental and social issues respectively. It stipulates
sustainable development, environmental rights, and environmental objectives in Articles 43, 44, and 92
respectively.




16
Article 43: The Right to Development: Stipulates the right to improved living standards and to sustainable
development. Citizens have the right to participate in national development and, in particular, to be
consulted with respect to policies and projects affecting their community. The basic aim of development
activities shall be to enhance the capacity of citizens for development and to meet their basic needs.

Article 44: Environmental Rights: Stipulates the right to live in a clean and healthy environment. All
persons who have been displaced or whose livelihoods have been adversely affected as a result of state
programs have the right to commensurate monetary or alternative means of compensation, including
relocation with adequate state assistance.

Article 92: Environmental Objectives: The Government shall ensure that all Ethiopians live in a clean and
healthy environment. The design and implementation development initiatives shall not damage or
destroy the environment. People have the right to full consultation and to the expression of views in the
planning and implementations of environmental policies and projects that affect them directly.
Government and citizens shall have the duty to protect the environment. Moreover, the Article provides
a basic outline to safeguard the rights to thought, opinion and expression; and the rights of vulnerable
groups that need protection under Articles 29, 35, 36 and 41 respectively.

Article 35: Rights of Women: Women shall, in the enjoyment of rights and protection provided for by the
Constitution, have equal right with men. Women have the right to full consultation in the formulation of
national development policies, the designing and execution of projects, and particularly in the case of
projects affecting the interests of women. Women have the right to acquire, administer, control, use and
transfer property. In particular, they have equal rights with men with respect to use, transfer,
administration and control of land. They shall also enjoy equal treatment in the inheritance of property.

Article 36: Right of Children: Every child has the right not to be subjected to exploitative practices, neither
to be required nor permitted to perform work which may be hazardous or harmful to his or her education,
health or well-being.

Article 41: Economic, Social and Cultural Rights: The State shall, within available means, allocate
resources to provide rehabilitation and assistance to the physically and mentally disabled, the aged, and
to children who are left without parents or guardian. The State shall pursue policies which aim to expand
job opportunities for the unemployed and the poor and shall accordingly undertake programs and public
works projects.

Article 40(3): recognizes land as a common property of the Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples of
Ethiopia and prohibits sale or any other exchange of land. It recognizes that the use rights over “holding
land” are open and no time limit on this usufruct as long as the subject to a proof of permanent physical
property, ability to farm continuously and meet administrative dues and obligations.

Article 26: protects against unlawful seizure of property, stating “Everyone shall have the right to his
privacy and physical integrity. This right shall include protection from explorations of his person, his
home, his property and protection from appropriation of property under his possession”.

Environmental Protection Organs Establishment Proclamation No. 295/2002: establishes a system that
fosters coordinated but differentiated responsibilities among environmental protection agencies at
federal and regional levels as well as sector environmental units so as to foster sustainable use of
environmental resources, thereby avoiding possible conflicts of interests and duplication of efforts.



17
Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation No. 299/2002: This Proclamation harmonizes and
integrates environmental, economic, cultural,and social considerations for decision making processes in a
manner that promotes sustainable development. It stipulates the requirement to prepare EIAs, outlines
how to prepare them, and to whom the EIA report is submitted. It further promulgates the establishment
of environmental protection organs. The proclamation asserts the organizational requirements and the
need to establish systems that enablescoordination but with different responsibilities of environmental
protection agencies at federal and regional levels. The EIAs must cover social and ecological effects in
regard to resettlement, biodiversity loss, water quality and sedimentation. No dam construction permit
can be issued without EIA approval from the Environment, Forest and Climate Change Commission
(EFCCC).

Ethiopian Water Resources Management Proclamation, No. 197/2000: ensures that the water resources
of the country are protected and utilized for the highest social and economic benefits of the people of
Ethiopia, to follow up and supervise that they are duly conserved, ensure that harmful effects of water
are prevented, and that the management of water resources is carried out properly. It proclaims that all
water resources of the country are the common property of the Ethiopian people and the state. The
Proclamation includes large hydropower and irrigation dams. It regulates permit requirements for dams;
that all dam projects must align with basin master plans and integrated water resource management
principles; that the Ministry can set technical standards for dam design, construction and operation; and
that domestic and environmental flows must be safeguarded even when building dams.

Ethiopian Water Resources Management Regulations – Council of Ministers Regulation No. 115/2005:
implements the 2000 Proclamation by detailing the operational rules for water resources management.
It governs water abstraction, construction of waterworks, discharge permits, regulation of pollution, and
enforcement procedures. It sets groundwater protections, authorizes drilling safeguards, and defines
inspection regimes. It permits formation of water users’ cooperatives, including for irrigation and their
registration and federal or regional levels. Dam-related rules include that water abstraction and storage
require licensing. The regulation further sets inspection powers for dam construction sites and governs
pollution prevention in reservoirs.

Irrigation Water Users’ Associations – Proclamation No. 841/2014: establishes the legal basis for forming
and governing irrigation water user associations (IWUAs). It defines how associations are formed,
registered and organized and managed. It clarifies roles, responsibilities, rights and duties of members
and supervisory bodies. It sets mechanisms for dispute resolution and service agreements for irrigation
provision.

Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation No. 300/2002: requires pollution control mechanisms in
development projects before they are established and made operational. It requires development
projects to execute continuous activities that mitigate environmental pollution.

Fertilizer Manufacturing and Trade Proclamation No. 137/1998: governs the production, trade and
regulation of fertilizers for agricultural productivity.

Pesticide Registration and Control Proclamation No. 674/2010: Sets the legal framework for registering,
distributing and using pesticides safely.




18
Solid Waste Management Proclamation No. 513/2007: promotes community participation in order to
overcome the adverse effects from the disposal of wastes and to enhance benefits resulting from solid
wastes. The provisions require the preparation of solid waste management action plans by respective
urban local governments and project activities that produce solid waste.

Hazardous Waste Management and Disposal Control Proclamation Proc No.1090/2018: creates a
system for the environmentally sound management and disposal of hazardous waste; and to prevent the
damage to the human or animal health, the environment, biodiversity and property due to the
mismanagement of hazardous waste.

Public Health Proclamation No.200/2000: forbids the discharge of untreated liquid waste generated
from septic tanks,seepage pits and industries into water bodies, or water convergences. It also prohibits
the disposal ofsolid or liquid or any other waste in a way which contaminates the environment or affects
public health.

The Labor Proclamation No. 1156/2019: stipulates conducive working environments for the
laborers/workers in Ethiopia. The Proclamation bestowed responsibility upon the employer for the
creation of good working environment for the employees. The employer will take all the necessary
measures to safeguard the health and safety of the workers. It also intends to form durable industrial
peace, sustainable productivity and competitiveness that will contribute to the overall development of
the country.

Proclamation No. 1336/2024 amends the Proclamation 1161/2019 on Expropriation of Land Holdings for
Public Purpose, Payments of Compensation and Resettlement. It clarifies who pays compensation,
strengthens protections for displaced people, and improves dispute-handling. It makes the regional
administrations responsible for compensation when land I taken for federal infrastructure or other
purposes. It requires earlier notification and community consultation, and introduces a structured
grievance system with a Complaint Hearing Body and an Appeal Hearing Council. It also reinforces
livelihood restoration and resettlement duties to ensure affected households are fairly compensated and
properly supported.

Proclamation No. 89/1997 confirms and details the Constitutional principle that holding rights on land
can be assigned to peasants and pastoralists. Ethiopian peasants have the right to obtain land without
payment and the protection against eviction from their possession. Ethiopian pastoralists have the right
to free land for grazing and cultivation as well as the right not to be displaced from their own lands.

Council of Ministers Regulation No. 472/2020: contains property valuation and compensation methods
and formulae that should be used in calculating compensation for various properties. It also contains lump
sum compensation to be paid for severed social relationship and moral damages.

Gender Based Violence Proclamation No. 1097/2018: bestows powers and duties to the Ministry of
Women, Children and Youth to: “design strategies to effectively prevent and take measures against
gender-based violence against women; implement same in collaboration with relevant organs; facilitate
the setting up centers for provision of holistic health, psychological, legal and rehabilitation services for
women who were victims of violence; and follow up the implementation of same.”

Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (1997): The purpose of the Policy is to improve and enhance the health
and qualityof life of all Ethiopians through promoting sustainable social and economic development. This



19
shall be achieved through sound management and use of resources and the environment as a whole so
as to meet the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs.

Ethiopian Water Resources Management Policy (1999): enhances and promotes all national efforts
towards the efficient, equitable and optimum utilization of the available Water Resources of Ethiopia for
significant socioeconomic development on sustainable basis. The Policy aims to ensure access to water
for everyone fairly and in a sustainable manner, protect water resources and sources, and promote
cooperation for the management of river basins. The Policy also requires water resources schemes and
projects to have Environmental Impact Assessment and Evaluation.

The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) for 2015-2020: stipulates biodiversity
conservation, sustainable use, and equitable benefit sharing. It establishes guiding principles, national
targets, and institutional riles to conserve biodiversity. It strengthens protected areas, promotes
conservation, integrates biodiversity in development strategies and ensures equitable sharing of benefits
from genetic resources.

Dam Safety & Technical Guidelines: Ethiopia has dam safety manuals and technical standards developed
by the Ministry of Water and Energy. They guide on design flood requirements; seismic safety; emergency
action plans; and regular inspection and maintenance regimes.

National Policy on Women (1993): With the announcement of the National Policy of Women in 1993 and
the promulgation of the new Constitution in 1995, the Ethiopian Government declared its commitment
to the equitable socio-economic development of women. It aims to institutionalize the political, economic
and social rights of women by creating appropriate structures in government offices and institutions so
that public policies and interventions become gender-responsive in order to ensure equitable
development for all Ethiopians.

Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Guidelines and Directives: The Environmental Protection
Authority has provided comprehensive guidelines on “Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
Guideline September 2017”, based on the Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation No. 299/2002.
An ESIA guideline document prepared earlier, in 2000, provides essential information covering the
following elements: Environmental assessment and management in Ethiopia, ESIA Process, Standards and
Guidelines, and Sectorial Environmental impact assessments in Ethiopia covering agriculture, industry,
transport, mining, dams and reservoirs, tanneries, textiles, hydropower generation, irrigation projects and
resettlement. The Environmental and Social Management Plan Preparation Guidelines from 2004 outline
the content that needs to be featured while preparing an ESMP and provides template forms to be used
for such purposes. The guideline also provides guidance on the preparation of institutional arrangements
for implementation of ESMPs. The ESIA Guidelines from 2017 outline a revised version of the Ethiopian
ESIA Guidelines with the aim to integrate social issues (gender, health, and workplace rights) into to the
environmental impact assessment system of the country.

In addition, Directive No. 1/2008 determines projects to identify and list those investment projects subject
to mandatory ESIA. The regions are entitled to issue similar directive to their own specific cases based on
these directives. Extensive lists of project types requiring ESIA are provided in this directive.

This guideline outlines the screening, review and approval process for development projects in Ethiopia
and defines the criteria for undertaking an ESIA. Projects are categorized into three schedules:



20
     ▪   Schedule 1: Projects which may have adverse and significant environmental impacts and require a
         full ESIA.
     ▪   Schedule 2: Projects, whose type, scale or other relevant characteristics have potential to cause
         some significant environmental impacts, but are not likely to warrant a full ESIA.
     ▪   Schedule 3: Projects which would have no significant environmental and social impact and do not
         require an ESIA.

However, projects situated in an environmentally sensitive areas, such as land prone to erosion;
desertification; areas of historic or archaeological interest; important landscape; religiously important
area, etc… will fall under Schedule I irrespective of the nature of the project.


3.2 International Conventions
The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) ratified a number of regional and international conventions and
protocols on environment. The following are international conventions and protocols that are relevant to
the implementation of the Project:

     •   The Bamako convention on banning and control of trans-boundary movements and management
         of hazardous wastes within Africa
     •   The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
         their Disposal
     •   The Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous
         Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade
     •   The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POP)
     •   Convention on Biological Diversity
     •   The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
     •   The United Nations Conventions to Combat Desertification
     •   The International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
     •   The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
     •   The Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
     •   The International Labor Organization (ILO) Conventions


3.3 World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS)
The Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) sets out the World Bank’s commitment to sustainable
development through a set of Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) that are designed to support
borrowers’ projects with the aim of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity.

This section provides a summary of the ESS relevant for this Project.

ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts: sets out the
borrower’s responsibilities for assessing, managing and monitoring environmental and social risks and
impacts associated with each stage of a project supported by the Bank through Investment Project
Financing, in order to achieve environmental and social outcomes consistent with the ESS. The Project is
subject to ESS1 and will follow it through during preparation, design and implementation.




21
ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions. ESS2 recognizes the importance of employment creation and
income generation in the pursuit of poverty reduction and inclusive economic growth. Borrowers can
promote sound worker-management relationships and enhance the development benefits of a project by
treating workers in the project fairly and providing safe and healthy working conditions.

ESS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management. ESS3 recognizes that economic
activity and urbanization often generate pollution to air, water and land, and consume finite resources
that may threaten people, ecosystem services and the environment at the local, regional and global levels.
This ESS sets out the requirements to address resource efficiency and pollution prevention and
management throughout the project life cycle consistent with GIIP. The Project considers resource
efficiency related to all irrigation activities as part of this ESMF and site-specific E&S instruments.

ESS4: Community Health and Safety. ESS4 recognizes that project activities, equipment and infrastructure
can increase community exposure to risks and impacts. In addition, communities that are already
subjected to impacts from climate change may also experience an acceleration or intensification of
impacts due to project activities.ESS4 addresses the health, safety, and security risks and impacts on
project-affected communities and the corresponding responsibility of borrowers to avoid or minimize
such risks and impacts, with particular attention to people who, because of their particular circumstances,
may be vulnerable. While not explicitly mentioned, prevention and mitigation of different forms of
gender-based violence, specifically SEA/SH, is covered by ESS4.

ESS4 further covers the safety of dams. It applies to the design, construction, operation and maintenance
of new and existing dams., as well as structures that rely on dams (reservoirs, irrigation schemes, flood
control and water supply systems). The Borrower must take measures to ensure that dam failure or
operational failure risks are minimized through proper design, construction, supervision, quality
assurance, and regular safety inspections. It requires independent dam safety experts for large dams (15
meters high or of special complexity). It further covers appurtenant structures, including dikes,
embankments, spillways, tunnels and other components.

ESS5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement. ESS5 recognizes that
project-related land acquisition and restrictions on land use can have adverse impacts on communities
and persons. Project-related land acquisition or restrictions on land use may cause physical displacement
(relocation, loss of residential land or loss of shelter), economic displacement (loss of land, assets or access
to assets, leading to loss of income sources or other means of livelihood), or both. The term “involuntary
resettlement” refers to these impacts. Resettlement is considered involuntary when affected persons or
communities do not have the right to refuse land acquisition or restrictions on land use that result in
displacement. The Project considers these risks and impacts as part of this ESMF.

ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources. ESS6
recognizes that protecting and conserving biodiversity and sustainably managing living natural resources
are fundamental to sustainable development. Biodiversity is defined as the variability among living
organisms from all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the
ecological complexes of which they are a part; this includes diversity within species, between species and
of ecosystems. Biodiversity often underpins ecosystem services valued by humans. Impacts on
biodiversity can therefore often adversely affect the delivery of ecosystem services. To manage these risks
and impacts, the ESMF includes E&S screening criteria for excluding subprojects that have potential
adverse impacts on ecologically sensitive areas and natural habitats; an indicative list of mitigation




22
measures based on potential risk assessment of the subprojects. Mitigation measures will be detailed in
site-specific E&S instruments.

ESS7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities.
This ESS applies to distinct social and cultural groups. ESS7 contributes to poverty reduction and
sustainable development by ensuring that projects supported by the Bank enhance opportunities for
SSAHUTLC to participate in, and benefit from, the development process in ways that do not threaten their
unique cultural identities and well-being. Some communities in the project area may meet the criteria for
SSAHUTLCs. The Project will screen sub-projects for the presence of SSAHUTLCs and ensure meaningful
and culturally appropriate consultations where they are present. Furthermore, sub-project ESIAs and
ESMPs will capture the risks and impacts in relation to SSAHUTLCs.

ESS8: Cultural Heritage. ESS8 recognizes that cultural heritage provides continuity in tangible and
intangible forms between the past, present and future. People identify with cultural heritage as a
reflection and expression of their constantly evolving values, beliefs, knowledge and traditions. Cultural
heritage, in its many manifestations, is important as a source of valuable scientific and historical
information, as an economic and social asset for development, and as an integral part of people’s cultural
identity and practice. ESS8 sets out measures designed to protect cultural heritage throughout the project
life cycle. Given the planned construction under the Project, this ESS is applicable.

ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure: recognizes the importance of open and
transparent engagement between the Borrower and project stakeholders as an essential element of good
international practice. Effective stakeholder engagement can improve the environmental and social
sustainability of projects, enhance project acceptance and make a significant contribution to successful
project design and implementation. The borrower will engage with stakeholders throughout the project
life cycle, commencing such engagement as early as possible in the project development process and in a
timeframe that enables meaningful consultations with stakeholders on project design. The nature, scope
and frequency of stakeholder engagement will be proportionate to the nature and scale of the project
and its potential risks and impacts. The borrower has prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
proportionate to the nature and scale of the project and its potential risks and impacts.

For a gap analysis between the national legislation and these ESSs, see Annex 9.



3.4 Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines
The general WB Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSG) will serve as a technical
reference for the Project activities, together with the relevant Industry Sector EHS Guidelines, which
provide guidance to users or project implementers on EHS issues in specific industry sectors. It
includes environmental guideline on air emissions and ambient air quality, energy conservation,
waste water and water quality, water conservation, noise and contaminated land. The occupational
health and safety guideline includes hazards related to chemicals, physical and biological that cause
health and safety risks. The communityhealth and safety guideline include traffic safety, structural,
life and fire, water quality and diseases. The WBG General EHS Guidelines provide guideline values
on air quality, wastewater, and noise emission, which are applicable during most of the subprojects
implementation and operation. Ethiopian EHS regulatory requirements applicable to the project
include the following: The Ethiopian EIA Guideline (2000) provides guideline values for water and air
quality; Ethiopia drinking water standard published by the Ethiopian Standard Agency (2013) provides



23
guideline values (limits) on physical, chemical, and bacteriological water quality. The standardalso
provides sampling frequency for water quality testing of water supply schemes/systems.
Reconstruction of existing and construction of new WASH facilities are required to satisfy this
standard for potable water supply. The EHS requirements for emissions control are usually addressed
through the environmental and social assessment and monitoring process while building designs
require permits from the concerned local authorities.



     4. Environmental and Social Baseline
Geographic and Physical Setting: Ethiopia is a landlocked country in the Horn of Africa, characterized
by significant geographic and climatic diversity. It spans from highland plateaus (above 3,000 m) to arid
lowlands in the east and southeast. The country’s topography and rainfall patterns create distinct
agroecological zones — ranging from moist highlands to semi-arid and arid lowlands — with
corresponding variations in agricultural potential and water availability. Water resources are unevenly
distributed: more than 60 percent of land area is arid or semi-arid3, even though the western river basins
hold the bulk of surface water resources.

Ethiopia is administratively divided into 11 regional states and two chartered cities. The intended project
coverage is in all 13 regions and therefore includes extremely diverse environments, from the highland
rain-fed agricultural areas of Amhara, Tigray, Oromia, and Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’
Region (SNNPR), to lowland pastoral and agropastoral areas in Afar, Somali, Gambella, and parts
of Benishangul-Gumuz. Geographic variation directly influences irrigation potential, water stress
exposure, and socio-economic conditions.

Climate and Hydrology: Ethiopia’s climate exhibits strong seasonal and spatial variability, with three
rainfall seasons, Bega, Belg and Kiremt. The primary season occurs from mid-June to mid-September and
accounts for 50-80 percent of the annual rainfall. Mean annual distribution is approximately 2,000 mm
over the south-western highlands and less than 300 mm over the south-eastern and norther-eastern
lowlands. Temperatures across Ethiopia can range from -15 C over the highlands to above 25 C in the
lowlands. The equatorial rainforests in the south and southwest have high rainfall and humidity, while the
summits of the Semien and Bale mountains and the north-east ad east and south-east lowland have dry
conditions.4 The timing and amount of rainfall are key determinants of rain-fed agriculture and water
availability.

The country’s water resources are unevenly distributed on both spatial and temporal scales. Major river
basins such as the Blue Nile (Abbay), Baro-Akobo, Tekeze, and Omo-Gibe account for most surface water
flows, whereas eastern basins like the Awash face intensive water stress due to high demand and less
abundant water resources. Approximately 25 percent of the population lives in areas of high water stress5,



3
  Ethiopian Environment and Forest Research Institute (EEFRI), Strategic Plan 2016-2025, p.1
4
  World Bank, Ethiopia: Climate Risk Country Profile, 2020, Washington DC, p.4.
5
  See World Resources Institute, 3 Strategies for Water-Wise Development in Ethiopia, accessed at:
https://www.wri.org/insights/strategies-water-risk-insecurity-
ethiopia#:~:text=Nearly%2025%25%20(27%20million),further%20jeopardize%20urban%20water%20resilience.



24
with significant implications for irrigation demands. Projected warming trends for the country is expected
to increase declines in rainfall, leading to increased water stress.6

Land, Soil and Natural Resources: Soils in Ethiopia reflect its varied landscape. Highland soils often
support intensive smallholder agriculture, while lowlands may have coarse, less fertile soils with high
susceptibility to drought. Historical and continuing patterns of land degradation, soil erosion, and
deforestation threaten soil productivity and water catchment functions, particularly in highland and mid-
altitude zones. Ethiopia loses an estimated 1.4 million hectares of forest per year,7 contributing to
biodiversity loss, soil depletion, and increased sedimentation in waterways.

Water Resources and Irrigation Context: Despite significant river flows overall, only a small fraction of
Ethiopia’s irrigable land is developed: less than 5 percent of the estimated 3.7 million hectares of
potentially irrigable land is currently under irrigation.8 This underscores the very limited penetration of
irrigation and the associated development gap in rural agriculture.

Irrigation infrastructure varies by region: large dams such as Tendaho on the Awash River in Afar support
commercial irrigation, while small dams and micro-irrigation schemes are more common in Amhara and
Tigray. However, access to these structures and equitable distribution of irrigation benefits remain highly
uneven.

Environmental Conditions: Environmental pressures in Ethiopia include deforestation, watershed
degradation, and invasive species proliferation, which destabilize regulatory ecosystem services such as
water infiltration, soil retention, and biodiversity habitat integrity.9 These pressures interact with climate
variability to heighten the risk of droughts and floods, reducing the reliability of both rain-fed and irrigated
farming systems and increasing downstream sedimentation risks for irrigation canals and reservoirs.

Ecosystem degradation also undermines water quality and ecosystem health, with implications for both
human and livestock health and for aquatic species in rivers such as the Awash, where irrigation, industry,
and domestic water withdrawals converge.10

Social and Demographic Context: Ethiopia is one of Africa’s most populous countries, with over 137
million people11, of whom the majority live in rural areas and depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.
Agriculture accounts for about 35 percent of GDP and employs around 70 percent of the labor force,
underscoring its socio-economic centrality.12 However, the sector remains heavily rain-fed and
vulnerable to climate variability and extreme weather events.


6
  Ditto, p. 9.
7
  Ecohubmap, Deforestation in Ethiopia, accessed at: https://www.ecohubmap.com/hot-spot/deforestation-in-
ethiopia/4evkklhnigcl6
8
  See: Mekonen and Gelagle, The Current Irrigation Potential and Irrigated Land in Ethiopia – A Review, 2021.
9
  Hailu Biru, Impact of Deforestation in Ethiopia, In: Journal of the Selva Andina Biosphere, 2022
10
   Asseigide, Alamirew, Bayabil, Dile, Tessema and Zeleke, Impacts of Surface Water Quality in the Awash River
Basin, Ethiopia: A systematic Review, in: Frontiers in Water, 2022.
11
   Worldometer, Etjiopia, accessed on 24 January 2026, accessed at: https://www.worldometers.info/world-
population/ethiopia-population/#google_vignette
12
   African Development Bank, Ethiopia Economic Outlook, accessed at: https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/east-
africa/ethiopia/ethiopia-economic-
outlook#:~:text=Ethiopia's%20economy%20grew%207.1%25%20in,due%20to%20slow%20export%20growth.



25
Persistent food insecurity remains a serious social issue: millions rely on safety net programs, and rural
poverty rates are high, particularly in lowland regions where rainfall is unreliable and irrigation
infrastructure is limited. Regional disparities are stark: highland areas such as parts of Amhara and Oromia
often have better climatic conditions and infrastructure, while drought-prone and lowland regions such
as Afar, Somali, Gambella, and Benishangul-Gumuz face chronic food insecurity and limited access to
water resources.

Vulnerability to Climate Change and Environmental Shocks: Ethiopia’s agriculture and water sectors are
highly sensitive to climate change, which is driving increased frequency of heat waves, floods, and
droughts. Historical records show rising temperatures and shifting rainfall patterns, affecting crop
productivity and water availability in major basins such as the Awash.13 These climate pressures are widely
perceived by farmers and communities as affecting river flows, farm yields, and seasonal water
availability.

Climate change disproportionately affects rural livelihoods and food security, especially for households
reliant on rain-fed agriculture. Increased climate shocks reduce cropping windows, deepen water stress,
and escalate competition between domestic, livestock, and irrigation demands.

Water Resource Competition and Irrigation Challenges: With agriculture accounting for an estimated 84
percent percent of total water demand14, competition for water between irrigation and other uses is a
growing concern, particularly in regions with limited water endowments. Water stress is intensified where
industrial, urban, and agricultural demands overlap. Strategies to reduce water stress (such as increased
water use efficiency and storage) are essential for supporting irrigation expansion without exacerbating
environmental degradation.

Key Social Vulnerabilities Relevant to Irrigation:

Economic vulnerability: Rural households heavily depend on agriculture, but structural constraints —
limited irrigation coverage, low productivity, underdeveloped markets — reinforce income insecurity.
Food insecurity: Chronic and seasonal food shortages are widespread, with disparities across regions
based on agroecology and infrastructure.
Gender disparities: Women often face barriers in access to land, water governance, and productive
resources, affecting their resilience to environmental stressors.
Health risks: Water scarcity and reliance on unsafe water sources increase burdens of waterborne
diseases in rural areas, compounded by limited health services.
    • Institutional and capacity gaps: Weak water governance and limited technical capacity at local
         levels constrain resilient water and irrigation management.




     5. Procedures and Implementation Arrangements

13
   Malede, Andualem, Yibeltal, Alamirew, Kassie, Demeke, Mekonnen, Climate change impacts on hydroclimatic
variables over Awash basin, Ethiopia: A systematic review, In: Discover Applied Science 27, 2024.
14
   Teferi, Kassawmar, Bewket, Zeleke, Ayele, O’Donnell, Walsh, Rainfed Agriculture in Ethiopia: A systematic review
of green water management pathways to improve water and food security, 2025, accessed at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/agronomy/articles/10.3389/fagro.2025.1418024/full



26
4.1 E&S Risk Management Procedures
The E&S risk management procedures will be implemented through the sub-project selection process in
Components 1-4. In summary, the procedures aim to do the following:

Table 1 Project Cycle and E&S Management Procedures


 Project Stage                E&S Stage                              E&S Management Procedures

 Assessment and               Screening       •       During subproject identification, ensure sub-project eligibility
 Analysis: Sub-project                                check by referring to the Exclusion List in Annex 1.
 identification                               •       For all activities, use the E&S Screening Form in Annex 1 to
                                                      identify and assess potential E&S risks and impacts, and identify
                                                      the appropriate mitigation measures for the sub-project.
                                              •       Identify the relevant E&S instrument required under the ESF.
                                              •       Identify the documentation, permits, and clearances required
                                                      under the government’s Environmental Regulation.
                                              •       Submit the E&S Screening forms to the FPIU for clearance
                                              •       FPIU to submit first 5 sample screening forms to the World
                                                      Bank
 Formulation and               Planning        •       Based on the results of the E&S Screening Form, adopt and/or
 Planning: Planning for                                prepare relevant E&S procedures and plans.
 sub-project activities,                       •       For activities requiring site-specific E&S instruments (e.g. ESIA,
 including HR, costs                                   ESMP, RAP, IPMP, HULTC Plan etc, submit the the site-specific
 and monitoring                                        instruments for prior review and no objection by the World
 measures                                              Bank prior to initiating the bidding processes and/or launching
                                                       activities. Submit all RAPs to the WB.
                                               •       Ensure that the contents of the E&S instruments are shared
                                                       with relevant stakeholders in an accessible manner and
                                                       consultations are held with the affected communities in
                                                       accordance with the SEP, including vulnerable groups or
                                                       groups coming under IP/SSAHUTLC.
                                               •       Complete all documentation, permits, and clearances required
                                                       under the government’s Environmental Regulation.
                                               •       Train staff responsible for implementation and monitoring of
                                                       E&S instruments.
                                               •       Incorporate relevant E&S procedures and plans into contractor
                                                       bidding documents; train contractors on relevant procedures
                                                       and plans.

                                              For dam-related activities:
                                                  • Establish and maintain throughout the implementation an
                                                      independent panel of experts (POE), under terms of
                                                      reference with personnel possessing qualifications
                                                      satisfactory to the Association, with the purpose of (i)
                                                      inspecting and evaluating the safety status of the existing
                                                      dams or dam under construction (DUC), their appurtenances
                                                      and performance history; (ii) reviewing and evaluating the
                                                      dam owners’ operation and maintenance procedures; and
                                                      (iii) providing written reports of findings and




27
                                                      recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related
                                                      measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams or DUC to
                                                      an acceptable standard of safety. For high-hazard cases
                                                      involving significant and complex remedial work, the
                                                      Recipient shall also ensure the POE provide advice on any
                                                      technical design, construction procedures, dam safety,
                                                      appurtenant structures, catchment area, areas surrounding
                                                      the reservoir, downstream areas, to support and inform the
                                                      development of the studies being undertaken under the
                                                      Activities.
                                                • Update or prepare O&M Plan and Emergency Preparedness
                                                      Plan if recommended from dam safety assessments.
                                                • Engage competent professionals to design and supervise
                                                      construction for any remedial work or dam safety measures
                                                      necessary to update the relevant existing dams or DUC to an
                                                      acceptable standard of safety if recommended from dam
                                                      safety assessments, including the preparation or updating of
                                                      the following detailed plans: (a) a plan for construction,
                                                      supervision and quality assurance; (b) and implementation
                                                      plan; (c) an operation and maintenance plan; and (d) an
                                                      emergency preparedness plan. The scope and depth of the
                                                      dam safety plans should be commensurate with the works
                                                      and site condition.
                                                • If dam rehabilitation is required, Integrate dam safety risk
                                                      assessment and recommendations into feasibility/design
                                                      studies and ESIA.
 Implementation and       Implementation    •    Ensure implementation of procedures and plans through site
 Monitoring:                                     visits, regular reporting from the field, and other planned
 Implementation                                  monitoring.
 support and of                             •    Track grievances/beneficiary feedback.
 monitoring for sub-                        •    Continue awareness raising and/or training for relevant staff,
 projects                                        contractors, communities.
 Review and                Completion       •    Assess whether plans have been effectively implemented.
 Evaluation:                                     Include indicators on sustainability and community
 Qualitative,                                    participation.
 quantitative, and/or                       •    Ensure that physical sites are properly restored.
 participatory data
 collection on a sample
 basis



Stage 1: Sub-project assessment and analysis – E&S Screening:
All proposed activities or sub-projects in Component 1-4 will be checked for their eligibility to ensure that
they are within the boundaries of the Project’s eligible activities, and they are not considered as activities
listed on the E&S Exclusion List (See Annex 1).

In a second step, all sub-projects and activities are screened for their E&S risks and impacts, including
poverty targeting, gender inclusion, and environmental and climate risks. For Component 2 and 3 sub-
project activities, the MoA and the respective Regional Governments will conduct the E&S screening, done
by the Environmental and Social Specialists in the regional governments, in close coordination with the




28
engineers and other technical staff working on subproject planning and design. The Environmental Officer
in the Regional Government will review and approve the documents prior to submission to the FPIU.

Sub-projects site selection and screening must be based on community participation and consultation,
which must be documented. The E&S screening process involves: a) reconnaissance of the subproject
areas/routes and their surroundings, b) identification of the major subproject activities and c) preliminary
assessment of the impacts of these activities on the ecological and socio-economic environment of the
subproject surrounding areas.

E&S Baseline Information to be collected at site: As part of the E&S screening process and subsequently
the preparation of site-specific E&S instruments, the following information should be collected and
considered:

Table 2 Baseline data to be collected

 Environmental                    Hydrology
                                  Water equality
                                  Soils
                                  Biodiversity
                                  Climate / seasonal flows
 Social                           Socio-economic baseline emphasizing poor/vulnerable households
                                  landless and smallholders
                                  land tenure and livelihoods
                                  Inclusion analysis:
                                               o HUTLC (see also Annex 1),
                                               o vulnerable groups,
                                               o gender equality, GBV
                                  Labor
                                  Public health
                                  Cultural sites
                                  Social and power dynamics
                                  Institutional capacity

E&S Screening Results: The E&S Screening Form and the baseline results in conjunction with the Generic
ESMP (see Annex 2) indicate which mitigation measures and plans are relevant for the specific activities
(such as the ESIA, ESMP, the LMP, Chance Find Procedures, IPMF, HUTLC Plan etc.). Respectively, the
Environmental Officers in the FPIU and RPIUs (Component 2 and 3) and of the proposer in the relevant
Ministry will be responsible for preparation of sub-project E&S instruments, and for follow-up, monitoring
and supervision of their implementation (see Annex 11 and 12 for ESMP and RAP TOR and outlines). The
responsible party (the Regional Government, MoWE or MoA) will also identify the documentation,
permits, and clearances required under the government’s Environmental Regulation.

Overview of Sub-project categorization: Depending on the level of their environmental and social risks
and impacts, sub-projects may be classified as High Risk, Substantial Risk, Moderate Risk and Low Risk.
Please note that this categorization is part of the screening process for new sub-projects. For all “Yes”
responses on the screening form (Annex 1), the measures taken to this effect should be described briefly.
Based on the answers provided, the risk rating of the sub-project (High, Substantial, Moderate or Low)




29
will be determined - according to the WB Environmental and Social Policy for Investment Project
Financing, dispositions for projects involving multiple small subprojects (see below).

Table 3. Risk Categories and Classification
Risk Category       Nature of Risk and Impact                           Examples
                    Activities that do not have a physical
                    footprint. These will not require E&S
                    instrument preparation, however, E&S                communication and translations; training
Low Risk
                    clauses in the contract are recommended (to         and workshops; TA
                    be prepared by the contracting agency prior
                    to bidding process)
                    Activities rated moderate risk are site-specific,
                    temporal and reversible in nature. In addition
                                                                        Rehabilitation or construction of SSI and
                    to the E&S clauses in the contract, these
Moderate Risk                                                           small dams with no land and resettlement
                    activities may require a simplified or detailed
                                                                        implications
                    ESMP. Contractors will also be required to
                    prepare a C-ESMP.
                    Activities that have substantial E&S risks and
                    impacts, including those that are not as            Activities that include rehabilitation or
                    complex as high risk projects, and more             construction of more complex SSI. Activities
                    predictable and potentially reversible. This        leading to involuntary resettlement, land
Substantial Risk
                    category includes risks of social conflict;         acquisition and restrictions to land use;
                    impacts that are medium in magnitude,               activities that may spark inter-communal
                    medium to low probability of serious adverse        conflicts
                    effects to human health and/or environment.
                                                                        Construction/ rehabilitation activities in
                                                                        critical habitat and protected areas; projects
                                                                        involving significant amount of land,
                    Subprojects   that    contain      significant      quantities of hazardous substances;
High Risk
                    environmental and social risks impacts.             rehabilitation or construction of large dams;
                                                                        dam height, size or storage volume exceeds
                                                                        threshold or dam has potential significant
                                                                        downstream impacts in case of failure, etc.

It is expected that most rehabilitation sub-projects under Component 2 will require an ESMP, while sub-
projects under Component 1 and 3 may require an ESIA/ESMP or ESMP. For both components, the
identification of specific risks in view of ESS5 may require the additional preparation of a RAP (see Section
on Resettlement Framework below).

Local requirements: Article 5 of the EIA Proclamation includes directives on which projects a) require an
EIA, b) which projects do not require an EIA, and which may require a partial EIA or other evaluation. An
initial Environmental Examination (IEE) may be used in cases where it is not clear if a full EIA is required.
Projects are grouped in schedules:
     1. Schedule-1: Projects which may have adverse and significant environmental effects require a full
          EIA study (e.g. large dams, reservoirs, major water supply schemes, major infrastructure works)
     2. Schedule-2: Projects whole type, scale or characteristics mean they may cause some significant
          environmental impacts, but are less likely to need a full EIA (smaller infrastructure works, medium
          scale projects whose impacts may be significant depending on location, scale or characteristics)




30
     3. Schedule-3: Projects that are unlikely to have significant environmental impacts, and hence do
        not require an EIA (smaller projects with minimal E&S impacts, small-scale infrastructure, small
        scale irrigation, small water supply or drainage works in non-sensitive areas).

Proponent submits information, including on location, size, likely environmental and social impacts,
proposed mitigation measures and based on that the relevant agency decides whether a full EIA is
required, whether conditions or modifications are sufficient, or to reject the proposal. Any project in an
environmentally sensitive area (e.g. land prone to erosion or desertification, areas of historical or
archaeological importance, special landscapes, etc..) is treated more strictly.

Stage 2: Sub-project formulation and planning – E&S Planning:
Based on the process above, the responsible party will adopt the necessary E&S management measures
already included in the Annexes of this ESMF (such as the LMP, the SEA/SH Action Plan, the Chance Find
Procedures, etc.) or develop relevant site-specific E&S instruments (e.g. ESIAs, ESMPs, RAPs, IPMPs,
HUTLC Plans ect). The following existing Project-level procedures and plans may apply:

Table 4 E&S risk mitigation procedures and plans

 Procedures or Plan                      Description
 Labor Management Procedures             The project is associated with labor risks and impacts, given the
 (LMP):                                  rehabilitation and construction works planned. These include OHS, child
                                         and forced labor, labor disputes, discrimination and exclusion of
                                         vulnerable/marginalized groups and GBV related issues, and others. In
                                         order to mitigate these risks, specific LMP have been developed (see Annex
                                         5). The purpose of the LMP is to establish clear labor procedures for all
                                         project workers, namely direct project workers, contracted workers,
                                         primary suppliers’ workers, and community workers, in line with the
                                         requirements of the local legislation and the World Bank's ESS2.

 Chance Find Procedures                  To mitigate risks on cultural heritage, a Chance Find Procedure needs to be
                                         followed in the case of Chance Finds (see Annex 3).
 SEA/SH Action Plan                      To mitigate any SEA/SH-related risks and impacts of project activities, a
                                         SEA/SH Action Plan has been prepared. The plan contains a tailored channel
                                         to handle SEA/SH grievances and proposes prevention mechanisms. It will be
                                         strictly followed by all project implementers (Annex 6).
 Stakeholder     Engagement       and    A separate Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) was prepared for the Project.
 Disclosure                              The SEP defines a structured, purposeful and culturally appropriate approach
                                         to consultation and disclosure of information, in accordance with ESS10
 Project  Grievance          Redress     The SEP contains the description of the Project GRM. The Project GRM
 Mechanisms (GRM):                       allows any project-affected person to file grievances with the project as
                                         well as other project-related concerns. As per World Bank standards, the
                                         GRM operates to be responsive to SEA/SH cases with activities further
                                         detailed in the SEA/SH Action Plan (see Annex 6). The GRM aims to address
                                         concerns in a timely and transparent manner and effectively. It will be
                                         widely disseminated in all project areas, through means identified in the
                                         SEP. It will be readily accessible for all project-affected parties.
 Security Risk Assessment and            The Project will implement security risk management measures, which
 Management                              include measures necessary to manage the security risks for all
                                         implementers, including contractors’ staff and workers as well as assets and
                                         sites. The FPIU will share updated security risk assessments capturing
                                         security risks at a reasonable and relevant level. NGOs and contractors will




31
                                   prepare and implement local security measures, based on the security risk
                                   assessments, specifically for the planned interventions. The FPIU will
                                   approve the measures and monitor their implementation. A separate
                                   Security Risk Assessment and Management Plan (SRAMP) will be prepared
                                   to guide this.
 Waste Management Plan (WMP):      Some activities will result in resource utilization and pollution risks
                                   including risks from utilization of water for irrigation, raw materials, and
                                   energy during construction and operational phases. Furthermore, there
                                   are risks of soil, air, & water pollution from waste (solid, hazardous,
                                   wastewater) generation, pollutants release, and application of agro-
                                   chemicals during construction & operation periods. A WMP has been
                                   prepared for to mitigate these risks (see Annex 4).
 Integrated Pest Management        The rehabilitation and construction of SSI will lead to increased agriculture
 Framework (IPMF):                 activity. These activities may include the use of agrochemicals (fertilizers
                                   and pesticides), which could result in water and soil pollution affecting
                                   human health and the environment. To mitigate risks associated with the
                                   use of agrochemicals, an Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF)
                                   has been prepared (see Annex 8).
 Resettlement Action Plan (RAP):   Some activities may necessitate land acquisition and involuntary physical
                                   or economic resettlement. In these cases, screening results may trigger the
                                   preparation of a RAP to assess the losses and allow for appropriate
                                   responses, including compensation. (see Section 4.3).
 Emergency Preparedness and        For the rehabilitation or construction of medium size or large dams, a site-
 Response Plan (EPRP):             specific EPRP will be prepared as part of the ESMP and OHS Plan, and any
                                   other documentation as requested by the POE.
 Historically      Underserved     If a sub-project, through the screening, identifies the presence of HUTLCs
 Traditional Local Communities     in the sub-project area, the activity will require the preparation of a HUTLC
 Plan (HUTLC Plan)                 Plan with an explicit outline of Free, Prior and Informed Consultations
                                   (FPIC) in the following circumstances: a) adverse impacts on land or natural
                                   resources under traditional ownership or use; b) relocation from such
                                   land/resources; significant impacts on cultural heritage material to identify
                                   or spiritual life.

If site-specific E&S instruments are necessary, the responsible party will prepare these and other
applicable documents as needed. It may include consultant teams for the preparation of these E&S
instruments. ESIAs and ESMPs will be prepared in line with para 13 and 14 of ESS1 of the World Bank’s
ESF (‘indicative outline of ESIA/ESMP’, see also Annex 11 and 12) and the project-specific requirements
outlined in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) of this Project. Stakeholder
consultations will be conducted as part of the E&S screening and the preparation of ESIAs/ESMPs – as laid
out in the SEP – and shall identify any E&S related concerns from project-affected parties.

Project Generic ESMP: The table matrix in Annex 2 contains a Generic Project ESMP. It identifies
prevention, minimization, mitigation and compensation measures for each activity. The mitigation table
serves as a reference on potential environmental and social risks and impacts, associated with
international industry best practices, mitigation measures and indicators or outcomes that can be
planned and implemented throughout the sub-project or project. The risks and impacts, mitigation
measures and monitoring indicators are sorted by ESS.

Site-Specific Mitigation Measures: The Generic ESMP will be used as a basis to develop the site-specific
E&S mitigation measures for specific sub-projects, based on the E&S risk screening results. Each activity




32
takes place in a specific context and has specific characteristics, which will be considered in the
preparation of site-specific E&S mitigation measures, for example in ESIAs and/or site-specific ESMPs.
These sub-project instruments should be in place before any construction or rehabilitation activity
(including land clearance, contractor mobilization, etc.) take place. Depending on the level of anticipated
risks and impacts, other mitigation measures may be added, and monitoring mechanisms adjusted prior
to sub-project commencement.

Bidding Documents: The ESMPs shall be included in the procurement and contracting of contractors -
including bidding documents for potential civil works, as well as other WB standard EHS terms and
conditions for procurement and any subproject-specific requirements. Codes of Conduct (CoC) shall be
required to be signed by all workers of contractors, subcontractors, primary suppliers, and their workers
(see Annex 5).

Approvals and Disclosure: The contents of the site-specific E&S instruments will be shared with relevant
stakeholders in an accessible manner, and consultations will be held with the affected communities on
the environmental and social risks and mitigation measures. The site-specific E&S instruments will be
submitted to the FPIU and will be subject to a no-objection from the FPIU. The FPIU will submit the first
five ESIAs, ESMPs, IPMP and every RAP to the World Bank for prior review and no objection. After this first
5, the World Bank and the FPIU will reassess whether prior review is needed for further E&S instruments.

The responsible party will also complete the documentation, permits and clearances required under the
government’s Environmental Regulation before any project activities begin. Once cleared by the World
Bank, the ESIAs/ESMPs and ESMPs will be submitted by the proposer to the Regional Environmental
Protection Authority for approval and licensing. The Authority will review the ESIA/ESMP and provide to
the proposer with written comments within fifteen (15) days of its receipt. The Authority will review the
ESIA/ESMP and notify the proposer in writing if it is cleared. Where the ESIA/ESMP is found to be
inadequate, the Authority will return it to the proposer for revision, taking into consideration the
comments and objections of the Authority. No works can commence prior to approval and licensing by
the Authority.

The World Bank requires that the ESIAs/ESMPs are made available to project-affected groups, as defined
in the SEP, and to the public at large. A summary version will be translated into the main local languages
and disclosed to the public. The proposer will disseminate the ESIA or ESMPs at strategic locations and
offices of the ministries and according to the SEP. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be in place
for complaints on non-compliance with the disseminated documentation.

Capacity Building: At this stage, staff who will be working on the respective sub-project activities will be
trained in the specific E&S instruments relevant to the activities they work on. The party responsible
should provide such training for field staff. The party responsible should also ensure that all selected
contractors and subcontractors understand and incorporate E&S mitigation measures relevant to them
as standard operating procedures for civil works. The party responsible should provide training to selected
contractors to ensure that they understand and incorporate E&S mitigation measures; and plan for
cascading training to be delivered by contractors to subcontractors. The party responsible should further
ensure that the entities or communities responsible for ongoing operation and maintenance of the
investment have received training on operations stage E&S management measures as applicable (See
Section on Capacity building below).

Stage 3: Implementation and Monitoring – E&S Implementation:



33
Monitoring: The main monitoring and supervision responsibilities rest with the FPIU, which will administer
the overall project-related E&S monitoring and implementation as laid out in this ESMF. The FPIU will have
overall responsibility for the implementation of the E&S mitigation measures, as well as for monitoring
for compliance. The E&S Specialists and the OHS Specialist in the FPIU will handle all monitoring,
inspection and reporting aspects.

The responsible party working to implement the project will ensure that monitoring practices include the
E&S risks identified in the ESMF and in the site-specific E&S instruments, where applicable, and will
monitor the implementation of E&S risk management mitigation plans as part of regular project
monitoring. For Component 1 and 2 activities, the RPIUs will be responsible for day-to-day monitoring and
inspection of E&S mitigation measures in relation to construction and rehabilitation of irrigation schemes.
E&S-related monitoring will focus on compliance by its contractors, sub-contractors and suppliers. For
Component 2 or 3, the proposer, MILLS, MoWe or the regional government, will be responsible for day-
to-day inspections and monitoring, while the FPIU will conduct overall monitoring of activities. The FPIU
E&S Specialists will assess progress of activities against the ESCP, ESMF, and the SEP, and subsequent
ESIAs/ESMPs.

The responsible party will monitor and supervise the preparation of C-ESMPs by contractors and will be
responsible for the monitoring and supervision of contractors and sub-contractors and suppliers as
stipulated in the ESMP. If monitoring and supervision results in the identification of non-compliance by
contractors, the responsible party will report such to the FPIU and will discuss and oversee the
implementation of corrective actions of the contractor.

Capacity Building: Throughout Project implementation, the responsible party will continue to provide
training and awareness raising to relevant stakeholders, such as staff, selected contractors, and
communities, to support the implementation of the E&S risk management mitigation measures. An initial
list of training needs is proposed below.

The responsible party and the FPIU will also track grievances/beneficiary feedback in line with the SEP
during project implementation to use as a monitoring tool for implementation of project activities and
environmental and social mitigation measures.

Reporting: The contractor will be required to report to the responsible party on a monthly basis. The
responsible party will report to the FPIU on a quarterly basis (see Annex 7). The FPIU will receive all
reporting and will provide general reporting as part of the Project Progress Report to the World Bank, on
a quarterly basis. At a minimum, the reporting will include (i) the overall implementation of E&S risk
management instruments and measures, (ii) any environmental or social issues arising as a result of
project activities and how these issues will be remedied or mitigated, including timelines, (iii) Occupational
Health and Safety performance (including incidents and accidents), (iv) community health and safety, (v)
stakeholder engagement updates, in line with the SEP, (vi) public notification and communications, (vii)
progress on the implementation and completion of project works, and (viii) summary of
grievances/beneficiary feedback received, actions taken, and complaints closed out, in line with the SEP.

Incident and Accident Reporting: The World Bank will be notified promptly (within 48 hours) of any
incident or accident related to the Project which has, or is likely to have, a significant adverse effect on
the environment, communities, the public or workers, including, inter alia, cases of SEA/SH and accidents
that result in death, serious or multiple injuries (by the FPIU). The FPIU will provide sufficient detail
regarding the scope, severity, and possible causes of the incident or accident, indicating immediate



34
measures taken or that are planned to be taken to address it. The report should also include any
information provided by any contractor or supervising entity. The report will be submitted through the
relevant form in the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Incident Reporting Toolkit (ESIRT).

All other incidents will be reported in the quarterly E&S report, with a Root Cause Analysis (RCA) prepared
by the contractor within 15 days of the incident or accident notification, which will be followed by the
detailed action plan. In cases where prolonged investigations are required, quarterly reports will be
provided.

Stage 4: Review and Evaluation – E&S Completion:
Upon completion of the sub-project activities, the responsible party will review and evaluate progress and
completion of project activities and all E&S mitigation measures. Especially for civil works, the responsible
party will monitor activities with regard to site restoration and landscaping in the affected areas to ensure
that the activities are done to an appropriate and acceptable standard before closing the contracts, in
accordance with measures identified in the site-specific E&S instrument and other plans. The sites must
be restored to at least the same condition and standard that existed prior to commencement of works.
Any pending issues must be resolved before a sub-project is considered fully completed. The responsible
party jointly with the FPIU will prepare the completion report describing the final status of compliance
with the E&S risk management measures and the FPIU will submit it to the World Bank. Key indicators to
be used for evaluation will measure sub-project sustainability and public participation and ownership.


4.2 Implementation Arrangements
The Project will be implemented by the MILLS as the lead implementing agency through the FPIU. The
FPIU will be responsible for day-to-day coordination, oversight of implementation, and consolidation of
project reporting and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). It will work closely with focal persons from the
MoA and MoWE to implement activities within their respective mandates. A Federal Steering Committee
(FSC), to be established during project preparation and maintained throughout implementation, will
provide strategic guidance and ensure effective multi-ministry and federal–regional coordination. The FSC
will be chaired by the Minister of MILLs, and the Committee will comprise ministers/state ministers from
the MoF, MoA, and MoWE, along with representatives from regional governments and development
partners.

The FPIU will coordinate with MoWE, MoA and regional Governments on the implementation of
Component 2 and 3. The MILLS FPIU which will include a functional environmental and social risk
management organizational structure. It will consist of one Environmental, one Social Specialist, one OHS
Specialist, and one GBV Specialist. They will be full time project staff. The Environmental and the Social
Specialists will be responsible for the monitoring of the compliance with this ESMF including the LMP, and
the SEP. Where necessary, they will discuss corrective measures with the PSC. They will further oversee
the preparation of site-specific additional E&S instruments, such as ESIAs, ESMPs, or RAPs for sub-
projects. The GBV Specialist will be responsible for the implementation of the SEA/SH Prevention and
Response Plan, and jointly with the Social Specialist for the GRM. The will receive these instruments for
review and for onward submission to the World Bank.

At the regional level, CRISP will use a hybrid implementation approach that leverages the existing capacity
of Bank-financed projects, while establishing dedicated structures where needed. CRISP will operate
across all 13 regions and will set up dedicated Regional Project Implementation Units (RPIUs) within the
Bureaus of Irrigation to oversee small-scale irrigation (SSI) and related activities. In the larger regions—



35
Oromia, Amhara, and Tigray—each will have one environmental expert and one social expert. For
Benishangul, Central Ethiopia, Somali, and Afar regions, each will have one environmental and social (E&S)
expert assigned. Additionally, two E&S experts will provide coverage for the regions of Sidama, South East,
and South West, as well as for Somali, Dire Dawa, and Harari, with one expert supporting each group of
regions. The Gambella region will be supported by an E&S expert from the existing Lowlands Livelihood
Resilience Project (LLRP). The allocation of E&S staff has been determined based on available resources
and the number of project interventions in each region. Mirroring the federal structure, Regional Steering
Committees will be formed in each region to coordinate across the irrigation, agriculture, and water
sectors. In the larger regions, CRISP will establish dedicated RPIUs under the Bureaus of Irrigation to
oversee SSI and related activities. In four smaller regions with limited activities (Benishangul-Gumuz,
Gambella, Harari, and Dire Dawa), the Project will leverage existing RPIUs under the MILLs-led Lowlands
Livelihood Resilience Project II LLRP-II or the Food Systems Resilience Program for Eastern and Southern
Africa FSRP to optimize resources, strengthen coordination, and progressively build the capacity of these
units

The E&S Specialists at the RPIUs will be responsible for the monitoring and supervision of the subproject-
specific E&S instruments in regard to Component 2 activities. They will assist in the preparation of bidding
documents for the rehabilitation activities and ensure that all subproject-specific requirements are
included in the bidding documents and that the construction companies have the respective capacity to
implement the requirements. They will undertake field monitoring missions and review documentation
in order to monitor the implementation of the E&S requirements, and they will train regional level
government staff in monitoring efforts.

For Component 3, the MILLS FPIU directly and the MoA and regional governments will act as key proposers
of sub-projects. FPIU E&S Specialists will be directly responsible for the preparation and implementation
of sub-project E&S instruments and for reporting on such. Where the MoWE acts as a proposer of a sub-
project, the WoWE will be responsible for the screening, preparation of E&S instruments and reporting
on the compliance with these instruments. For this purpose the MoWE will ensure the availability of one
Environmental and one Social Specialist.

The FPIU E&S Specialists will receive quarterly ESHS performance reports from all
proposers/implementers. The FPIU will submit these reports, together with a Project Progress Report to
the World Bank on a quarterly basis. The FPIU E&S staff will flag any performance concerns or non-
compliance with the FPIU leadership.

Contractors: Contractors will be implementing E&S mitigation measures as laid out in the ESMF and
subsequent ESMPs under construction and rehabilitation activities. Mitigation measures requirement will
be included in all procurement and bidding documentation, including in Bills of Quantities (BoQs), and will
be cost in agreements with the contractors. The contractors will be obliged to ensure that staff with EHS
experience and capacity is involved in construction works and can fulfill the reporting requirements on
E&S, and can guide and supervise all workers, including community workers.

Dam Safety Panel of Experts: For Component 2 activities, the FPIU will recruit and maintain a Dam Safety
Panel of Experts, with terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank, to oversee dam safety for all
dams associated with targeted irrigation schemes under the Activity.




36
The dam safety panel of experts will a) review and advise on dam safety aspects relevant to the feasibility
and design studies; b) ensure that dam safety considerations are integrated into all preparatory activities,
in accordance with Good International Industry Practice (GIIP) and World Bank requirements; c) provide
written recommendations for dam safety measures to be considered in subsequent project phases, should
the project proceed to construction; d) integrate dam safety risk assessment and recommendations into
feasibility/design studies and ESIAs.

The table below summarizes the roles and responsibilities regarding the implementation arrangements
for environmental and social management.

Table 5 Implementation Arrangements

 Level/                    Roles and Responsibilities
 Responsible Party
     • National level:         • Provide support, oversight, and quality control to all entities working on E&S
         MILLS        FPIU         risk management.
         (E&S                  • Collect, review, and provide quality assurance and approval to E&S Screening
         Specialists, OHS          Forms and Site-specific E&S instruments as relevant (except for Component
         Specialist and            2). Keep documentation of all progress.
         GBV Specialist)       • Submit first 5 site-specific E&S instruments to the World Bank, submit all RAPs
                                   to the World Bank.
                               • Oversee overall implementation and monitoring of E&S mitigation and
                                   management activities, compile progress reports from responsible parties,
                                   and report to the World Bank on a quarterly basis.
                               • Train responsible parties who will be responsible for implementing the ESMF.
     • National Level          • Ensure project activities do not fall under the Negative List.
         Component 2-          • Fill out E&S Screening Forms for relevant subproject activities and submit
         3: MoA and                forms to the FPIU, in close coordination with the engineers and other
         MoWe                      technical staff working on subproject planning and design
         (Environmental        • If relevant, prepare site-specific E&S instruments for sub-project activities and
         and        Social         submit to the FPIU .
         Specialists)          • Oversee daily implementation and monitoring of E&S mitigation measures,
                                   and report progress and performance to the FPIU level on a quarterly basis.
                               • Provide training to local contractors and communities on relevant E&S
                                   mitigation measures, roles, and responsibilities.
                               • Ensure that all bidding and contract documents include all relevant E&S
                                   management provisions per general and site-specific E&S instruments.
     • Regional Level /        • Ensure project activities do not fall under the Negative List.
         Component 2:          • Receive E&S Screening Forms for relevant subproject activities, review and
         RPIUs                     approve the forms and their results
         (Environmental        • If relevant, supervise the preparation of site-specific E&S instruments for sub-
         and        Social         project activities and submit to the FPIU .
         Specialists,          • Oversee daily implementation and monitoring of E&S mitigation measures,
         dam Specialist)           and report progress and performance to the FPIU level on a quarterly basis.
                               • Provide training to local contractors and communities on relevant E&S
                                   mitigation measures, roles, and responsibilities.
                               • Ensure that all bidding and contract documents include all relevant E&S
                                   management provisions per general and site-specific E&S instruments.
                               • xDam Specialist to oversee all dam-related activities and liaise with the POE.
     • Local        Level:     • tbd
         Woredas




37
     •       Local     level:     •   Comply with the Project’s E&S mitigation and management measures as
             contractors              specified in the general E&S instruments and the site-specific E&S
                                      instruments, and contract documents.
                                  •   Take all necessary measures to protect the health and safety of workers and
                                      community members, and avoid, minimize, or mitigate any environmental
                                      harm resulting from project activities.
                                  •   Report on a monthly basis to the responsible party on all E&S measures.


4.3 Resettlement Framework
This section lays out the process to be followed in case of land acquisition and involuntary resettlement.
Land acquisition as a result of sub-projects implementation may result in negative impacts to different
categories of Project-Affected People (PAP). Until the exact sub-project locations are determined, it is not
possible to estimate the likely number of people who may be affected.

The following process applies in these cases:

Land acquisition and resettlement procedures for the Project are guided by the following ESS5 principles:

         •      Involuntary resettlement should be avoided where feasible, where it is unavoidable, it will
                be minimized and appropriate measures to mitigate adverse impacts on displaced persons
                (and on host communities receiving displaced persons) will be carefully planned and
                implemented.
         •      Avoid forced eviction15.
         •      Mitigate unavoidable adverse social and economic impacts from land acquisition or
                restrictions on land use by: (a) providing timely compensation for loss of assets at
                replacement cost and (b) assisting displaced persons in their efforts to improve, or at least
                restore, their livelihoods and living standards, in real terms, to pre-displacement levels or to
                levels prevailing prior to the beginning of project implementation, whichever is higher.
         •      Improve living conditions of poor or vulnerable persons who are physically displaced, through
                provision of adequate housing, access to services and facilities, and security of tenure.
         •      Conceive and execute resettlement activities as sustainable development programs,
                providing sufficient investment resources to enable displaced persons to benefit directly from
                the project, as the nature of the project may warrant.
         •      Ensure that resettlement activities are planned and implemented with appropriate disclosure
                of information, meaningful consultation, and the informed participation of those affected.

According to ESS5 provisions, PAPs are persons who a) have formal legal rights to land or assets; b) do
not have formal legal rights to land or assets, but have a claim to land or assets that is recognized or
recognizable under national law; or c) have no recognizable legal right or claim to the land or assets they
occupy or use.

The Project is likely to have minor displacement impacts, either through economic or physical
displacement. The potential PAPs may be a) individuals who lose assets, building and structures, land,

15
  Forced eviction is the permanent or temporary removal against the will or individuals, families, and/or
communities from the homes and/or land which they occupy without the provision of, and access to, appropriate
forms of legal and other protection, including all applicable procedures and principles in ESS5.



38
property and/or access to natural and/or economic resources as a result of a sub-project. The Project
may also acquire communal lands, which will be addressed based on the regional communal tenure
systems for setting out entitlements and compensation payment. PAPs may belong to vulnerable groups,
such as poor people, elders, female headed households, children including orphans; disable people,
unemployed youth; people with disability; etc. Households headed by women that depend on sons,
brothers, and others for supports are especially vulnerable. Annex 11 lays out Voluntary Land
Donation procedures, in case land owners wish to donate their land to the Project.

Eligibility Criteria
Eligibility requirements ensure that PAPs experiencing a complete or partial loss of land, crops, trees, and
properties or access to income earning resources are identified and recognized as eligible for
compensation and any kind of assistance regardless of their legitimate land rights. To determine the
eligible person for compensation, the project takes into account the National Proclamation No 1336/2024
and the ESS5.

According to the WB ESS5 and the Ethiopian Proclamation No. 1161/2019 and its amendment 1336/2024,
article 13: a landholder who is to be displaced permanently shall be provided a substitute for a reasonable
proportion of the land taken from the area, and shall be given a substitute land if it is available. Where
equivalent substitute land is given, calculated by the current price the land holder shall be paid a one year
landholding compensation income which is equal to the highest income he annually used to generate in
the last three years preceding the expropriation of the land. ESS5 also requires that for persons whose
livelihoods are land based, replacement land that has a combination of productive potential, locational
advantages and other factors at least to equivalent to that being lost will be offered where feasible. Land
for land compensation will be applied only for those who have formal legal rights over the land. But
according to the ESS5, for those who have no legal right or claim to the land or asset they occupy or use
compensation for lost assets other than land and resettlement assistance will be provided in lieu of
compensation for land. Persons who encroach on the area after the cut-off date are not entitled to
compensation or any other form of resettlement assistance.

PAPs who are entitled for compensation under the Ethiopian legislation and ESS5 (in case of differences
between the Ethiopian laws and ESS 5, the instrument that provides and guarantees greatest benefit to
the PAPs will prevail) will be compensated for the improvements and assets on the land they lose, and
other assistance ensuring that they are: Informed about their options and rights pertaining to
resettlement; consulted and provided with technically and economically feasible resettlement, and
provided prompt and effective compensation at full replacement cost for losses of assets attributable
directly to the project.

According to Proclamation No 1161/2019 and its amendment 1336/2024, Article 3: the valuation method
and manner of payment to permanent and temporary expropriation of communal land holdings shall be
determined in a directive to be issued by Regional States, Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa City Administrations
considering the following: a) Valuation of displacement compensation for communal landholding shall be
based on the use of the communal land; or the lost benefits and livelihood of the displaced people; b)
Members of the community using the communal land shall be clearly identified.; c) private and communal
property found on the expropriated communal land shall be identified; d) the method of allocating the
displacement compensation money or the use of it in kind to all members of the communal landholding
community shall be clearly determined.




39
PAPs that lose their property or assets will be compensated as per Proclamation No. 1161/2019 and its
amendment 1336/2024 and WB ESS5. PAPs who lose their property, will be compensated for the property
they lost including for permanent improvements he/she made to such land. The amount of compensation
for property situated on the expropriated land shall be determined based on replacement cost of the
property. The cost of removal, transportation and erection shall be paid as compensation for a property
that could be relocated and continue its service as before. Displacement cost will also be compensated
for the property situated on the expropriated land.

ESS5 requires that persons with no recognizable legal right or claim are not entitled to compensation for
land, but they should be compensated for the structures that they own and occupy (such as dwellings,
crops, irrigation infrastructure, etc.), and for any other improvements to land at full replacement cost. In
addition, they should be offered resettlement assistance sufficient to restore their standards of living at
a suitable alternative site. Options for resettlement assistance should be generated through consultation
with such displaced persons and reflect their priorities and preferences.

In order to ensure that displaced persons who do not have legal title are not adversely affected by
Project investments, they will be enabled to maintain their livelihood and assisted to secure
accommodation through capacity building training on different technologies, and technical
support to participate/engage on different livelihood activities; participation on different income
generating/ livelihood activities that the project will create; and access to finance/credit to
participate/engage on different livelihood activities.

Compensation for temporary loss: According to Proclamation No 1336/2024, rural landholder whose
landholding has been temporarily expropriated shall, be paid displacement compensation for lost income
based on the highest annual income secured during the last three years preceding the expropriation of
the land until repossession of the land take in to consideration the amount of additional time necessary
for the land to regain its productivity which shall be determined by the area agricultural office. According
to the same Proclamation article 13, sub article 5(a-b) urban land holders’ temporarily displaced shall be
provided with substitute housing or compensation to lease a house equivalent to the current rental
market of the expropriated house for the period till they displaced and shall be paid compensation for the
economic loss they suffer due to temporary displacement.

Resettlement Action Plans
Once the sub-project has been screened and involuntary resettlement or displacement have been
identified as an impact, a RAP will be prepared. The RAP must be implemented prior to commencement
of works, and PAPs must be compensated prior to taking the assets in question. As part of the RAP, the
sub-project proponent must conduct a census to determine the cut-off-date for resettlement and
compensation eligibility. The cut-off dates will be set by the Woreda /City administration. The potential
PAPs will be informed by both formal written notification and verbal notification given in the presence of
the community leaders or their representatives. A Project Entitlement Matrix is listed in Annex 10.

According to Proclamation No 1161/2019 and its amendment 1336/2024, compensation for the property
situated on land to be expropriated shall be evaluated by Certified Private Institution or individual
consultant valuators on the basis of a nationally approved valuation method; or by an Autonomous
Government Organization established for that purpose where there is no private certified property
valuation organization or individual consultant; or it shall be evaluated by valuation committee
established by the relevant Urban or Woreda Administrations comprising proper professionals. The
Project will use either of the described options where valuation committee is more applicable for small



40
scale impacts on land and asset losses. The sub-project proponent is responsible for engaging the valuer
during the preparation of the RAP.

The RAP preparation will be based on in-depth consultations with local communities and PAPs. Where
SSAHUTLCs have been identified to be present in a location, as specific FPIC process will be launched. In
any case, members of vulnerable communities will be consulted.

After their preparation, RAPs will need to be disclosed, especially to the local communities. Disclosure
methods will be based on methods described in the SEP, and will specifically target members of vulnerable
groups. The Project GRM will be available for grievances and complaints in regard to the RAP and the RAP
process.

Method of Asset Evaluation
According to Proclamation No. 1161/2019 and its amendment 1336/2024 Article 2(8), “Valuation is
defined as a means of a common compensation valuation method used to calculate the value of property
on expropriated land.” Land valuations are often done at Woreda and urban administration levels. As
stated in Proclamation No.1161/2019 and its amendment 1336/2024, permanent improvement made to
the land and labor expended on the land will be taken into account in the valuation of land assets.
Accordingly, compensation for permanent improvement to land shall be equal to the current value of
capital and labor expended on the land as stated in Proclamation No. 1161/2019, Article 12 sub-article 4.
Compensation for Agricultural Land, Urban Land and Houses and Other Structures will be considered and
updated depending on the Regulation and directives that will be published by the regions. A Detail
description of valuation and compensation methods for different impacts is provided in Entitlement
Matrix.

Valuation and compensation for affected building and other structures will be done taking into account
of the replacement costs of the building, structures and materials. In addition, cash assistance is provided
to cover costs of restoration of the remaining structure. For agricultural land the valuation and
compensation will be done taking into account for the harvest or product from the affected land or asset,
equivalent to fifteen times (fifteen years) the highest annual income s/he generated during the last three
years preceding the expropriation of the land. For urban/residential land valuation and compensation will
be done taking into account the full replacement cost without factoring depreciation or replacement land
of same value of land lost and at location acceptable to PAPs where feasible land for land replacement
shall be of minimum plot of acceptable size under the zoning law/ s or a plot of equivalent size, whichever
is larger, in either the community or a nearby resettlement area (i.e., which is acceptable by the PAPs)
with adequate physical and social infrastructure systems as well as secured tenure status. For crops and
trees, If the crop is not harvested, the compensation payable will be based on the amount of produce
available and/or the amount of produce that the produce could produce if the crop had arrived. The cost
of the property owner’s deduction will be deducted until the crop or vegetable is harvested. If one crop is
produced more than once in a year, the amount of the crop per year will be the sum of the produce
produced during the year. Valuation is made based on the current market price. For trees, valuation and
compensation will be made at full replacement cost based on type, age and productive value of affected
trees

Compensation Approach: Compensation for land structures, business, fixed improvements and other
temporary impacts are based on, among other things, market valuation, productivity valuation, material
and labour valuation, disposition of salvage materials and other fees paid. All PAPs regardless of having
legal title will get compensation for the properties situated on their land. The compensation and other



41
related resettlement activities will be paid and implemented by the woreda or City Administration. The
amount of compensation for a relocated property shall be determined by computing the estimated costs
of labour, material and transport to be incurred at market value for removing, transferring and installing
the property. In addition, workers losing employment in the process of relocating should get transitional
income support.

Compensation for temporary impacts should include but not be limited to the following: (a) compensation
equivalent to lost income required for the duration of impact; (b) compensation equivalent to lost income
required for loss of access; and, (c) physical restoration of assets (or access) required prior to return.

In addition, PAPs will be entitled to transitional assistance, which includes moving expenses, temporary
residence (if necessary), employment training and income support. While the woreda/City Administration
is mainly responsible for payments and assistance, where PAPs can receive project benefits, they will be
listed as beneficiaries and benefit directly from the project.

Relocation and Livelihood Restoration
While it is unlikely that the Project will resulted to physical relocation of PAPs. In case it does occur, the
Woreda/City Administration will ideally move PAPs to areas near the location in which they lived. The RAP
will resolve the residential parcel condition and be enforced with the full involvement of PAPs and the
community. ESS5 requires that displaced persons are offered a choice among feasible resettlement
options, including adequate replacement housing or cash compensation; and provides relocation
assistance suited to the needs of each group displaced persons. New resettlement site will offer living
conditions at least equivalent to those prevailing standards.

ESS5 requires that displaced persons should be assisted in their efforts to improve their livelihoods and
standards of living or at least to restore them, in real terms, to pre-displacement levels or to levels
prevailing prior to the beginning of project implementation, whichever is higher. ‘Livelihood’ refers to the
capacity to gain a sustainable living, flow of income and wealth accumulation from a wide range of natural
and social resources. Livelihood improvement, therefore, is not accomplished by compensation for
lost assets. The Project will implement the following strategies to assist PAPs, in addition to
compensation for their asset losses, to improve/restore their livelihood because of
implementation of subprojects: capacity building training on businesses which they want to engage;
technical support in Business Plan Preparation, and implementation of the businesses; and follow up,
supervision and monitoring of the implementation of business.

Special Livelihood Restoration for Vulnerable Groups: Income restoration measures will also target
the vulnerable persons to ensure that they are reasonably assisted to overcome potential economic
shock as a result of the project implementation, and to maintain the quality of life not less than their
pre-project state because; they are at higher risk than others based on their vulnerability status. The
type of livelihood restoration suitable to each PAP will be identified in consultation with the PAPs.

RAP Preparation, Review and Approval Procedure and Implementation Arrangements
Once the project activities are identified, the proposer will undertake E&S screening of sub-projects and
activities to determine whether they will require the involuntary resettlement of people within the
determined project area. The proposer in collaboration with the woreda unit will be responsible for the
screening process with close support and follow-up from the FPIU.

For the RAP preparation, a socio-economic census and asset inventory will be conducted to determine



42
the extent of resettlement required. This census will achieve the following:
    • Provide initial information on the scale of resettlement to be undertaken;
    • Identifies gaps in information and gives an indication of further socio economic survey needed
        to quantify losses to be compensated and, if required, to design appropriate development
        interventions; and
    • Establishes indicators that can be measured at a later date during monitoring and evaluation.

 The land and asset inventory will be done under close supervision of a sub-project Compensation and
 Resettlement Committee (CRC).

The RAP will be prepared by the proposer and in consultation with the affected parties, in particular with
regard to the eligibility, cut-off date, disturbances to livelihoods and income-earning activities, valuation
methods, compensation payments, potential resettlement assistance, GRM and timetables. The RAP
should be proportional to expected risks and impacts whether the resettlement activities have minor or
substantial effects on the land and livelihood of the affected persons. The structure of the RAP will follow
the outline in the ESF (Page 60).

GRM: To enable the PAPs to voice their concerns, complaints, or dissatisfaction with any part of the
compensation process and seek redress, the Project GRM can be addressed. In addition to the Project
GRM channels, the grievances can be addressed through local mechanisms or special committees that
can be established as an independent instrument for receiving and responding to grievances in order to
ensure that grievances from PAPs are treated fairly and promptly.

Review and Approval of the Resettlement Plan (RP): The proposer and the respective Woreda will submit
the RAP to the Woreda/Regional regulatory body and to the FPIU for review. The FPIU will submit the
RP to the WB for review and approval. The RAP must be implemented and completed prior to the
commencement of works.

Implementation: The proposer together with Woreda/Urban and Kebele Administration are generally
responsible for the implementation of the RAP and will arrange meetings with affected individuals
and/or households to discuss the compensation process. The required physical resettlement will not be
covered by the project rather will be covered by project target regions/project target woreda
administration.

Special Restoration Measures for Vulnerable Groups/PAPs: The RAP will pay particular attention to
potential members of vulnerable groups. Special attention will be given to the impact of resettlement on
women and other vulnerable groups during monitoring and evaluation of the RP. The income restoration
measures will also target the vulnerable persons to ensure that they are reasonably assisted to overcome
potential economic shock from the Project and maintain the quality of life not less than their pre-project
state. Identification of vulnerable people and identification of the cause and impacts of their vulnerability,
preferably through an identification mechanism devised with, and implemented by the beneficiary
community; this step is critical because often vulnerable people do not participate in community
meetings, and their disability/vulnerability may remain unknown. Assistance may take different forms,
depending upon vulnerable persons’ requests and needs.




43
     6. Stakeholder Engagement
As part of the preparatory and planning process, MILLS has been conducting consultations with various
stakeholders in line with the SEP. Consultations are conducted using participatory approaches that are
inclusive of various vulnerable groups: women, youth, female-headed households, pastoralist, adolescent
girls, minority ethnic groups, persons with disabilities (PWD), extremely poor, and illiterate.

MILLS has conducted consultations at the national level, in November 2025, including staff of the Ministry
of Agriculture, Ministry of Water and Energy, the Agricultural Transformation Institute, and the Ministry
of Irrigation and Lowlands. The participants welcomed the Project, especially as SSI structures are
important to ensure improved livelihood conditions for communities. They identified the following key
challenges as part of their current situation:
    • Maintenance issues of irrigation systems lead to high costs;
    • there is a general lack of community engagement and consultation of upstream and downstream
         communities;
    • there is an absence of modern irrigation technologies;
    • there is weak water management, saving of water and project administration and agronomic
         practices due to lack of detailed design.

Communities are usually consulted around land-related activities, irrigation scheme site selection, conflict
management and to a limited extent they are engaged in participatory watershed management activities.
The Project team responded that there will be increased community engagement under the Project on a
variety of issues. The participants further identified environmental risks in relation to the project activities,
including: risks associated with quarry management; gaps between the design and implementation
phases can lead to several risks; poor Environmental Management Plans and insufficient monitoring of
environmental risks; and water logging and soil salinity due to poor irrigation water management
practices. The Project team has included these risks in this ESMF. Social concerns mainly focused on the
lack of proper handling of compensation. This ESMF includes a specific section on the handling of
involuntary resettlement for this purpose. Furthermore, participants were concerned about potential land
expansion beyond the limits of the permitted work areas. There are also risks of SEA/SH during the
implementation of the works.

MILLS further conducted consultations in all 13 Project regions, in November – December 2025. It mostly
consulted various regional or local government agencies that will be involved or affected by the Project.
For detailed results of the consultations, see Annex 15.

Additionally, the consultations will (i) inform stakeholders about the activities to be undertaken, possible
impacts including E&S risks and impacts, and (ii) document and address their concerns. Consultation
summaries are prepared, including who was consulted, where and when, what concerns were expressed,
and how these concerns were addressed. The FPIU will continue to do regular consultations with PAPs
and communities throughout subproject implementation, as indicated in Project SEP. Furthermore, all
stakeholders participating in the consultation will be informed on the GRM and where/how complaints
can be made and updates on the project.




44
6. Grievance Redress Mechanism
Under the World Bank ESS10, Bank-supported projects are required to facilitate mechanisms that address
concerns and grievances that arise in connection with a project. One of the key objectives of ESS10 is ‘to
provide project-affected parties with accessible and inclusive means to raise issues and grievances and
allow borrowers to respond and manage such grievances. This Project GRM should facilitate the project
to respond to concerns and grievances of the project-affected parties related to the environmental and
social performance of the project. The Project will provide mechanisms to receive and facilitate
resolutions to such concerns. This section lays out the grievance redressal mechanisms (GRM) for the
Project.

The goal of the GRM is to strengthen accountability to beneficiaries and to provide channels for project
stakeholders to provide feedback and/or express grievances related to project supported activities. By
increasing transparency and accountability, the GRM aims to reduce the risk of the project inadvertently
affecting citizens/beneficiaries and serves as an important feedback and learning mechanism that can
help improve the project impacts.

The GRM will be operated in addition to a specific workers’ GRM, which is laid out in the LMP.

The GRM is designed to ensure that grievances and perceived injustices are handled by the project, and
that the project helps mitigate general conflict stresses by channeling grievances that occur between
people, groups, communities, government actors, beneficiaries, project staff, Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs), Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), contractors or primary suppliers. Aggrieved
parties need to be able to refer to institutions, instruments, methods and processes by which a resolution
to a grievance is sought and provided. The GRM therefore provides an effective avenue for expressing
concerns, providing redress, and allowing for general feedback from community members.

The GRM aims to address project-related concerns in a timely and transparent manner and effectively.
Information on the GRM will be readily available to all project-affected parties. The GRM is designed in a
culturally appropriate way and is able to respond to all needs and concerns of project-affected parties.
The availability of the GRM does not prevent recourse to judicial and administrative resolution
mechanisms.

This GRM sets out the steps to be taken to resolve grievances, the role of different staff members involved
and timeframes to reach a decision on grievances. The GRM management will be the FPIU’s responsibility
and should ensure implementation with support from the MoWE, MoA, and regional governments.


6.1 Principles of Grievance Redress

The GRM is proposed to address any complaints and grievances including in regard to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse (SEA) / Sexual Harassment (SH) arising during the course of implementing the project and its
sub-projects. Community members may perceive risks to themselves or their property or have concerns
about the environmental performance of the project. Any concerns or grievances should be addressed
quickly and transparently, and without retribution.




45
A primary principle is that all complaints and grievances are resolved as quickly as possible. The resolution
of complaints and grievances will therefore be addressed at the lowest possible level for resolution. All
minor land or property related complaints that can be resolved, should be resolved immediately at the
sub-project level. The focus of the GRM is to resolve issues in an appropriate fashion at community level
and record details of the complaint, the complainant and the resolution. Moreover, the GRM is critical to
ensure inclusion, transparency and accountability of the sub-project financial disbursements. For this
reason, the CRISP Project will put in place information and communication campaigns aimed at deepening
public engagement and visibility of the activities and their funding. The general principles that guide the
GRM procedure are:

Fairness: Its procedures should be widely perceived as fair, especially in terms of access to information
and opportunities for meaningful participation in the final decision. The GRM operates independently of
all interested parties in order to guarantee fair, objective, and impartial treatment to each case. GRM
officials have adequate means and powers to investigate grievances (e.g., interview witnesses, access
records);

Accessibility: It should be accessible to everybody who would like to submit a complaint and should
provide assistance to those who face barriers related to language, literacy, awareness, cost, or fear of
reprisal. Procedures to file grievances and seek action are simple enough that project beneficiaries can
easily understand them. Project beneficiaries have a range of contact options including, at a minimum, a
telephone number (preferably toll-free), an e-mail address, a project staff, and a postal address. The GRM
is accessible to all stakeholders, irrespective of the remoteness of the area they live in, the language they
speak, and their level of education or income. The GRM does not use complex processes that create
confusion or anxiety (such as only accepting grievances on official-looking standard forms or through
grievance boxes in government offices).

Predictability: It should offer a clear procedure with time frames for each stage and clarity on the types
of results it can and cannot deliver.

Compatibility: Its outcomes should be consistent with applicable national and international standards and
should not restrict access to other redress mechanisms.

Transparency: Its procedures and outcomes should be transparent enough to meet the public interest
concerns at stake.

Capability: It should have the necessary technical, human and financial resources to deal with the issues
at stake.

Gender responsive: It should ensure equitable benefits of women and men;

Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH) responsive: It should provide survivor-
centered responses to GBV cases/incidents.

Feedback: It should serve as a means to channel citizen feedback to improve project outcomes for the
people.




46
Responsiveness and efficiency: It is designed to be responsive to the needs of all complainants.
Accordingly, officials handling grievances are trained to take effective action upon, and respond quickly
to, grievances and suggestions.

Speed and proportionality: All grievances, simple or complex, are addressed and resolved as quickly as
possible. The action taken on the grievance or suggestion is swift, decisive, and constructive.

Participatory and social inclusion: A wide range of beneficiaries, community members, members of
vulnerable groups, project implementers, and other stakeholders are encouraged to bring grievances and
comments to the attention of project authorities. Special attention is given to ensure that poor people
and marginalized groups, including those with special needs, are able to access the GRM.



6.2 Grievance Handling Mechanism

The Social Specialist and GRM Specialist at the FPIU will be assigned to follow up complaints related to
the project. The complaint, to be filed, should be related to the project components and/or to its
implementation and management. The grievance resolution process involves the following main steps:
     ▪ Receipt of grievances: anyone from the affected communities or believing they are affected
          by the Project can submit a grievance (written, verbal, telephone, etc. as appropriate for the
          complainant).
     ▪ Registering the complaint: the focal point who received the complaint will use the GRM
          logbook for registering.
     ▪ Referral and examination of complaints: a GRM Committee shall be established at each project
          implementation sites (comprising of members from the community, elders, a representative
          from Women and Children Affairs office, etc.) who will examine the complaint, resolve, or
          refer.
     ▪ Notifying the complainant: the decision/solution/action by the grievance committee shall be
          communicated to the complainant as per the stipulated timeline.
     ▪ Closing the complaint: where the decision/solution of the complaint is accepted by the
          complainant, or complaint that is not related to the project or any of its components, or a
          complaint that is being heard by the judiciary will be closed following the appropriate
          procedure.

 All complaints received will be entered into a publicly accessible system that will allow complaints to
 be tracked and monitored. The system will also present a database showing:
      ▪ No of complaints received.
      ▪ No and % of complaints that have reached agreement.
      ▪ No and % of complaints that have been resolved.
      ▪ No and % of complaints that have gone to mediation
      ▪ No and % of complaints that have not reached agreement

The FPIU, MoWE, MoA or the regional governments and other stakeholders have responsibility for
addressing complaints related to the project on the basis of available legal systems and complaining
redressing mechanisms (see the complaint handling flow chart in the Table below).

Table 6 Project GRM Management Process




47
        Process                            Description                        Time Frame              Other
                                                                                                  Information
 Establishment of GRM    GRM Committee will be established at the sub-     Before                Training will
 Committees at all       project level comprising of members from local    commencement          be provided by
 Project                 elders, beneficiaries (women and men), Woreda/    of sub-project        the FPIU (E&S
 implementation sites    Kebele representative, Women Youth and            works                 Specialists) to
                         children officer, etc.                                                  the GRM
                                                                                                 Committee
                                                                                                 members and
                                                                                                 beneficiaries
 Reporting of grievance Face to face; telephone; letter; mail; e-mail;     Confirmation of       Appropriately
                        website; recorded during public/community          registration          disclose
                        interaction; others                                within 1 day          telephone no.,
                                                                                                 an email
                         Any other convenient mechanism for the affected                         address, etc..;
                         party, disadvantaged, vulnerable groups, etc.
 Grievance      assessed Significance assessed and grievance recorded or Assessment to be
 and logged              logged (i.e. in a logbook).                        completed in 6
                                                                            days
                         Grievances concerning SEA/SH should be treated
                         as confidential. Only the nature of the complaint
                         and the processing outcome should be recorded.
                         Region/ Woreda/ Kebele, Children, and Youth
                         Offices in the subcomponent implementation area
                         will be responsible for handling SEA/SH
                         grievances. The FPIU shall allocate budget to this
                         office for capacity building and GBV grievance
                         handling.
 Grievance             is Acknowledgment          of       grievance       Within 3 days of
 acknowledged             through appropriate medium.                      filing of grievance
 Development of          Grievance assigned to the appropriate entity for Within 8 days of
 response                resolution.                                      filing of grievance

                         Development of response with input from GRM
                         Committee/relevant stakeholders.
 Response signed off     Redress action approved at FPIU             Within 10 days of
                                                                     filing of grievance
 Implementation/         Redress action implemented and update of Within 12 days of
 communication of        progress on resolution communicated to the filing of grievance
 response                complainant.




48
Figure 1 Grievance Handling Process

Where the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the solution or response, it can address the FPIU directly
as an appeals mechanism. The FPIU will provide a dedicated contact for this matter.



6.3 Addressing SEA/SH Cases

Given the sensitive nature of SEA/SH complaints, the GRM provides different ways to submit grievances.
All grievance uptake channels can be used to report on SEA/SH-related grievances. No grievance uptake
mechanism can reject such grievances, and all personnel directly receiving grievances will be trained in
the handling and processing of SEA/SH-related grievances.




49
The SEA/SH survivor has the freedom and right to report an incident to anyone: community member,
project staff, SEA/SH case manager, local authorities. All recipients of the report should – with the
survivor’s informed consent – report the case to one of the Project’s formal GRM. Furthermore, a survivor
can ask someone else to act as a survivor advocate and report on her/his behalf.

The grievance recipient will be responsible for the recording and registration of the complaint. A GRM
operator cannot reject a SEA/SH complaint. At the same time, however, the project can only respond to
a SEA/SH complaint if it is directed into the designated GRM channels.

Confidentiality: All grievance recipients and anyone handling the SEA/SH-related grievances must
maintain absolute confidentiality in regard to the case. Maintaining confidentiality means not disclosing
any information at any time to any party without the informed consent of the person concerned. There
are exceptions under distinct circumstances, for example a) if the survivor is an adult who threatens his
or her own life or who is directly threatening the safety of others, in which case referrals to lifesaving
services should be sought; b) if the survivor is a child and there are concerns for the child’s health and
safety. The survivors need to be informed about these exceptions.

Informed Consent: The survivor can only give approval to the processing of a case when he or she has
been fully informed about all relevant facts. The survivor must fully understand the consequences of
actions when providing informed consent for a case to be taken up. Asking for consent means asking the
permission of the survivor to share information about him/her with others (for instance, with referral
services and/or FPIU/RPIU), and/or to undertake any action (for instance investigation of the case). Under
no circumstances should the survivor be pressured to consent to any conversation, assessment,
investigation or other intervention with which she does not feel comfortable. A survivor can also at any
time decide to stop consent. If a survivor does not consent to sharing information, then only non-
identifying information can be released or reported on. In the case of children, informed consent is
normally requested from a parent or legal guardian of the children.


6.4 WB Grievance Redress Service (GRS)

World Bank Grievance Redress Service (GRS): Anyone is eligible to file a grievance directly with the World
Bank’s Grievance Redress System (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed
in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit
their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or
could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be
submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank
Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to
the     World     Bank’s     corporate    Grievance      Redress     Service     (GRS),     please    visit
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service.
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit
www.inspectionpanel.org.

     7. Capacity Building and Training
Capacity building and training will be provided to the FPIU and their E&S staff, MoWE, regional
governments and to contractors and their project workers, to ensure the project is implemented in



50
compliance with the ESCP and this ESMF. The following Table outlines the planned training and capacity
building sessions. An institutional E&S capacity assessment will cover federal, regional, and woreda
levels, and it will inform the development of a capacity development plan which will cover
recommendations on the enabling environment, institutional arrangements, systems and processes,
communication and coordination between institutes, human and other resources, stakeholder
engagement and grievance redress. The plan will then be implemented. The below Table presents a
placeholder capacity and training plan until the detailed capacity assessments have been conducted.


Table 7 Capacity development and training plan

 Objectives           Issues for       Method of     Stakeholders/ta   Responsible       Time frame      Budget         in
                      engagemen        engageme      rget population   entity                            USD
                      t                nt            and area
 WB ESF               ESF              Training      FPIU and RPIU     WB                At              WB        staff
                                                     staff                               commence        time
                                                                                         ment       of
                                                                                         activities
 Stakeholder          SEP              Meeting       FPIU and RPIU     FPIU        E&S   Prior      to   E&S
 mapping and                                         staff, regional   Specialists       commence        Specialists
 engagement                                          governments,                        ment of sub-    staff time
                                                     MoWE, MoA                           projects
                                                                                                         Meeting
                                                                                                         costs
 ESMF         and     ESMF and         Training      FPIU and RPIU     FPIU        E&S   Prior     to    E&S
 specific aspects,    E&S                            staff, regional   Specialists       commence        Specialists
 including            processes                      governments,                        ment of sub-    staff time
 preparation of                                      MoWE, MoA                           projects
 E&S instruments                                                                                         Meeting
 such as ESMPs,                                                                                          costs
 SEA/SH
 Prevention and
 Response Action
 Plans, etc.

 OHS issues (such     OHS    risk      Meeting at    Contractors and   Proposing         Prior     to    E&S
 as OHS measures      managemen        sub-project   workers           entity    (e.g.   construction    Specialists
 in rehabilitation    t                site                            FPIU,    RPIU,    works           staff time
 works)                                                                MOWE,
                                                                       regional                          Meeting
                                                                       governments)                      costs

                                                                                                         Staff travel
                                                                                                         costs
 Sub-project          E&S    risk      Meeting at    Contractors and   Proposing         Prior     to    E&S
 specific     E&S     managemen        sub-project   workers           entity    (e.g.   construction    Specialists
 instruments,         t                site                            FPIU,     RPIU    works           staff time
 such as ESIA,                                                         MOWE,
 ESMP, RAP                                                             regional                          Meeting
                                                                       governments)                      costs




51
                                                                                                       Staff travel
                                                                                                       costs
 GRM                  GRM             Meeting:     Beneficiaries/co   Proposing         Continuous     E&S
                                      Plenary      mmunity            entity    (e.g.                  Specialists
                                      discussion   members            FPIU,     RPIU                   staff time
                                      with                            MOWE,
                                      questions                       regional                         Meeting
                                      and                             governments)                     costs
                                      answers,
                                      informatio                                                       Staff travel
                                      n                                                                costs
                                      materials,
                                      website
 SEA/SH     Action    GBV risks       Meetings     Contractors,       Proposing         Prior     to   GBV
 Plan                                 at site      Workers            entity    (e.g.   commence       Specialists
                                                                      FPIU,    RPIU,    ment of sub-   staff time
                                                                      MOWE,             projects
                                                                      regional                         Meeting
                                                                      governments)                     costs

                                                                                                       Staff travel
 Community            E&S risks       Meetings     Community          Proposing         Throughout     E&S
 Health & Safety                                   members at site    entity    (e.g.   engagement     Specialists
                                                   locations          FPIU,     RPIU
                                                                      MOWE,                            Meeting
                                                                      regional                         costs
                                                                      governments)
                                                                                                       Staff travel
 Proper use of        OHS             Meetings     Project workers    Proposing         Throughout     E&S
 Personal                                                             entity    (e.g.   works          Specialists
 Protective                                                           FPIU,     RPIU
 Equipment (PPE)                                                      MOWE,                            Meeting
                                                                      regional                         costs
                                                                      governments)
                                                                      and contractor                   Staff travel




      8. Estimated Budget
The below table presents the estimated costs for the implementation of the ESMF. It excludes costs for
the implementation of the SEP (including for the GRM), which are listed separately in the SEP.

Table 8 Estimated Costs of ESMF implementation

           Required Resources                                            USD
                                         E&S Risk Management Unit / FPIU
 1.        Human Resources:
           1 Social Specialist (100%)                                  Incl. in FPIU staff costs
           1 Environmental Specialist (100%)                           Incl. in FPIU staff costs
           1 OHS Specialist                                            Incl. in FPIU staff costs




52
       1 GBV/SEA/SH Specialist                                         Incl. in FPIU staff costs

 2.    Logistics / Travel for monitoring and supervision to 13         234,000
       regions for 5 years (3 persons x 13 trips x 5 years, 1200 /
       person/ trip)

                                  Regional governments E&S risk management
 3.    Human Resources:
       1 x Social Specialist (100%) x 11                             Incl. in staff costs
       1 x Environmental Specialist (100%) x 11                      Incl. in staff costs
 4.    Logistics / Travel for monitoring and supervision by SPIU     270,000
       Specialists. 18 persons x 5 trips (1000) x 3 years.

                                          MoWE E&S risk management
       1 x Social Specialist (100%)                                Incl in MoWE staff costs
       1 x Environmental Specialist (100%)                         Incl in MoWE staff costs
       Logistics / Travel for monitoring and supervision           80,000

                              Implementation E&S of Risk Mitigation Measures
 8.    Preparation of ESMPs x 150 (150 x 2,000 USD)                 300,000
       Preparation of ESIAs x 30 (30 x 12,000 USD)                  460,000
 9.    Contractor E&S staff                                         Incl. in contractor budget
 10.   Risk Mitigation Measures (estimates based on other project   200,000 – most included in contractor
       implementation)                                              budget
 11.   Trainings and Capacity Building                              100,000
 12.   SEA/SH Action Plan implementation                            200,000
 13.   Resettlement Framework implementation (without               300,000
       compensation payments), preparation of RAPs (5,000 per
       RAP, ca. 60 locations.
       TOTAL                                                        2,144,000




53
Annex 1: Exclusion List and E&S Screening Form
Sub-project plans will first be checked against the following exclusion criteria:

     ➢ Construction/rehabilitation irrigation (including the dam, reservoir, canals, and command area) is
       located at Critical Habitat/ Ecologically sensitive areas such as wetlands, forests, and protected
       habitats, fragile ecosystems, and wildlife reserves.
     ➢ The planned site is presence where the site is known for its tangible and intangible cultural
       heritage
     ➢ Activities causing significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats or critical
       cultural heritage sites.
     ➢ Activities that may cause long-term, permanent and/or irreversible (e.g. loss of major natural
       habitat) impacts.
     ➢ Activities that may have significant adverse social impacts and/or may give rise to significant social
       conflict.
     ➢ Land acquisition and/or resettlement of a scale or nature that will have significant adverse
       impacts on affected people, or the use of forced evictions.
     ➢ Activities that involve the use of forced or child labor.
     ➢ Construction of new dams
     ➢ Projects in international waterways without proper notification/agreements with riparian states

Then, plans will be screened as follows: The objective of this E&S screening is to assist in the evaluation
of planned sub-projects. The form is designed to place information in the hands of implementers and
reviewers so that impacts and their mitigation measures, if any, can be identified and/or that
requirements for further environmental impact assessment be determined. The form contains
information that will allow reviewers to determine the characterization of the prevailing local bio-physical
and social environment with the aim to assess the potential impacts of the activities on this environment.

The form is completed by the sub-project proposer in coordination with engineers and E&S staff, after
field visit and consultations with local authorities and communities. It is then submitted to the FPIU for
no-objection.


IDENTIFICATION OF THE SUB-PROJECT

Name of sub-project_________________________________________________________________
Name        of    the    woreda/community          in    which       the      subproject  takes place
______________________________________________________________________________
Executing entity ___________________________________________________________________
Name, job title, and contact details of the person responsible for filling out this form:
Name: ________________________________________
Job title: ______________________________________
Telephone numbers: ____________________________
E-mail address: _________________________________
Date: _________________________________________



54
Signature: _____________________________________

PART A: BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE PROPOSED ACTIVITIES
Please provide information on the type and scale of the activity
______________________________________________________________________________

Describe how the rehabilitation activities will be carried out, including support/activities and resources
required to operate it e.g. roads, disposal site, water supply, energy requirement, human resources etc.
______________________________________________________________________________


PART B: QUESTIONNAIRE
                                                      Yes   No     Additional comments
 ESS2: Occupational health hazards
 Will the works require large number (e.g., more
 than 100) of staff and laborers from outside the
 local area?
 Will the infrastructure works require a
 worker’s camp?
 If “Yes”, how many workers are expected to
 occupy the camp?
 Are the works activities prone to hazards, risks
 and could result injuries, death to workers
 during construction?
 Will the works include the installation of solar
 panels and related OHS risks?

 Will the sub-project include excavation or
 demolition works and related risks?

 Is there a risk of forced or child labor being
 deployed during works?

 ESS3: Noise and Dust Pollution during Construction and Operations
 Will the operation result in emission of
 significant amounts of dust?
 ESS3: Contamination and Pollution Hazards
 Is there a possibility that the works will lead to
 any contamination and degradation of water
 bodies?
 Is there a risk of agrochemical runoff through
 increased fertilizers and pesticides for irrigated
 crops?
 Can the activity lead to the contamination of
 water in the reservoir as a result of poor
 farming?




55
 ESS3: Degradation and/or depletion of resources during construction and operation
 Will the operation involve use of considerable
 amounts of natural resources (construction
 materials, trees) or may lead to their depletion
 or degradation at points of source?
 Is there a risk of erosion and sedimentation
 through the activity?
 Is there a risk of soil disturbance and erosion
 through earthworks?
 Is there a risk of natural hazards during the
 operational phase of the activity?

 Can the activity disrupt natural drainage and
 reduce downstream water flow or cause
 flooding?
 Is there a risk of salination due to the activity?

 Does the activity pose a risk of groundwater
 depletion?
 ESS3: Solid and/or Liquid Wastes and/or Hazardous Wastes
 Will the works generate domestic waste?
 Will the works generate construction waste?

 Is there a risk of the generation of hazardous
 waste (fuels, lubricants, etc)?
 Will the activity generate e-waste?

 Is there a risk of water depletion through the
 activity?
 ESS4: Beneficiary Selection and Social Dynamics and Community Health

 Could the subproject lead to discrimination of
 certain societal groups, e.g. exclude women?
 Could the subproject lead to conflicts between
 local groups over access to water?
 Is the sub-project located in a conflict area?

 Could the beneficiary selection be contested?

 Are there community safety risks in the vicinity
 of the works?
 Is there a risk of solar panels impacting human
 health?
 Are there public health risks due to stagnating
 water?




56
 Does the activity include risks of drowning for
 the public?
 Is there a risk of embankment failure?

 In case of dam rehabilitation or construction,
 are there communities located downstream of
 the dam?
 ESS5 and ESS6: Block of access and routes or disrupt normal operations in the general area
 Can the activity lead to disruptions of
 livelihoods for farmers , fishers or downstream
 water users?
 Will the works interfere with or block access,
 routes etc. or traffic routing and flows?
 ESS5: Resettlement and/or land Acquisition
 Will the rehabilitation of the infrastructures
 works or any other project activities result in
 the permanent or temporary loss of crops, fruit
 trees, infra-structure etc?
 Will the activity require any involuntary
 resettlement?
 Could the activity lead to conflicts over land
 ownership or usage?

 ESS6: Natural habitats, Environmentally sensitive areas or threatened species
 Could the activity lead to soil degradation and
 reduced fertility?
 Is there a risk of biodiversity/habitat loss
 through altered water regimes in wetlands and
 riparian zones?
 Is the activity likely to impact terrestrial and
 aquatic species?
 Is there a likelihood of ecosystem
 disturbance through temporary dewatering
 or altered river flow affecting downstream
 aquatic life, fish migration and water quality

 Is the subproject area (or components of it)
 located within/adjacent to any protected areas
 designated by government (national park,
 national reserve, world heritage site etc.)?
 Is the site considered to be habitats of
 endangered/threatened or endemic species
 for which protection is required?
 ESS7: Indigenous Peoples
 Is the activity implemented in an area with
 presence of people coming under the WB’s



57
 definition of SSAHUTLC? (see below for
 definition)
 Can the activity lead to the exclusion of certain
 population groups from Project benefits?
 ESS8: Historical, archaeological or cultural heritage site
 Could the works alter any historical,
 archaeological, cultural heritage traditional
 (sacred, ritual area) site or require excavation
 near same?
 ESS10: Stakeholder engagement
 Has input from community members and those
 who may be affected by the works or any other
 project activities been sought?
 Has the subproject received overall
 stakeholder support including from vulnerable
 individuals and marginalized groups?
 Has the stakeholder engagement process
 considered vulnerable individuals and
 marginalized groups?
 Do the benefits of the activity reach low-
 income or female farmers?



Definition of Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities, as
per ESS7:

Table 9 Definition of SSAHUTLCs

 Characteristics                                       Description
 Self-identification and recognition                   The group self-identifies as a distinct social and
                                                       cultural group, and this identity is recognized by
                                                       others
 Collective attachment to territory                    The group has a strong, collective bond to
                                                       geographically distinct habitats, ancestral
                                                       territories, or areas they use and to the natural
                                                       resources in those areas
 Customary institutions                                They maintain customary, cultural, economic,
                                                       social, or political institutions that are distinct
                                                       from the mainstream society
 Distinct language/dialect                             The often use a language or dialect that is
                                                       different from the country’s or region’s official or
                                                       dominant languages




58
 Annex 2: E&S Risk Assessment and Generic ESMP
 The assessment of impacts is an iterative process underpinned by four key questions: Prediction: what change to the physical, chemical or social
 environment will occur if the project is implemented?; Evaluation: what are the consequences of this change? How significant will its impact be
 on human and biological receptors; Mitigation: if it is significant can anything be done about it? Residual Impact: is it still significant after
 mitigation? Where significant residual impacts remain, further options for mitigation will be considered and where necessary impacts are re-
 assessed until they are reduced. The figure below shows the methodology that will be used to assess impacts.

 Table 10 Risk assessment methodology

                                                                        Effects/Consequences
                                                                       Negligible   Small    Medium High                    Very high
                                                  Very likely
                                 Probability of   Likely
                                                  May occur (50% of
                                                  the time
                                 occurrence       Unlikely
                                                  Very unlikely


                           Overall   risk High                        Substantial               Moderate                  Low
                           rating of the
                           impact

 Table 11 E&S risk assessment

Component    and        Activities                           Potential Risks and Impacts                                                   Risk
Subcomponent                                                                                                                               Assessment
                                                             Environmental Risks:

                        Rehabilitation of prioritized
                        existing large and medium as         Air pollution through dust and emissions during rehabilitation (ESS3)




 59
Component 1 and      well as construction and           Soil and water contamination and degradation of water bodies caused by discharge of
2: Irrigation        rehabilitation of SSIs, while      waste during rehabilitation (ESS3)
rehabilitation and   introducing modern irrigation      Pollution of local surface water sources during rehabilitation (ESS3)
                     technologies and promoting         Generation of domestic waste during rehabilitation, Indiscriminate disposal of solid and
Modernization ;
                     solar and other green energy       liquid wastes, packages, plastic material, etc. (ESS3)
and Small-Scale      solutions in SSI modernization
Irrigation                                              Potential emissions associated with solar energy, such as heavy metals like lead, mercury
                                                        and may cadmium emissions (ESS3)
Development          Construction of new SSIs
                                                        Generation of construction waste (cement mixing areas, metal, diesel and other residues)
                                                        (ESS3)
                     Dam safety works
                                                        Erosion and sedimentation through poorly designed canals or lack of vegetation cover
                                                        (ESS3)
                     Development and
                                                        Agrochemical runoff through increased fertilizers and pesticides for irrigated crops (ESS3)
                     rehabilitation of small water
                     storage systems, such as           Use of agrochemicals (fertilizers, pesticides) could result in water and soil pollution
                     rainwater harvesting facilities,   Water depletion through excessive pumping from rivers or aquifers (ESS3)
                     haffirs, and small dams            Risks from natural hazards (flooding and lack of water due to droughts) during operation
                                                        (ESS3)
                                                        Flooding risks: Unplanned releases or failures can cause flooding, threatening lives,
                                                        property, agriculture, and natural habitats downstream.
                                                        Improper management can result in sedimentation, pollution, or contamination of water
                                                        sources (ESS3 and 4)
                                                        Loss of Aquatic and Terrestrial Habitats: Sudden changes in water flow or flooding can
                                                        disrupt ecosystems, leading to loss of biodiversity (ESS6)
                                                        Downstream Erosion: Uncontrolled releases can cause significant erosion, altering river
                                                        morphology and affecting agricultural lands (ESS3)
                                                        Flooding, structural destruction and erosion through embankment failure (ESS3)
                                                        Waste generation through domestic solid waste due to activities around the dam plastics,
                                                        containers, boxes, papers (ESS3)

                                                        improper management can result in sedimentation, pollution, or contamination of water
                                                        sources.
                                                        Generation of hazardous waste or improper recycling - Used panels (containing oils or
                                                        molten salts, hydraulic fluids, coolants, and lubricants) and used batteries (both lead acid
                                                        and lithium ion) (ESS3)
                                                        Potential emissions associated with solar energy, such as heavy metals like lead, mercury
                                                        and may cadmium emissions (ESS3)




 60
     E-Waste generation and waste-generation from discarded solar panels (ESS3)
     Risks related to pest management during the operational phase (ESS3 and ESS4)
     Soil degradation and reduced fertility through salinization caused by evaporation from
     irrigated fields leaving behind salts (ESS6)
     Ecosystem disturbance through temporary dewatering or altered river flow affects
     downstream aquatic life, fish migration and water quality (ESS6)
     Biodiversity loss and ecological flow limitations. Small dams can alter aquatic habitats,
     block fish passage or disturb wildlife movement (ESS6)
     Biodiversity loss through altered water regimes in wetlands and riparian zones (ESS6)
     Social Risks:

     Lack of understanding of risks and impacts of sub-projects (ESS1)
     OHS risks during rehabilitation and construction (injury) (ESS2)
     During solar installation: OHS issues for workers during installation (ESS2)
     EHS issues associated with solar panel storage facilities (e.g. maintenance work, storage
     of hazardous goods such as batteries)
     Inadequate PPE (ESS2)
     Noise and vibration linked to machinery (ESS4 and ESS2)
     Lack of understanding of EHS risks and impacts and of mitigation measures leads to
     accidents and health impacts (ESS2)
     Violations of labor and working conditions (ESS2)
     Risk of forced labor (ESS2)
     Risks of labor influx (ESS2 and ESS4)
     Community H&S risks through dam failure
     SEA/SH for project workers, project-affected persons and during rehabilitation phase
     (ESS2 and ESS4)
     Community safety risks during rehabilitation in the vicinity of project works
     Bias in the selection of beneficiaries (ESS4)
     Water access conflicts (ESS4)
     Impacts of solar panels on human health (mold, contact with electrical outlets, etc.) (ESS4)
     Exclusion of women from water ownership and water governance (ESS4)




61
                                          Community health risks from stagnant water in poorly managed systems (ESS4)
                                          Ethnic tensions among project workers and between project workers and communities
                                          (ESS4)
                                          Exposure to infectious diseases during rehabilitation works (ESS4)
                                          Risk due to road accidents due to solar panel trucks/workers transport for the
                                          communities along the roadside (ESS4)
                                          Lack of adequate budgets for O&M (ESS4)
                                          Public health issues through stagnant water in small reservoirs may create conditions for
                                          mosquito breeding (ESS4)
                                          Community health risks including accidents, injuries and drowning in open sites (ESS4)
                                          Injuries and loss of life through embankment failure (ESS4)
                                          Breakout of water borne disease as a result of poor sanitation practices by communities
                                          living upstream of the dam (ESS4)
                                          Risk of drowning for community members, especially children, as well as drowning of
                                          livestock (ESS4)



                                          Land acquisition (ESS5)
                                          Disputes over land ownership (ESS5)
                                          Temporary or permanent economic displacement (ESS5)
                                          Destruction of cultural heritage through chance finds (ESS8)
                                          Small dams may be sited in areas of cultural/spiritual significant (ESS8)
                                          Lack of access to grievance redress mechanisms (ESS10)
                                          Exclusion of women, youth, Persons with Disabilities (PWD), other vulnerable groups,
                                          Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) or Historically Underserved Peoples as end
                                          beneficiaries (ESS7 and ESS10)
                                          Lack of security and access in FCV-affected areas impedes consultations, works
                                          supervision, and timelty incident reporting (ESS4 and ESS10)
Component       3:   Policy and TA work   Environmental Risks
Irrigation Service
Improvement                               Lack of consideration of downstream E&S risks and impacts through TA work
                                          Social Risks:




 62
                                                                                        Violations of labor laws and conditions (ESS2)
                                                                                        Discriminatory practices in accessing project services, and benefits (ESS4)

                                                                                        Inadequate stakeholder engagement with affected people causes mistrust (ESS10)
        Component    4:                                                                 Environmental Risks:
        Project
        Management and                                                                  TA may pose downstream environmental risks, such as lack of environmental protection
        Capacity                                                                        and waste management, etc… (ESS1)
        Development                                                                     Social Risks:

                                                                                        TA may pose downstream risks and impacts, such as conflicts around O&M and water
                                                                                        management, fee collection etc (ESS1)
                                                                                        Lack of access to grievance redress mechanisms (ESS10)
                                                                                        Exclusion of vulnerable groups in project activities and consultations (ESS10)
                                                                                        Inadequate stakeholder engagement due to ongoing conflict (ESS10)


         The Table below provides a generic ESMP for the Project, including indicators, frequency ad responsibilities for monitoring. The Generic ESMP can
         serve the preparation of sub-project specific E&S instruments.

         Table 12 Project Generic ESMP and Monitoring Table

                                                                                                       Phase                                                                Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts                  Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                        Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                           for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                                    implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                               Continuous
                                                                                                        Construction
                                                                                                                                                                              Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                     and monitoring

                                                                                            Planning                   Operation



ESS 1: Environmental and Social Assessment




         16
              The costs cannot be fully determined at this stage. They will be calculated for each activity in the activity-specific ESMPs.




         63
                                                                                         Phase                                                                     Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts              Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                  Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                  for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                           implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                      Continuous
                                                                                          Construction
                                                                                                                                                                     Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                            and monitoring

                                                                              Planning                   Operation

                                      o   Screen each subproject prior to         X                                  o   % of subprojects that             X                               Implementation:    Monitori
Lack of understanding of risks            implementation (See Annex 1 for                                                have been screened                                                Regional           ng costs:
and impacts of sub-projects               E&S screening template)                                                                                                                          Governments /      Included
                                      o                                                                                  # of additional E&S                                               MILLS / MoWE       in staff
                                          Prepare all relevant E&S                                                       instruments prepared                                                                 time
                                          instruments to mitigate risks and                                                                                                                Monitoring: FPIU
                                          impacts                                                                        # of capacity building
                                                                                                                         sessions for project
                                          Raise awareness of E&S risks and                                               workers
                                          conduct capacity building on all
                                          relevant E&S instruments and                                                   # of capacity building
                                          measures for the project team in                                               sessions for communities
                                          the FPIU and RPIUs and for all
                                          project workers as well as
                                          communities
Downstream E&S risks                  o   Include all relevant E&S                X                                  o   % of RFPs or TOR contain          X                               Implementation:    Monitori
emanating from TA                         provisions into every Request for                                              all relevant provisions on                                        Regional           ng costs:
                                          Proposals or TOR, and in every                                                 E&S                                                               Governments /      Included
                                          contractual agreement                                                      o                                                                     MILLS / MoWE       in staff
                                                                                                                     o   % of contractual                                                                     time
                                                                                                                         agreements with E&S                                               Monitoring: FPIU
                                                                                                                         provisions

ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions

Occupational Health and Safety            Train workers appropriately on X                      X                        # of training sessions for                     X                  Implementation:    Monitori
risks (injury, death, fire hazards)       OHS risks, hazards and safe                                                    workers                                                           Contractor         ng costs:
                                          handling of equipment and
                                          procedures,     based       on




           64
                                                                                      Phase                                                                     Frequency of
      Potential Risks and Impacts       Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                  Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                       Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                           Planning                   Operation

                                       International          Financial                                           o   % of workers with                                                 Monitoring:        Included
                                       Corporation (IFC) EHSG                                                         adequate PPE                                                      Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                  o                                                                     Governments /      time
                                       Provide      appropriate    PPE,                                           o   # of signage on PPE                                               RPIUs and FPIU /
                                       continuous reminders to use PPE,                                               available                                                         MoWE               Travel
                                       use of signage and continuous                                              o                                                                                        costs for
                                       supervision, based on EHSG                                                     % of workers aware of                                                                monitori
                                                                                                                      the GRM                                                                              ng
                                       Communicate and implement                                                                                                                                           activities
                                       workers’ GRM                                                                   # of C-ESMPs that include                                                            : 100,000
                                                                                                                      OHS measures
                                       Develop and implement C-ESMP
                                       including OHS measures                                                         # of RFP or TOR or
                                                                                                                      contracts with E&S
                                       Implement LMP                                                                  provisions

                                       Include OHS requirements into
                                       bids and contracts
    OHS risks for workers during                                                             X                                                                       X
    installation of solar panels:                                                                                                                                                       Implementation:
-                                                                                                                     # of sites with emergency                                         Contractor         Monitori
-   The emission of lead and battery   Use secondary containment to                                                   showers and eye wash                                                                 ng costs:
    acid to the workspace and the      capture leaks from batteries                                                   stations                                                          Monitoring:        Included
    environment at large can cause                                                                                                                                                      Regional           in staff
    severe and potentially life-       Provide emergency showers and                                                  # or workers trained on                                           Governments /      time
    threatening health risks for       eye wash stations                                                              safe handling of batteries                                        RPIUs, FPIU /
    workers                                                                                                                                                                             MoWE               Travel
-                                      Provide training on safe handling                                              # of workers          with                                                           costs as
                                       of batteries to workers                                                        appropriate PPE




              65
                                                                                          Phase                                                                 Frequency of
      Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                 Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                           Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                               Planning                   Operation

-   Electrocution through working                                                                                                                                                                          per
    with electrical connections         Only trained and certified                                                                                                                                         above
-                                       electricians should work on
-   Injuries through lifting of heavy   electrical connections
    materials (e.g. solar panels)
                                        Provide PPE (insulated gloves,
                                        dielectric footwear, face shields if
                                        necessary)

                                        Establish limits on maximum
                                        weight per worker (25 kg and less)
                                        and require team lifting for heavy
                                        or awkward loads

                                        Train workers on lifting methods

                                        Provide PPE (safety shoes with slip
                                        resistant soles, gloves with good
                                        grip, support belts, etc)

    OHS risks through excavation        Install drainage channels or                             X                    # of drainage channels                         X                  Implementation:    Monitori
    works and demolition works          diversion ditches to control                                                  installed                                                         Contractor         ng costs:
                                        stormwater     runoff     around                                                                                                                                   Included
                                        excavated or demolition areas                                                 # of excavations with safe                                        Monitoring:        in staff
                                                                                                                      access/egress                                                     Regional           time
                                        Regularly pump out water                                                                                                                        Governments /
                                        accumulating in excavations                                                                                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /      Travel
                                                                                                                                                                                        MoWE               costs as




              66
                                                                                   Phase                                                                Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts      Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                       for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                           Continuous
                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                                          Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                 and monitoring

                                                                        Planning                   Operation

                                  Ensure safe access/egress in                                                                                                                                     per
                                  excavations during wet conditions                                                                                                                                above

EHS risks associated with solar   Segregate storage: separate                             X                    # of sites with                   X                              Implementation:    Monitori
panel storage facilities (e.g.    hazardous goods from general                                                 appropriate                                                      Contractor         ng costs:
maintenance work, storage of      storage (solar panels, tools)                                                storage systems                                                                     Included
hazardous goods such as                                                                                                                                                         Monitoring:        in staff
batteries)                        Ensure natural or mechanical                                                 # of workers with                                                Regional           time
                                  ventilation to avoid build-up of                                             appropriate PPE                                                  Governments /
                                  hydrogen gas from lead-acid                                                                                                                   RPIUs, FPIU /      Travel
                                  batteries                                                                                                                                     MoWE               costs as
                                                                                                                                                                                                   per
                                  Use acid-resistant flooring,                                                                                                                                     above
                                  bunds or trays to contain leaks

                                  Use racks for solar panels to
                                  avoid breakage and falling
                                  hazards

                                  Provide appropriate PPE to
                                  workers (gloves goggles, and
                                  aprons)
Inadequate PPE for workers        Provide     appropriate        PPE,                     X                                                                  X                  Implementation:    Monitori
                                  continuous reminders to use PPE,                                             % of workers with                                                Contractor         ng costs:
                                  use of signage and continuous                                                appropriate PPE                                                                     Included
                                  supervision of availability and use                                                                                                           Monitoring:        in staff
                                  of PPE, based on EHS Guidelines                                              # of occasions on which                                          Regional           time
                                  on OHS                                                                       workers’ GRM was                                                 Governments /
                                                                                                               communicated




         67
                                                                                 Phase                                                                Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts    Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                     for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                              implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                         Continuous
                                                                                  Construction
                                                                                                                                                        Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                               and monitoring

                                                                      Planning                   Operation

                                Communicate and implement                                                                                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /      Travel
                                GRM/workers’ GRM                                                                                                                              MoWE               costs for
                                                                                                                                                                                                 monitori
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                 activities
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (see
                                                                                                                                                                                                 above)
Noise and vibration linked to   Select equipment with lower                             X                    # of sites with suitable                      X                  Implementation:    Monitori
machinery                       sound power levels                                                           mufflers installed                                               Contractor         ng costs:
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Included
                                Install suitable mufflers on engine                                          # of workers        with                                         Monitoring:        in staff
                                exhausts and compressor                                                      appropriate PPE                                                  Regional           time
                                components in cases where the                                                                                                                 Governments /
                                service provider uses generators                                             # of sites with acoustic                                         RPIUs, FPIU /      Travel
                                                                                                             enclosures deployed                                              MoWE               costs for
                                Provide fit to work PPEs (ear                                                                                                                                    monitori
                                plug/earmuffs) for all workers                                                                                                                                   ng
                                involved in the areas with                                                                                                                                       activities
                                elevated noise levels                                                                                                                                            (see
                                                                                                                                                                                                 above)
                                Install acoustic enclosures and/or
                                use vegetation as sound buffer
                                for equipment casing radiating
                                noise i.e. generator

                                Use equipment that is/are in good
                                working       condition       and
                                periodically maintained




          68
                                                                                Phase                                                                 Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts      Proposed Mitigation Measures                                             Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                     for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                              implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                         Continuous
                                                                                 Construction
                                                                                                                                                        Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                               and monitoring

                                                                     Planning                   Operation

Lack of understanding of EHS      Assess capacity of construction                      X                    %     of  construction                         x                  Implementation:    Monitori
risks and impacts and of          company on EHS/OHS                                                        companies       whose                                             Contractor         ng costs:
mitigation measures leads to                                                                                capacity  has    been                                                                Included
accidents and health impacts      Train workers on        EHS/OHS                                           assessed.                                                         Monitoring:        in staff
                                  through toolbox talks                                                                                                                       Regional           time
                                                                                                            # of toolbox         talks                                        Governments /
                                                                                                            conducted                                                         RPIUs, FPIU /      Travel
                                                                                                                                                                              MoWE               costs for
                                                                                                            # of trainings provided                                                              monitori
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                 activities
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (see
                                                                                                                                                                                                 above)
Violations of labor and working                                                        x                                                                   x                  Implementation:    Monitori
conditions                        Provide workers’ GRM                                                      # of available GRM                                                Contractor /       ng costs:
                                                                                                            channels for workers                                              Regional           Included
                                  Create awareness on LMP (See                                                                                                                Governments /      in staff
                                  Annex 5)                                                                  # of awareness sessions                                           RPIUs, FPIU /      time
                                                                                                            on LMP                                                            MoWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Travel
                                                                                                                                                                              Monitoring:        costs for
                                                                                                                                                                              Regional           monitori
                                                                                                                                                                              Governments /      ng
                                                                                                                                                                              RPIUs, FPIU /      activities
                                                                                                                                                                              MoWE
Risk of Child labor               Comply with minimum age set for                      X                    # of workers violations                        X                  Implementation:    Monitori
                                  all types of work (in compliance                                          (child, forced labor)                                             Contractor         ng costs:
Risk of Forced Labor              with national laws and ESS2) and




          69
                                                                                    Phase                                                                 Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                               Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                         for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                  implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                             Continuous
                                                                                     Construction
                                                                                                                                                            Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                   and monitoring

                                                                         Planning                   Operation

                                    document age of workers upon                                                # of                                                              Monitoring:        Included
                                    hiring                                                                      existence/maintenance                                             Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                of a labor registry of all                                        Governments /      time
                                    Verify age of workers with                                                  contracted                                                        RPIUs, FPIU /
                                    communities where required                                                                                                                    MoWE
                                                                                                                % of workers with age
                                    Conduct a track record search of                                            verification
                                    the contractors at the bidding
                                    process (record of health and                                               # of awareness
                                    safety violations, fines, consult                                           campaigns
                                    public documents related to
                                    workers’ rights violations, SEA/SH
                                    issues etc.)

                                o   Raise awareness of
                                    communities/suppliers to not
                                    engage in child labour
                                o
                                o   Consider ending of contract in
                                    case of violations
Risks of labor influx               Set up local workforce minimum                         X                    % of local workforce                           x                  Implementation:    Monitori
                                    content for the contractors                                                 hired                                                             Contractor         ng costs:

                                    Disclose to communities local                                               # Number of                                                       Monitoring:        Included
                                    workforce content requirement                                               sensitization/awareness                                           Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                events within                                                     Governments /      time
                                    Maximize the use of local                                                   communities                                                       RPIUs, FPIU /
                                    suppliers (for food, water,                                                                                                                   MoWE
                                    services etc.)                                                              # of local suppliers used




           70
                                                                                      Phase                                                                       Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts         Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                      Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                 for           d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                          implementation      (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                     Continuous
                                                                                       Construction
                                                                                                                                                                    Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                           and monitoring

                                                                           Planning                   Operation

SEA/SH for project workers and       Provide awareness session to                            x                          % of workers that signed                       x                  Implementation:     Monitori
project-affected persons             workers and communities on                                                         CoCs                                                              Contractor          ng costs:
                                     Sea/SH
                                                                                                                        # of trainings on CoC                                             Monitoring:         Included
                                     Every worker to sign Code of                                                                                                                         Regional            in staff
                                     Conduct (CoC)                                                                                                                                        Governments /       time
                                                                                                                                                                                          RPIUs, FPIU /
                                     Provide awareness on CoC                                                                                                                             MoWE
                                 o

ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management

Generation of domestic waste Contractor to prepare C-ESMP                                    x                      o   # of contractors that                          x                  Implementation:
during              rehabilitation, include waste management                                                            have prepared a C-ESMP                                            Contractor          Monitori
Indiscriminate disposal of solid                                                                                    o                                                                                         ng costs:
and liquid wastes, packages, Waste               minimization       and                                             o   # of sites with waste bins                                        Monitoring:
plastic material, etc               segregation: provide clearly labeled                                                available                                                         Regional            Included
                                    bins; minimize single use packaging;                                                                                                                  Governments /       in staff
                                    encourage re-use and recycle                                                                                                                          RPIUs, FPIU /       time
                                    where possible                                                                                                                                        MoWE
Waste     generation     through      Place adequately covered waste                                              X o   # of waste containers                                     X       Implementation:     Monitori
domestic solid waste due to           containers across the site                                                        available                                                         Local authorities   ng costs:
activities around the dam
plastics, containers, boxes, Empty bin frequently to prevent                                                                                                                              Monitoring:         Included
papers                                overflow                                                                                                                                            Regional            in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                          Governments /       time
                                                                                                                                                                                          RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                                                                                          MoWE




          71
                                                                                   Phase                                                                    Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts      Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                           for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                    implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                               Continuous
                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                                              Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                     and monitoring

                                                                        Planning                   Operation

Generation of construction        Contractor to prepare C-ESMP                            x                                                                      x                  Implementation:    Monitori
waste (cement mixing areas,                                                                                    o   % of contractors that                                            Contractor         ng costs:
metal, wood and paint residues,   Employ technologies that are                                                     have prepared C-ESMPs
diesel and other residues         least polluting and technically                                              o                                                                    Monitoring:        Included
                                  feasible                                                                     o   # of sites with recycling                                        Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                   efforts undertaken                                               Governments /      time
                                  Recycling of waste effluents will                                                                                                                 RPIUs, FPIU /
                                  be carried out as far as possible                                                                                                                 MoWE               Travel
                                  and practical                                                                                                                                                        costs for
                                                                                                                                                                                                       monitori
                                  It will be ensured that the wastes                                                                                                                                   ng
                                  are not released into any drinking                                                                                                                                   activities
                                  water source, cultivation fields or
                                  critical habitat

                                  Waste effluents will be not be
                                  released into irrigation channels –
                                  based on EHS Guidelines on
                                  Wastewater and Ambient Water
                                  Quality

                                  All wastewater discharges are to
                                  meet      applicable     country
                                  laws/regulations     and     WB
                                  Environmental, Health and Safety
                                  Guidelines (EHSGs) (General and
                                  sector-specific)
Potential   pollution    from     Implement WMP                                           X                        # of sites conducting                         X                  Implementation:    Monitori
Hazardous   materials through                                                                                      waste segregation                                                Contractor         ng costs:




         72
                                                                                     Phase                                                                Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                         for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                  implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                             Continuous
                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                            Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                   and monitoring

                                                                          Planning                   Operation

improper handling of fuels,         Segregate hazardous from non-
lubricants, or concrete additives   hazardous waste                                                              # of sites where                                                 Monitoring:        Included
and      construction     waste                                                                                  hazardous waste is                                               Regional           in staff
generation (cement mixing           Minimize generation of hazardous                                             stored correctly                                                 Governments /      time
areas, metal, diesel and other      waste                                                                                                                                         RPIUs, FPIU /
residues)                                                                                                        # of workers trained                                             MoWE               Travel
                                    Store hazardous waste in sealed,                                                                                                                                 costs for
                                    labeled containers compatible                                                                                                                                    monitori
                                    with waste types                                                                                                                                                 ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                     activities
                                    Train workers in safe handling of
                                    hazardous materials
Waste management issues             Separate reusable and recyclable                        X                    # where waste is                              X                  Implementation:    Monitori
through inadequate disposal of      materials                                                                    separated                                                        Contractor         ng costs:
excavated      materials    or
demolition waste                    Promote site re-use                                                          # of sites where waste is                                        Monitoring:        Included
                                                                                                                 transported                                                      Regional           in staff
                                    Transport waste in covered trucks                                            appropriately                                                    Governments /      time
                                    to prevent spillage and dust                                                                                                                  RPIUs, FPIU /
                                    generation                                                                   # of illegal dumping                                             MoWE               Travel
                                                                                                                 incidents reported                                                                  costs for
                                    Prohibit illegal dumping                                                                                                                                         monitori
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                     activities
Air pollution through dust and      Planning activities in consultation                     x                    % of vehicles that have                       x                  Implementation:    Monitori
emissions during rehabilitation     with local communities so that                                               been recently maintained                                         Contractor         ng costs:
                                    activities with the greatest
                                    potential to generate noise are                                              % of vehicles with                                               Monitoring:
                                    planned during periods of the day                                            mufflers installed                                               Regional




          73
                                                                                     Phase                                                                         Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts       Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                       Indicators for monitoring                    Monitoring               Responsibility    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                  for           d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                           implementation      (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                      Continuous
                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                                     Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                            and monitoring

                                                                          Planning                   Operation

                                   that will result         in   least                                                                                                                     Governments /       Included
                                   disturbance.                                                                    o   # of community                                                      RPIUs, FPIU /       in staff
                                                                                                                       consultations around                                                MoWE                time
                                   Suitable     wet    suppression                                                     planning
                                   techniques need to be utilized in                                                                                                                                           Travel
                                   all exposed areas                                                                                                                                                           costs for
                                                                                                                                                                                                               monitori
                                   All unnecessary traffic must be                                                                                                                                             ng
                                   strictly limited on site speed                                                                                                                                              activities
                                   controls are to be enforced

                                   Monitor exhaust emissions to
                                   ambient air, waste pollutant
                                   releases to land and water.
Soil and water contamination       Untreated waste effluents from                           x                      o   # of GRM cases filed                             x                  Implementation:     Monitori
and degradation of water bodies    the construction sites shall not be                                             o                                                                       Contractor          ng costs:
caused by discharge of waste       released into drinking water                                                        # of incidents of water
during rehabilitation              sources,      cultivation    fields,                                                contamination based on                                              Monitoring:         Included
                                   irrigation channels or critical                                                     regular testing                                                     Regional            in staff
                                   habitats.                                                                       o                                                                       Governments /       time
                                                                                                                                                                                           RPIUs, FPIU /
                                  Adopt and implement GRM                                                                                                                                  MoWE
Poor water quality through         Fence of water places to prevent                                              X o   Availability of fence                                       X       Implementation:     Monitori
livestock    watering      and     direct livestock access and                                                     o                                                                       Local authorities   ng costs:
agrochemical use in operational    provide controlled watering                                                     o   Evidence of manure
phase                              points                                                                              collection and storage                                              Monitoring:         Included
                                                                                                                   o                                                                       Regional            in staff
                                   Collect and store manure                                                        o   # of sites with buffer strip                                        Governments /       time
                                                                                                                   o




         74
                                                                                     Phase                                                                          Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts       Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                         Indicators for monitoring                   Monitoring               Responsibility     Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                   for            d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                            implementation       (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                       Continuous
                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                                      Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                             and monitoring

                                                                          Planning                   Operation

                                   Maintain vegetated buffer strips                                                  o   # of sites with                                                    RPIUs, FPIU /
                                   between livestock areas and                                                           appropriate storage of                                             MoWE
                                   water bodies                                                                          agrochemicals

                                   Follow   integrated            pest
                                   management

                                   Store agrochemicals in bunded,
                                   ventilated and labelled facilities
Pollution of local surface water   Prevent erosion and control                              x                        o   # of sites with silt fences                     x                  Implementation:      Monitori
sources during rehabilitation      sediment through installation of                                                      installed                                                          Contractor           ng costs:
                                   silt fences, straw wattles or fiber                                               o
                                   rolls; construction of temporary                                                  o   # of sites with correct                                            Monitoring:          Included
                                   basins to collect and settle muddy                                                    storage of fuels, oils and                                         Regional             in staff
                                   runoff before discharge                                                               chemicals                                                          Governments /        time
                                                                                                                                                                                            RPIUs, FPIU /
                                   Conduct spill prevent and control                                                                                                                        MoWE
                                   by storing fuels, oils and chemicals
                                   in secondary containment away
                                   from water bodies.
Potential emissions associated     During installation, prevent                             X                    X       Evidence that                       X                              Implementation:      Monitori
with solar energy, such as heavy   accidental release of heavy-                                                          panels are stored                                                  Contractor / local   ng costs:
metals like lead, mercury and      metal containing components                                                           appropriately                                                      authorities
cadmium                            by using proper containment                                                                                                                                                   Included
                                   and handling procedures.                                                              # of inspections of                                                Monitoring:          in staff
                                                                                                                         panels after                                                       Regional             time
                                   Store panels and related                                                              installations                                                      Governments /
                                   materials on impermeable                                                                                                                                 RPIUs, FPIU /
                                   surfaces  with  secondary                                                                                                                                MoWE




          75
                                                                                    Phase                                                                      Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts         Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                              for           d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                       implementation      (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                  Continuous
                                                                                     Construction
                                                                                                                                                                 Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                        and monitoring

                                                                         Planning                   Operation

                                     containment to minimize                                                          # of panels with
                                     leaching into soil and water.                                                    protective
                                                                                                                      encapsulants
                                     During the operational phase
                                     regularly inspect panels for
                                     cracks or damages that could
                                     increase leaching of toxic
                                     elements

                                     Apply protective encapsulants
                                     and lamination materials to
                                     minimize leaching risk during
                                     the operational life of the
                                     panels.
E-Waste generation and waste-        Implement a safe disposal               x                                    o   # of E-Waste                                  x                  Implementation:     Monitori
generation from discarded solar      procedure for broken, end of life                                                Management Plans                                                 Contractor          ng costs:
panels                               solar panels (to be installed on                                                 prepared
                                     top of certain infrastructures)                                                                                                                   Monitoring:         Included
                                                                                                                                                                                       Regional            in staff
                                     Prepare and implement                                                                                                                             Governments /       time
                                     subproject specific E-Waste                                                                                                                       RPIUs, FPIU /
                                     Management Plan                                                                                                                                   MoWE

Risks related to use of Pesticides   Create awareness on Integrated                                             X o   See indicators in IPMP                                           Implementation:
                                     Pest Management and                                                                                                                               local authorities
                                     implement IPMF (see Annex 9)




          76
                                                                                 Phase                                                                        Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts     Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                     Indicators for monitoring                   Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                             for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                      implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                 Continuous
                                                                                  Construction
                                                                                                                                                                Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                       and monitoring

                                                                      Planning                   Operation

Erosion and sedimentation        Ensure proper canal alignment                          X                    X o   % of designs with proper                                   X       Implementation:    Monitori
through poorly designed canals   and slope design                                                                  canal alignment and                                                Contractor         ng costs:
or lack of vegetation cover                                                                                        slope design
                                 Supply grass seeding,                                                         o                                                                      Monitoring:        Included
                                 hydroseeding or turfing along                                                 o   # of sites with grass                                              Regional           in staff
                                 canal embankments                                                                 seeding along                                                      Governments /      time
                                                                                                                   embankment                                                         RPIUs, FPIU /
                                 Plant trees, shrubs or live fences                                            o                                                                      MoWE               Travel
                                 as buffer zones along irrigation                                              o   # of trees planted                                                                    costs
                                 canals                                                                        o
                                                                                                               o   # of inspections
                                 Perform regular canal inspection                                                  performed per quarter
                                 and maintenance                                                               o
                                                                                                                   % reduction in sediment
                                                                                                                   loss

                                                                                                                    Vegetation cover trends
Soil disturbance and erosion     Conduct proper site selection and                      X                    X o   # of sites with proper site                                X       Implementation:    Monitori
through      earthworks  for     alignment to minimize                                                             selection performed                                                Contractor/Local   ng costs:
embankments, trenches, or        disturbance of steep slopes                                                   o                                                                      Authorities
ponds                                                                                                          o   Evidence of design with                                                               Included
                                 Ensure drainage design that                                                       safe channels runoff                                               Monitoring:        in staff
                                 safely channels runoff                                                        o                                                                      Regional           time
                                                                                                               o   Evidence of good timing                                            Governments /
                                 Time earthworks during dry                                                        for earthworks                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /      Travel
                                 season to minimize erosion from                                               o                                                                      MoWE               costs –
                                 rainfall                                                                      o   # of sites with grass                                                                 see
                                                                                                                   seeding or turfing after                                                              above
                                                                                                                   earthworks




         77
                                                                                    Phase                                                                       Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts         Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for           d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation      (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                     Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                         Planning                   Operation

                                     Employ grass seeding or turfing                                              o
                                     immediately after earthworks to                                              o   # of inspections per
                                     stabilize soil                                                                   quarter

                                     Perform regular inspections of
                                     embankments, canals, trenches
                                     and ponds for erosion or
                                     sedimentation
Contamination of water in the        Train farmers on integrated pest                      X                    X o   # of training sessions for                                        Implementation:     Monitori
reservoir as a result of poor        management                                                                       farmers                                                           Contractor /        ng costs:
farming practices and open                                                                                        o                                                                     Local Authorities
defecation upstream                  Establish vegetated buffer strips                                            o   # of sites with buffer                                                                Included
                                     along riverbanks to filter runoff                                                strips                                                            Monitoring:         in staff
                                                                                                                  o                                                                     Regional            time
                                     Implement behavior change                                                    o   # of behavior change                                              Governments /
                                     campaigns to limit open                                                          campaigns                                                         RPIUs, FPIU /
                                     defecation                                                                   o                                                                     MoWE

Agrochemical runoff through          Train farmers on integrated pest                      X                    X o   # of training sessions to                                 X       Implementation:     Monitori
increased       fertilizers    and   management and safe handling,                                                    farmers                                                           Contractor /        ng costs:
pesticides for irrigated crops       storage and application of                                                   o                                                                     Local Authority
                                     fertilizers/pesticides                                                       o   # of sites with shrubs                                                                Included
                                                                                                                      planted                                                           Monitoring:         in staff
                                     Plant shrubs or grass along                                                  o                                                                     Regional            time
                                     irrigation canals and around                                                 o   Water quality monitoring                                          Governments /
                                     reservoirs to trap sediments and                                                 log available                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /
                                     chemicals                                                                    o                                                                     MoWE
                                                                                                                  o




          78
                                                                                     Phase                                                                      Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts         Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                     Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility     Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for            d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation       (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                          Planning                   Operation

                                     Avoid over-irrigation that flushes
                                     chemicals into canals

                                     Conduct regular water quality
                                     monitoring
Water      depletion   through       Promote efficient irrigation                           X                    X o   Evidence of lined canals                                 X       Implementation:      Monitori
excessive pumping from rivers or     technologies instead of flood                                                 o                                                                    Contractor/local     ng costs:
aquifers                             irrigation                                                                    o   # of water allocation                                            authorities
                                                                                                                       plans                                                                                 Included
                                     Line canals and ponds to reduce                                               o                                                                    Monitoring:          in staff
                                     seepage losses                                                                o   Availability of check                                            Regional             time and
                                                                                                                       dams, recharge ponds                                             Governments /        travel
                                     Prepare water allocation plans                                                    and infiltration trenches                                        RPIUs, FPIU /        costs
                                     ensuring priority for drinking                                                o                                                                    MoWE
                                     water, ecosystem needs and                                                    o   # of IWUAs
                                     equitable distribution                                                        o
                                                                                                                       Water use efficiency
                                     Prepare check dams, recharge                                                      (m3/ha)
                                     ponds, infiltration trenches to
                                     replenish aquifers

                                     Establish IWUAs to engage
                                     farmers in water allocation and
                                     enforcement
Risks of natural hazards (flooding   Incorporate design return periods                      X                    X o   Availability of adequate                                 X       Implementation:      Monitori
and lack of water due to             (e.g. 1-in-100 year or probably                                                   spillway capacity                                                Contractor / local   ng costs:
droughts) during operation           max. flood events)                                                            o                                                                    authorities
                                                                                                                   o   Availability of flood                                                                 Included
                                                                                                                       control structures                                                                    in staff




          79
                                                                                     Phase                                                                      Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts         Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                     Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                          Planning                   Operation

                                     Provide adequate spillway                                                                                                                          Monitoring:        time and
                                     capacity in dams                                                              o   Availability of multi-                                           Regional           travel
                                                                                                                       purpose reservoirs, check                                        Governments /      costs
                                     Install flood control structures,                                                 dams and recharge                                                RPIUs, FPIU /
                                     such has diversion channels or                                                    ponds                                                            MoWE
                                     emergency gates

                                     For droughts, increase storage                                                o   Evidence of irrigation
                                     capacity with multi-purpose                                                       scheduling based on crop
                                     reservoirs, check dams, and                                                       needs
                                     recharge ponds

                                     Introduce irrigation scheduling                                               o   Availability of drought
                                     based on soil moisture and crop                                                   management plan
                                     needs                                                                         o

                                     Prepare drought management
                                     plan
Generation of hazardous waste        Use spill container and drip trays                     X                    X o   Availability of spill                                    X       Implementation:    Monitori
or improper recycling - Used         under equipment                                                                   containers                                                       Contractor/local   ng costs:
panels (containing oils or molten                                                                                  o                                                                    authorities
salts, hydraulic fluids, coolants,   Segregate hazardous fluids from                                               o   Evidence of segregation                                                             Included
and lubricants) and used             general waste                                                                     of hazardous fluids                                              Monitoring:        in staff
batteries (both lead acid and                                                                                      o                                                                    Regional           time and
lithium ion)                         Design impermeable storage                                                    o   Availability of                                                  Governments /      travel
                                     surfaces to prevent leakage into                                                  impermeable storage                                              RPIUs, FPIU /      costs
Potential emissions associated       soil and groundwater                                                              surfaces                                                         MoWE
with solar energy, such as heavy                                                                                   o




          80
                                                                                   Phase                                                                        Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts      Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                        Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for           d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation      (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                        Planning                   Operation

metals like lead, mercury and     Used batteries to be stored in                                                   o   % of batteries stored
may cadmium emissions             dry, well-ventilated and covered                                                     appropriately
                                  facilities with acid-resistant                                                   o
                                  flooring                                                                         o   % of used batteries
                                                                                                                       returned to
                                  Return used batteries to                                                             manufacturer
                                  manufacturers tack-back
                                  programs or certified recyclers
E-Waste generation and waste-     Waste effluents will be not be                                               X                                                     x                  Implementation:     Monitori
generation from discarded solar   released into irrigation channels –                                                  # incidents of waste                                             local authorities   ng costs:
panels                            based on EHS Guidelines on                                                           effluents released into
                                  Wastewater and Ambient Water                                                         water                                                            Monitoring:         Included
                                  Quality                                                                                                                                               Regional            in staff
                                                                                                                       % of wastewater                                                  Governments /       time
                                  All wastewater discharges are to                                                     discharges that met                                              RPIUs, FPIU /
                                  meet       applicable     country                                                    regulatory requirements                                          MoWE
                                  laws/regulations      and    WB
                                  Environmental, Health and Safety
                                  Guidelines (EHSGs) (General and
                                  sector-specific)
Poor siting and design of small   Conduct basin-level studies to                          X                    X       # of studies prepared                                    X       Implementation:     Monitori
dams or haffirs may disrupt       determine safe locations, runoff                                                                                                                      Contractor/local    ng costs:
natural     drainage,   reduce    yield and downstream flow needs                                                      % of haffirs with correct                                        authorities
downstream water flows or                                                                                              siting                                                                               Included
cause flooding                    Do not site dams or haffirs in                                                                                                                        Monitoring:         in staff
                                  wetlands, ecologically sensitive                                                     Availability of natural                                          Regional            time and
                                  zones or areas prone to flash                                                        drainage paths                                                   Governments /       travel
                                  floods                                                                               Availability of natural                                          RPIUs, FPIU /       costs
                                                                                                                       flows during construction                                        MoWE




         81
                                                                                  Phase                                                                     Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts     Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                           for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                    implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                               Continuous
                                                                                   Construction
                                                                                                                                                              Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                     and monitoring

                                                                       Planning                   Operation

                                 Maintain natural drainage paths                                                  Evidence of the use of
                                 with culverts, bypass channels or                                                check dams, silt fences
                                 controlled outlets                                                               and vegetation on
                                                                                                                  disturbed soil
                                 Ensure   natural    flows    are
                                 maintained during construction                                                   # of inspections in a
                                                                                                                  quarter
                                 Use check dams, silt fences and
                                 vegetation on disturbed soil                                                     # of IWUAs

                                 Conduct      regular    safety
                                 inspections during operational
                                 phase

                                 Involve IWUAs in community-
                                 based management
Excessive rates of erosion and   Design canals with safe side              X             X                    X   # of canals with safe side                                #       Implementation:    Monitori
sedimentation                    slopes and non-erosive flow                                                      slopes                                                            Contractor/local   ng costs:
                                 velocities                                                                                                                                         authorities
                                                                                                                  Evidence of lining in                                                                Included
                                 Use lining in highly erodible zones                                              highly erodible zones                                             Monitoring:        in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                    Regional           time and
                                 For dams and reservoirs, include                                                 Evidence of sediment                                              Governments /      travel
                                 sediment trapping structures                                                     trapping structures                                               RPIUs, FPIU /      costs
                                 upstream and provide adequate                                                                                                                      MoWE
                                 spillways to handle peak flows                                                   Evidence of terracing,
                                 without eroding embankment                                                       contour bounding and
                                                                                                                  conservation tillage in
                                 Conduct        upstream        soil                                              catchments




         82
                                                                                  Phase                                                                    Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts       Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                  Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                          for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                   implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                              Continuous
                                                                                   Construction
                                                                                                                                                             Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                    and monitoring

                                                                       Planning                   Operation

                                   conservation    through      the
                                   promotion of terracing, contour
                                   bunding and conservation tillage                                               Evidence of check dams,
                                   in catchments                                                                  gabions and retention
                                                                                                                  ponds in erosion prone
                                   Construct check dams, gabions                                                  areas
                                   and retention ponds in erosion
                                   prone areas                                                                    # of inspections in a
                                                                                                                  quarter
                                   Conduct regular inspection and
                                   maintenance
Flooding, structural destruction   Conduct climate risk screening of       X             X                    X   Evidence of appropriate                                          Implementation:    Monitori
and       erosion       through    activity    (drought,      flood,                                              design                                                           Contractor/local   ng costs:
embankment                         temperature extremes) and                                                                                                                       authorities
                                   design adoption measures                                                       Evidence of adequate                                                                Included
                                                                                                                  spillways, drainage                                              Monitoring:        in staff
                                   Design    embankments       with                                               outlets and sluice gates                                         Regional           time and
                                   capacity for design flood levels                                                                                                                Governments /      travel
                                   and include freeboard                                                          Evidence of flood gauges                                         RPIUs, FPIU /      costs
                                                                                                                  and monitoring systems                                           MoWE
                                   Provide adequate spillways,
                                   drainage outlets and sluice gates                                              Evidence of use of
                                                                                                                  compacted soils or
                                   Install  flood   gauges      and                                               rockfill in embankment
                                   monitoring systems                                                             cores

                                   As part of engineering controls,                                               # of inspection in a
                                   use compacted well-graded soils                                                quarter
                                   or rockfill in embankment cores




          83
                                                                                   Phase                                                                     Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                  Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                            for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                     implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                Continuous
                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                                               Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                      and monitoring

                                                                        Planning                   Operation

                                                                                                                   # of training sessions for
                                    Perform regular inspections for                                                IUAWs
                                    cracks,     seepage or    slope
                                    instability

                                    Reduce erosion risks through
                                    surface protection, flow control,
                                    and catchment and drainage
                                    management.

                                    Train IWUAs in routine monitoring
                                    and reporting

ESS 4: Community Health and Safety

Community safety risks during       Suppress dust during                                  X                        # of complaints on dust                        X                  Implementation:    Monitori
rehabilitation in the vicinity of   construction by water spraying                                                 emissions                                                         Contractor         ng costs:
project works                       and dampening where necessary
                                                                                                               o                                                                     Monitoring:        Included
                                    Implement speed limit for the                                              o   # of trucks covered with                                          Regional           in staff
                                    heavy machinery                                                                a tarpaulin                                                       Governments /      time
                                                                                                               o                                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /
                                    Cover trucks carrying soil, sand                                           o   # of fences and warning                                           MoWE               Travel
                                    and stone with tarpaulin sheets                                                signs                                                                                costs for
                                    to dust spreading                                                                                                                                                   monitori
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ng
                                    Fence construction areas and                                                                                                                                        activities
                                    install warning signs                                                                                                                                               (see
                                                                                                                                                                                                        above)




           84
                                                                             Phase                                                                    Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts     Proposed Mitigation Measures                                               Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                     for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                              implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                         Continuous
                                                                              Construction
                                                                                                                                                        Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                               and monitoring

                                                                  Planning                   Operation

Discriminatory practices in      Adopt and implement GRM                            X                        Availability of GRM                           X                  Implementation:    Monitori
accessing project services and                                                                               channels                                                         Contractor         ng costs:
benefits                         Create awareness for GRM
                                                                                                             # of awareness sessions                                          Monitoring:        Included
                                 Implement information                                                       for GRM                                                          Regional           in staff
                                 dissemination as per SEP                                                                                                                     Governments /      time
                                                                                                             # of information                                                 RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                             dissemination sessions                                           MoWE
Impacts of solar panels on       Regularly inspect for mold in                      X                    X   # of inspections                  X                      X       Implementation:    Monitori
human health (mold, contact      areas where panels are                                                      per month                                                        Contractor/local   ng costs:
with electrical outlets, etc.)   installed                                                                   Evidence of                                                      authorities
                                                                                                             weatherproof,                                                                       Included
                                 Install weatherproof,                                                       insulated cabling                                                Monitoring:        in staff
                                 insulated cabling and junction                                              and junction                                                     Regional           time
                                 boxes                                                                       boxes                                                            Governments /      And
                                                                                                                                                                              RPIUs, FPIU /      travel
                                 Position outlets and inverters                                              # of warning                                                     MoWE               costs
                                 awa from direct exposure to                                                 labels
                                 water
                                                                                                             # of awareness
                                 Post warning labels on                                                      sessions for
                                 electrical panels and restrict                                              community
                                 public access

                                 Educate communities bout
                                 safe distances, avoiding
                                 tampering and reporting
                                 hazards




          85
                                                                                Phase                                                                     Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts       Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                         for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                  implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                             Continuous
                                                                                 Construction
                                                                                                                                                            Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                   and monitoring

                                                                     Planning                   Operation

Exclusion of women from water      Establish IWUAs with women                                               X   # of IWUAs meeting the                                    X       Implementation:    Monitori
ownership and water                quota                                                                        women quota                                                       local authority    ng costs:
governance
                                                                                                                                                                                  Monitoring:        Included
                                                                                                                                                                                  Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                  Governments /      time
                                                                                                                                                                                  RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                                                                                  MoWE
Community health risks from        Provide lined and well-graded                       X                    X   Evidence of lined and                          X                  Implementation:    Monitori
stagnant water in poorly           canals to ensure water                                                       well-graded canals                                                Contractor         ng costs:
managed systems                    movement and prevent                                                         Evidence of drainage
                                   stagnation                                                                   outlets and escape                                                Monitoring:        Included
Public health issues through                                                                                    structures                                                        Regional           in staff
stagnant water in small            Construct drainage outlets and                                               # of canal desilting                                              Governments /      time
reservoirs may create conditions   escape structures                                                            exercises per quarter                                             PIU / MoWE
for mosquito breeding                                                                                                                                                             Implementation:
                                   Conduct regular canal desilting                                              Evidence of controlling of                                        Contractor/local
                                   and cleaning and remove weeds,                                               aquatic weeds                                                     authorities
                                   debris and silt that slow water
                                   flow                                                                         # of IWUAs deployed                                               Monitoring:
                                                                                                                                                                                  Regional
                                   Control aquatic weds to reduce                                                                                                                 Governments /
                                   breeding habitats.                                                                                                                             RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                                                                                  MoWE
                                   Deploy IWUAs and involve
                                   farmers in managing irrigation
                                   flows to avoid stagnant pockets




          86
                                                                                     Phase                                                                        Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts      Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                          Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                 for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                          implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                     Continuous
                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                                    Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                           and monitoring

                                                                          Planning                   Operation

Ethnic tensions among project     Provide information about           X                     X                            # of information                  X                              Implementation:    Monitori
workers and between project       activities as per the SEP                                                              sessions at                                                      Contractor         ng costs:
workers and communities                                                                                                  community level
                                  Adopt and implement a                                                                                                                                   Monitoring:        Included
                                  Project GRM                                                                            # of GRM                                                         Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                         channels available                                               Governments /      time
                                                                                                                         at community                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                         level                                                            MoWE
Exposure to infectious diseases   Provide awareness to local                                x                            # of                                          x                  Implementation:    Monitori
during rehabilitation works       communities through                                                                    sensitization/awareness                                          Contractor         ng costs:
                                  stakeholder engagement                                                                 events within
                                                                                                                         communities                                                      Monitoring:        Included
                                  Community awareness on STDs                                                                                                                             Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                         # of disclosures                                                 Governments /      time
                                  Disclose to communities local                                                                                                                           RPIUs, FPIU /
                                  workforce content requirement                                                          % of local suppliers                                             MoWE
                                                                                                                     o
                                  Maximize the use of local
                                  suppliers (for food, water,
                                  services etc.)

                                  Follow hygiene prescriptions for
                                  infectious disease
Water access conflicts            Transparency                 and                          x                    X       # of communication                                       X       Implementation:    Monitori
                                  communication/public disclosure                                                        events as per SEP                                                Contractor/local   ng costs:
                                  of beneficiary selection criteria                                                      implemented      as                                              authorities
                                  (SEP)                                                                                  compared to planned                                                                 Included
                                                                                                                         events                                                           Monitoring:        in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                          Regional           time




          87
                                                                                 Phase                                                                        Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts      Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                   Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                             for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                      implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                 Continuous
                                                                                  Construction
                                                                                                                                                                Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                       and monitoring

                                                                      Planning                   Operation

                                  Communicate and implement                                                    o   # of GRM channels                                                  Governments /
                                  GRM                                                                              available                                                          RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                               o                                                                      MoWE
                                  Deploy IWUAs with quotas for                                                 o   # of IWUA fulfilling
                                  women and participants from                                                      women’s quota
                                  different social groups
Risk due to road accidents due    Prepare traffic management plan,                      x                      o   # of traffic management                         x                  Implementation:    Monitori
to solar panel trucks/workers     based on EHS Guidelines on                                                       plans prepared                                                     Contractor         ng costs:
transport for the communities     Traffic Safety                                                               o
along the roadside                                                                                             o   # of community                                                     Monitoring:        Included
                                  Hold Community consultations                                                     consultations conducted                                            Regional           in staff
Increased traffic and heavy       before the construction                                                      o                                                                      Governments /      time and
machinery causing road safety                                                                                  o   # of safety signage visible                                        RPIUs, FPIU /      travel
hazards                           Safety signage will be erected at                                            o                                                                      MoWE               costs
                                  appropriate places                                                           o   # of GRM channels
                                                                                                                   available
                                  Safe driving practices will be
                                  promoted among the drivers,
                                  including training to drivers,
                                  limiting of max. speed

                                  Publicize hotline numbers for
                                  GRM
Disruption of livelihoods for      Conduct advanced planning and                        X                    X o   Evidence of scheduling                                     X       Implementation:    Monitori
farmers, fishers, or downstream   scheduling by scheduling canal                                               o                                                                      Contractor/local   ng costs:
users because of temporary or     closures, diversions or reservoir                                            o   Evidence of irrigation                                             authorities
permanent changes in water        filling outside critical                                                         diversions                                                                            Included
availability, land access to      farming/planting and fishing                                                 o                                                                      Monitoring:        in staff
irrigation supply                 seasons                                                                                                                                             Regional           time and




          88
                                                                              Phase                                                                    Frequency of
Potential Risks and Impacts    Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                   Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                      for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                               implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                          Continuous
                                                                               Construction
                                                                                                                                                         Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                and monitoring

                                                                   Planning                   Operation

                                                                                                          o   Evidence of notifications                                        Governments /      travel
                              Provide temporary irrigation                                                    provided                                                         RPIUs, FPIU /      costs
                              diversions or bypass channels to                                            o                                                                    MoWE
                              maintain supply                                                             o   Evidence of appropriate
                                                                                                              design
                              Notify farmers and fishers well in                                          o
                              advance of construction -related                                            o   # of water allocation
                              water disruptions                                                               plans
                                                                                                          o   Evidence of LRPs where
                              For operational phase, design                                                   appropriate
                              and implement minimum                                                       o
                              ecological flows to sustain                                                 o   # of IWUAs formed
                              downstream fisheries and water
                              users

                              Establish water allocation plans
                              ensuring fair distribution among
                              upstream and downstream users.

                              Balance reservoir storage with
                              downstream irrigation needs,
                              particularly during dry seasons

                              Where economic displacement
                              occurs, follow ESS5 requirements
                              and prepare Livelihood
                              Restoration Plan (LRP)




       89
                                                                                   Phase                                                                      Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                             for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                      implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                 Continuous
                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                                                Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                       and monitoring

                                                                        Planning                   Operation

                                   Empower IWUAs to manage
                                   irrigation distribution fairly and
                                   resolve conflicts through GRM.
Community health risks includingo Install temporary fencing around          X             X                    X o   # of fences erected                           X                  Implementation:    Monitori
accidents, injuries and drowning   open excavation sites, canals and                                             o                                                                    Contractor         ng costs:
in open sites                      reservoir edges during                                                        o   # of safe crossings
                                   construction                                                                      erected                                                          Monitoring:        Included
Risk of drowning for community Designate and mark safe crossing                                                  o                                                                    Regional           in staff
members, especially children, as points across canals and worksites                                              o   # of warning signs                                               Governments /      time and
well as drowning of livestock                                                                                    o   Evidence of lined canals                                         RPIUs, FPIU /      travel
                                 Place clear and visible warning                                                     with gentle slopes                                               MoWE               costs
                                 signs in local languages                                                        o   Evidence of buffer zones
                                                                                                                 o
                                  Restrict community entry into                                                  o   # of outreach sessions
                                  active construction zones                                                      o

                                  For operational phases, line canals
                                  and provide gentle side slopes
                                  where feasible

                                  Establish buffer zones with
                                  vegetation or barriers around
                                  reservoirs

                                  Conduct outreach in nearby
                                  communities on the dangers of
                                  swimming, fishing or playing near
                                  canals or dams




          90
                                                                                      Phase                                                                      Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts         Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                      Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                         implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                    Continuous
                                                                                       Construction
                                                                                                                                                                   Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                          and monitoring

                                                                           Planning                   Operation

Injuries and loss of life througho   Apply proper geotechnical and                           X                    X o   Evidence of application                       X          X       Implementation:    Monitori
embankment failure                   engineering design measures for                                                    of appropriate measures                                          Contractor/local   ng costs:
                                     dams                                                                           o                                                                    authorities
                                                                                                                    o   Evidence of deployment                                                              Included
                                     Ensure quality assurance of                                                        of Panel of Experts where                                        Monitoring:        in staff
                                     materials during construction                                                      appropriate                                                      Regional           time and
                                                                                                                    o                                                                    Governments /      travel
                                     Deploy Independent Panel of                                                    o   # of routine inspections                                         RPIUs, FPIU /      costs
                                     Experts for large dams and                                                         in a quarter                                                     MoWE
                                     critical embankments                                                           o
                                                                                                                    o   # of visible and
                                     Conduct routine inspections                                                        unrepaired scars and
                                                                                                                        cracks
                                     Repair small erosion scars, cracks,                                            o
                                     or seepage spots immediately to                                                o   # of action plans shared
                                     avoid escalation

                                     Develop and share a
                                     dam/embankment break action
                                     plan with downstream
                                     communities
Breakout of water borne diseaseo     Conduct awareness campaigns                             X                    X o   # of awareness                                X          X       Implementation:    Monitori
as a result of poor sanitation       on handwashing, safe water                                                         campaigns                                                        Contractor/local   ng costs:
practices by communities living      storage, and latrine use                                                       o                                                                    authorities
upstream of the dam            o                                                                                    o   # mobilization events                                                               Included
                                     Mobilize communities to commit                                                 o                                                                    Monitoring:        in staff
                                     to ending open defecation                                                      o   # of water testing events                                        Regional
                                     upstream                                                                           during quarter                                                   Governments /




          91
                                                                                  Phase                                                                      Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                   Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                            for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                     implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                Continuous
                                                                                   Construction
                                                                                                                                                               Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                      and monitoring

                                                                       Planning                   Operation

                                    Regularly test water quality                                                                                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                                                                                     MoWE
Risk of dam failure througho        Establish an Independent Panel                       X                    X o   Evidence of Panel of                                     X       Implementation:    Monitori
poorly implemented safety plans     of Experts to review, design,                                                   Experts                                                          Contractor/local   ng costs:
                                    construction and operational                                                o                                                                    authorities
                                    safety                                                                      o   Evidence of fail-safe                                                               Included
                                o                                                                                   design features                                                  Monitoring:        in staff
                                    Incorporate fail-safe design                                                o   Evidence of Early                                                Regional           time and
                                    features                                                                        Warning System in place                                          Governments /      travel
                                                                                                                o                                                                    RPIUs, FPIU /      costs
                                    Require independent                                                         o   # of Emergency                                                   MoWE
                                    construction quality assurance                                                  Preparedness Plans

                                    For operational phase, deploy
                                    Early Warning Systems

                                    Prepare and create awareness for
                                    Emergency Preparedness Plan

ESS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

Land acquisition and involuntaryo   Try to avoid involuntary               X                                    o   # of RAPs prepared that                                  X       Implementation:    Monitori
resettlement                        resettlement through alternative                                                were fully implemented                                           local              ng costs:
                                    design options                                                                                                                                   authorities/FPIU
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Included
                                    Prepare and implement RAP (see                                                                                                                   Monitoring:        in staff
                                    Section 7 below) including                                                                                                                       Regional           time and
                                    compensation measures and                                                                                                                        Governments /      travel
                                                                                                                                                                                                        costs




          92
                                                                                  Phase                                                                         Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                     Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility     Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for            d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation       (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                   Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                       Planning                   Operation

                                    livelihood restoration where                                                                                                                        RPIUs, FPIU /
                                    applicable                                                                                                                                          MoWE
Land disputes      /   ownershipo   Implement GRM as part of RAPs          X                                      o   # of GRM channels                                         X       Implementation:      Monitori
disputes                            and as part of Project                                                            available                                                         local authorities    ng costs:
                                                                                                                  o   # of grievances filed that
                                                                                                                      were processed                                                    Monitoring:          Included
                                                                                                                                                                                        Regional             in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                        Governments /        time and
                                                                                                                                                                                        RPIUs, FPIU /        travel
                                                                                                                                                                                        MoWE                 costs

ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Resources

                                    Avoid the destruction of plants                      X                            # of subproject sites that                                X       Implementation:      Monitori
Soil degradation and reduced        and minimize the clearance of                                                     have been re-vegetated                                            Contractor / local   ng costs:
fertility through salinization      vegetal coverage                                                                  after construction                                                authorities
caused by evaporation from                                                                                                                                                                                   Included
irrigated fields leaving behind     Ensure    re-vegetation    after                                                                                                                    Monitoring:          in staff
salts                               completion of construction                                                                                                                          Regional             time
                                                                                                                                                                                        Governments /
                                                                                                                                                                                        RPIUs, FPIU /        Travel
                                                                                                                                                                                        MoWE                 costs for
                                                                                                                                                                                                             monitori
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                             activities
Biodiversity loss through altered   Maintain minimum downstream            X             X                    X       Evidence of maintenance                                   X       Implementation:      Monitori
water regimes in wetlands and       flows from dams to support                                                        of minimum downstream                                             Contractor/local     ng costs:
riparian zones                      aquatic ecosystem and riparian                                                    flows                                                             authorities/FPIU/
                                    vegetation                                                                                                                                          MoWE




          93
                                                                                 Phase                                                                     Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts    Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                          for           d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                   implementation      (in USD)

                                                                                                                                              Continuous
                                                                                  Construction
                                                                                                                                                             Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                    and monitoring

                                                                      Planning                   Operation

                                                                                                                 Evidence of buffer strips                                                             Included
                                Regulate irrigation withdrawals to                                                                                                                 Monitoring:         in staff
                                prevent over-depletion of rivers,                                                Evidence of pollution and                                         Regional            time and
                                streams and wetlands                                                             sedimentation      control                                        Governments /       travel
                                                                                                                 measures                                                          RPIUs, FPIU /       costs
                                Establish vegetated buffer strips                                                                                                                  MoWE
                                along canals, rivers and reservoirs                                              #     of    Biodiversity
                                to protect water-dependent                                                       Assessments         and
                                biodiversity                                                                     Management Plans

                                Where wetlands are degraded,
                                use controlled flooding or
                                rehydration to restore natural
                                hydrological functions

                                Implement      pollution    and
                                sedimentation control measures

                                Prepare      and      implement
                                Biodiversity Assessment and
                                Management       Plan     where
                                necessary
Ecosystem disturbance through   Schedule works outside of critical                      X                    X   Evidence of fish-friendly                                 X       Implementation:     Monitori
temporary dewatering or         fish migration and spawning                                                      diversions                                                        local authorities   ng costs:
altered river flow affecting    seasons
downstream aquatic life, fish                                                                                    # of fish salvage programs                                        Monitoring:         Included
migration and water quality     Use    fish-friendly diversion                                                   adopted                                                           Regional            in staff
                                channels or bypass flows to                                                                                                                        Governments /       time




         94
                                                                                     Phase                                                                Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts         Proposed Mitigation Measures                                               Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                         for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                  implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                             Continuous
                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                                            Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                   and monitoring

                                                                          Planning                   Operation

Biodiversity loss and ecological     maintain     minimum         river                                          #     of    Biodiversity                                         RPIUs, FPIU /
flow limitations. Small dams can     connectivity                                                                Assessments         and                                          MoWE
alter aquatic habitats, block fish                                                                               Management Plans
passage or disturb wildlife          Implement fish salvage programs
movement                             to safely relocate aquatic fauna
                                     from dewatered sections

                                     Prepare      and      implement
                                     Biodiversity Assessment and
                                     Management       Plan     where
                                     necessary
Impacts on terrestrial and           Prepare      and      implement                                             #     of    Biodiversity                                 X       Implementation:    Monitori
aquatic species                      Biodiversity Assessment and                                                 Assessments         and                                          local              ng costs:
                                     Management       Plan     where                                             Management Plans                                                 authorities/PIU/
                                     necessary                                                                                                                                    MoWE               Included
                                                                                                                 # of site dams and canals                                                           in staff
                                     Site dams and canals to avoid                                               prepared                                                         Monitoring:        time
                                     critical   habitats     (wetlands,                                          Availability of buffer                                           Regional
                                     spawning areas, protected areas,                                            zones                                                            Governments /
                                     migration corridors etc)                                                                                                                     RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                 Evidence of fish passage                                         MoWE
                                     Limit clearing to the minimum                                               facilities
                                     footprint

                                     Establish buffer zones around
                                     riparian and forest habitats

                                     Implement fish passage facilities




          95
                                                                                   Phase                                                                    Frequency of
   Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                 Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                           for           d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                    implementation      (in USD)

                                                                                                                                               Continuous
                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                                              Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                     and monitoring

                                                                        Planning                   Operation

                                     Control aquatic wed growth and
                                     prevent      invasive   species
                                     introduction

                                     Manage banks with vegetation
                                     cover to provide nesting and
                                     feeding areas for birds and
                                     amphibians

ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples and Sub-Saharan Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities

 Exclusion of certain population o   Implement SEP.                         x                                  o   # of community                                           x       Implementation:     Monitori
 groups from Project benefits o                                                                                    consultation sessions                                            local               ng costs:
                                 o   Where the presence of                                                         implemented                                                      authorities/RPIUs
                                     SSAHUTLCs is identified during                                            o                                                                    , FPIU/MoWE         Included
                                     screening, prepare site-specific                                          o   # of FPIC events                                                                     in staff
                                     HUTLC Plan, including FPIC                                                o                                                                    Monitoring:         time and
                                     where land is affected that is                                                # of HUTLC Plans after                                           Regional            travel
                                     used or owned by groups                                                       screening has indicated                                          Governments /       costs
                                     identified under ESS7                                                         the presence of                                                  RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                   SSAHUTLCs.                                                       MoWE
                                     Ensure beneficiaries from bottom
                                     income quintile are included as                                               % of project
                                     beneficiaries                                                                 beneficiaries from
                                                                                                                   bottom income quitile


 ESS 8: Cultural Heritage




           96
                                                                                      Phase                                                                     Frequency of
   Potential Risks and Impacts        Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                    Indicators for monitoring                  Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                               for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                        implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                                   Continuous
                                                                                       Construction
                                                                                                                                                                  Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                         and monitoring

                                                                           Planning                   Operation

 Chance Finds                    o   Implement chance find                                   X                    o   # of Chance find                               X                  Implementation:    Monitori
                                     procedures (see Annex 3)                                                         procedures implemented                                            Contractor         ng costs:

                                                                                                                                                                                        Monitoring:        Included
                                                                                                                                                                                        Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                        Governments /      time
                                                                                                                                                                                        RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                                                                                        MoWE
 Small dams may be sited in      o   Conduct community                         X             X                    o   # of community                                                    Implementation:    Monitori
 areas of cultural/spiritual         consultations to assess locations                                                consultations conducted                                           local              ng costs:
 significant                         of cultural and spiritual                                                    o                                                                     authorities/RPIU
                                     significance                                                                 o   # of sited activities that                                        MoWE               Included
                                                                                                                      disrupt locations of                                                                 in staff
                                     Site activities in a way that they                                               cultural and spiritual                                            Monitoring:        time
                                     do not disrupt locations of                                                      significance                                                      Regional
                                     cultural and spiritual significance                                          o                                                                     Governments /
                                                                                                                                                                                        RPIUs, FPIU /
                                     Where unavoidable (for example                                                                                                                     MoWE
                                     where dam safety measures have
                                     to implemented) consult with
                                     communities and support
                                     appropriate cultural measures

                                     Adopt and implement GRM

ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure




           97
                                                                               Phase                                                                      Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts     Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                   Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                         for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                  implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                             Continuous
                                                                                Construction
                                                                                                                                                            Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                   and monitoring

                                                                    Planning                   Operation

Exclusion of vulnerable groups   Implement SEP                          X             x                      o   # of marginalized                                        x       Implementation:    Monitori
in project activities and                                                                                        communities assessed                                             Contractor/RPIUs   ng costs:
consultations                    Identify minority, marginalized                                             o                                                                    /MoWE
                                 and disadvantaged communities                                                   # Local languages used in                                                           Included
                                 in project sphere of influence.                                                 communication                                                    Monitoring:        in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                  Regional           time
                                 Establish and maintain                                                                                                                           Governments /
                                 continuous liaison with the                                                                                                                      RPIUs, FPIU /
                                 communities including                                                                                                                            MoWE
                                 marginalised groups to sensitize
                                 them on the project objectives
                                 and design.

                                 Use innovative communication
                                 means to reach the communities
                                 with information on the project.
                                 Establish GRM structures in the
                                 communities and sensitize the
                                 communities on the project
                                 GRM.

                                 Apply local languages in
                                 communication
Lack of access to GRM            Adopt and Implement GRM                X             X                    X o   # of GRM cases filed and         X            x                  Implementation:    Monitori
                                                                                                                 addressed                                                        RPIUs/FPIU         ng costs:
                                 Implement Workers’ GRM
                                                                                                                                                                                  Monitoring:        Included
                                                                                                                                                                                  Regional           in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                  Governments /      time




          98
                                                                               Phase                                                                    Frequency of
  Potential Risks and Impacts    Proposed Mitigation Measures                                                  Indicators for monitoring                 Monitoring               Responsibility   Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                       for          d Cost
                                                                                                                                                                                implementation     (in USD)

                                                                                                                                           Continuous
                                                                                Construction
                                                                                                                                                          Monthly   Quarterly
                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                 and monitoring

                                                                    Planning                   Operation

                                                                                                                                                                                RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                                                                                MoWE
Inadequate stakeholder          Adopt and implement SEP                 x             x                    o   # of community                   x                               Implementation:    Monitori
engagement                                                                                                     consultations held                                               RPIUs /            ng costs:
                                Ensure identification and                                                  o                                                                    FPIU/MoWE
                                consultation of vulnerable groups                                              # of vulnerable groups                                                              Included
                                at specific sites                                                              consulted                                                        Monitoring:        in staff
                                                                                                                                                                                Regional           time
                                                                                                                                                                                Governments /
                                                                                                                                                                                RPIUs, FPIU /
                                                                                                                                                                                MoWE




         99
   Annex 3: Chance Find Procedures
Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage (Proc. № 209/2000) stipulates the requirements for chance
finds. Article 41, which states that, "Any person who discovers any cultural heritage in the course of
excavation connected with mining, explorations, building works, road construction or other similar activities
shall report to the Authority and protect and keep same intact until the Authority takes delivery thereof".
The Authority shall take all appropriate measures to examine, take delivery and register the cultural heritage
discovered. Where the Authority fails to take appropriate measures within 6 months, the person that
discovered the cultural heritage may be released from the responsibility by submitting a written notification
with a full description of the situation to the Regional Government Official.

This procedure was developed in accordance with the mandate of the Ministry of Youth, Culture and Sports
(Directorate of Archives and Antiquities) of protecting and preserving both tangible and intangible cultural
heritage records of South Sudan and the requirements of the World Bank’s ESS8 (To protect cultural heritage
from the impacts of project activities and support its preservation, to address cultural heritage as an integral
aspect of sustainable development, to promote meaningful consultation with stakeholders regarding cultural
heritage and to promote the equitable sharing of benefits from the cultural heritage).

Unexpected encounters with cultural heritage during sub-project implementation will require the FPIU to
take up the issue with the woreda Office of Tourism & Culture, the procedure depending on the nature of
the find.

The contractor is responsible for familiarizing itself with the following “Chance Finds
Procedures”, in case culturally valuable materials are uncovered during excavation:

❖ Stop work immediately following the discovery of any materials with possible archaeological,
  historical, paleontological, graves, or other cultural value, announce findings to project manager and
  notify relevant authorities;
❖ Protect artifacts as well as possible using plastic covers, and implement measures to stabilize the area,
  if necessary, to properly protect artifacts;
❖ Prevent and penalize any unauthorized access to the artifacts’
❖ Restart construction works only upon the authorization of the relevant authorities.

This procedure is included as a standard provision in the implementation of Public Works contracts to ensure
the protection of cultural heritage (Archaeological and Historical Sites). The RPIUs, FPIU, as well as
contractors will be required to observe this procedure as documented hereafter.




                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Annex 4: Waste Management Plan
This Waste Management Plan presents the activities to be conducted to support the safe handling of
general waste during the project implementation in compliance with Ethiopian laws and the IFC EHSG on
Waste Management.

It should be noted that this Annex focuses on the handling and management of only non-hazardous waste.
This Framework will assist in the development of activity or site-specific Waste Management Plans. It will
be given to implementers for keeping waste at a minimum. Waste related to the use of agro-chemicals
will be handled in the IPMF below.

This Framework has been prepared to explain the management of the different types of waste that are
likely to be generated during the implementation of Component 2 and 3 activities. The likely wastes are
excavation and earthwork waste (excavated soil, rock, overburden, cuttings, spoil from foundation
works); solid wastes from construction, such as concrete rubble, masonry, bricks, tiles, broken blocks and
asphalt; timber, vegetation and organic waste; reservoir dredging and siltation spoil; hazardous waste like
diesel, gasoline, hydraulic oil, lubricants, waste oil filters, solvents, paints, adhesives, contaminated rags,
batteries; domestic waste from construction sites, such as packaging, plastics, paper, cans etc; and solid
wstes from O&M activities, including worn spare parts, broken pumps, filter cartridges, tyres, batteries,
metal scraps.

This Framework will reduce the risks of destroying and/or polluting the environment. It therefore
expresses the commitment to prevent any adverse impacts to the local environmental conditions from
any construction activities that generate waste by the implementation of waste management principles
and best practice strategies.

Types of Waste and Management
This procedure describes non-hazardous waste as waste that causes no harm to humans or environmental
health. Such waste can be categorized into biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste. Biodegradable
waste includes any organic matter which can be broken down into carbon dioxide, water, methane,
compost, humus, and simple organic molecules by micro-organisms. Non-biodegradable waste is those
that cannot be decomposed or dissolved by natural agents. –uring the site activities, waste will be
generated from sources such as the project mini camps and distribution and transmission line worksites.

Table 13 Waste Generated Proposed Management Method

 Type of Waste                             Waste items                           Management Measures
 Excavation and earthwork waste            Excavated soil, rock, overburden,     Reuse for embankment
                                           cuttings,    spoil     from   canal   construction or backfill; avoid
                                           foundation works                      dumping in waterways
 Construction solid waste                  Concrete rubble, masonry , bricks,    Reuse for road-base or
                                           tiles, broken blocks, asphalt         riprap; segregate on site
 Timber, vegetation and organic waste      Trees, brush cleared for reservoir    Reuse timber; remove large
 (But not including drained electrical     and canals, crop residue              logs from reservoir area
 equipment (transformers, etc.) refer to                                         before impoundment; avoid
 hazardous substances.                                                           open burning




                                                                                                              Official Use Only
 Reservoir dredging and siltation spoil   Silt, sediment removed from intake     Controlled dewatering and
                                          channels or reservoir during           stabilization or dredged
                                          operation                              material; use for land
                                                                                 reclamation or embankment
                                                                                 material
 Hazardous wastes                         Diesel, gasoline, hydraulic oil,       Separate storage in bunded
                                          lubricants, waste oil filters,         areas; use hazardous waste
                                          solvents,   paints,    adhesives,      contractors for disposal or
                                          contaminated rags, batteries           recycling; on site spill kits and
                                                                                 training; collect used oils for
                                                                                 recycling; never bury or
                                                                                 discharge to water
 Construction site domestic waste         Food waste, packaging, plastics,       Provide segregated bins;
                                          paper, cans                            regular              collection;
                                                                                 composting of food waste;
                                                                                 recycling where possible
 Solid waste from O&M                     Worn spare parts; broken pumps;        Establish recycling routes;
                                          filter cartridges; tyres; batteries;   take-back routes; maintain
                                          metal scrap                            inventory to minimize waste;
                                                                                 safe storage of used parts;
                                                                                 contractual responsibility of
                                                                                 suppliers to take-back



Waste Management Plan
Waste Management Process: Any existing unidentified waste exposed or uncovered on site prior to the
initialization of site activities will be brought to the attention of the implementer. All wastes identified
pre-project will be clearly documented, and pictorial evidence taken if necessary.

Waste Avoidance and Minimization: The opportunity for avoidance and minimization of waste
production identified can be summarized as follows:
   - Non-hazardous or low toxicity materials/products will be selected instead of hazardous
       material/products, whenever feasible;
   - As far as possible, it must be ensured that all materials are stored and handled correctly to
       minimize damage to the materials which will render it unusable; and
   - Minimization of waste will also include the reduction of waste toxicity. This may be performed by
       selecting low toxic chemicals used during the Project.

Waste Collection Points: The main waste collection point will be in an easily accessible area within the
main area. The waste collection point will be selected, taking into consideration the prevailing wind
direction, surface runoff patterns, topography and visual context and will as far as possible, cause the
minimum of nuisance to adjacent properties. It will be ensured that the waste disposal area will not be
located near any drainage areas, wetlands or wells and boreholes.

The selected waste area will comprise of a cordon-off and contained area. The waste area will make
provision for the segregation of waste into non-hazardous and hazardous waste. Non-hazardous waste
will further be divided into organic and non-organic waste. Organic waste will consist of general domestic
food waste.




                                                                                                                Official Use Only
All waste containers on site (bins, skips, drums, etc.) will be clearly labelled with visible signs to indicate
which wastes it contains.

Waste Treatment and Disposal: If waste produced cannot be reused or recycled, the waste will be
disposed of at a waste disposal facility as guided by the local government.

Table 14 Waste Disposal Methods

 Waste                                                 Disposal Method

 METALS:                                               Separate Bin – Metals
 Scrap metal, tins, cans, foil

 Plastic bottles and polythene                         Separate Bin – Plastics
                                                       Empties of water etc.
 Cardboard boxes and papers                            Separate Bin – Card & Paper
 Bottles and Glass                                     Separate Bin – Glass


Procedure for Handling and Storage of Waste
 Waste Handling: All personnel who are involved in the handling of non-hazardous waste will undergo
specific training in:
• The procedure to be followed to ensure adequate segregation;
• Waste handling (and PPE requirements) including collection;
• Waste storage; and
• Correct waste disposal procedures.
• Waste from litter bins will be collected from the site on a weekly basis or as required. Accumulated
    hazardous waste will be removed from the site daily and will be transported to the main waste
    collection point.
• Waste will be removed from site on a monthly/weekly basis. The frequency of waste collection will
    be determined based on the rate at which the waste accumulates during the construction activities.

Temporary Waste Storage
 Waste Storage Area: All waste produced during activities at site and servicing activities and camps shall
be collected using appropriate personnel protective equipment and they shall be sorted out and
temporarily stored in special containers at the camp.

The waste storage areas are to be indicated on relevant site procedures and will be located at least 100m
from any watercourses. Wastes will be stored in a manner to prevent:
    - Accidental spillage or leakage, contamination of soils and groundwater, loss of integrity from
       accidental collisions or weathering by provision of suitable secondary containment and/or
       roofing;
    - Corrosion or wear of containers both from the weather, by protecting waste storage areas, and
       from the wastes themselves, by selecting containers suitable for storage of intended waste,
    - Theft by people by storing waste within security of camp perimeter; and
    - Scavenging by animals by storing putrescible waste in closed bins before composting.




                                                                                                           Official Use Only
The waste storage containers used will be appropriate in terms of volume, composition, shape and
opening for the material that is being stored. Only containers in good condition will be utilized. Lids will
be securely fastened, or other forms of covering shall be provided. No containers will be used that are
susceptible to reaction with the waste, which may lead to the release of harmful substances. All hazardous
waste will be strictly segregated. Only one category of hazardous waste may be placed in any one
container. Solid and liquid waste will not be mixed, as well as hazardous waste of incompatible nature.

Best Waste Management Practices
These include the following:

    -   The Implementer / contractor to obtain permits regarding waste management from relevant
        authorities.
    -   The Implementer / contractor provides handling containers, storage, signage, transportation, and
        other items as required to implement waste management plan during the entire duration of the
        project.
    -   The Environmental management personnel to be responsible for matters of managing the
        environment including being responsible for implementing, monitoring, and reporting status of
        this procedure and shall be full time on worksites throughout the project.
    -   All workers, subcontractors, and suppliers to be trained in proper waste management plans, as
        appropriate for the work occurring at Project Site(s). Information, Education and Communication
        (IEC) materials shall be distributed and/or made available to everyone concerned and to all
        entities when they first begin work.
    -   To provide specific designated and labeled areas on project site(s) necessary for separating
        materials that are to be recycled, reused, donated, and sold. Recycling and waste bin areas are to
        be kept neat, and clean, and clearly marked to avoid contamination of materials and.
    -   Hazardous wastes to be separated, stored, and disposed of according to local regulations and
        according to the Waste Management Plan and should not be included in management of the other
        waste streams.

Community Safety
 The primary goal of waste management planning is to protect members of the community in which the
activity is executed from harming to effectively manage waste, debris and all waste materials generated.
While the amount of waste varies between sub-projects, the generated waste is often greater than the
amount of waste many communities handle each year. Additionally, projects may generate waste
streams, which typically are not handled by communities or waste management facilities. Some of these
are absorbed or processed through natural resources outlets like air and water. In addition to managing
the project wastes in such a manner that does not negatively impact the surrounding communities, the
Project will need to prepare the community by disclosing the types of potential of wastes that will be
generated through sensitization campaigns.

While this at source intervention planning should be documented in a site-specific WMP the community’s
preparation provides the most benefits, such as:
   - Saves valuable time and resources.
   - Allows more efficient and effective waste management decision-making.
   - Encourages stakeholders (e.g., state, local governments; owners of private storage, treatment and
        disposal facilities; residents) to work together before an incident occurs such as children collecting
        and playing with hazardous wastes, pollution of water sources, pollutions of soil etc. Boosts the




                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       community’s resilience, resulting in a quicker and less costly recovery to potential misconducts by
       the contractors as well as the communities.


Performance Monitoring
 Inspections: Sites inspections will be performed by the Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) or
Environmental Specialist of the Implementer on weekly basis. Waste quantity shall be recorded (as
number of 200L waste bins collected and disposed per week). These inspections will ensure that all
commitments in this plan are being enforced and that specific waste management elements are verified.

Data collection: Waste material register should be maintained to ensure the measurement of eliminated
waste and of residual matter sent for reuse, recycling and others.

Audit: Six months since commencement of the project, a waste management audit should be performed,
on sites all waste data collected, to identify waste streams and fate and develop ways to reduce waste
production.




                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Annex 5: Labor Management Procedures
The objectives of the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) are to:
    a) Identify the different types of project workers that are likely to be involved in the project
    b) Identify, analyze and evaluate the labor related risks and impacts for project activities
    c) Set out procedures to meet the requirements of ESS2, ESS4 and applicable national legislation.

The LMP will be applied in line with the requirements of national laws, the provisions of ESS2 and ESS4 in
particular.

Labor Requirements: The LMP will be administered to different types of project workers as follows:
(a) Direct Workers: For the CRISP Project, the direct workers include the Project Manager and project
staff who will be assigned to work for this project under MILLS and other Ministries and local authorities.
At this stage it is difficult to estimate the exact number of direct workers who will be engaged. Direct
workers will also include independent consultants recruited by the FPIU. Terms and conditions of these
workers are guided by Federal Civil Servants proclamation no. 1064/2017 at federal level and by the Civil
Service Proclamations of their respective regional states.

(b) Contracted Workers: Contracted workers will be recruited to construct or rehabilitate the SSI and
dams. Each contractor might require the engagement of subcontractors. The subcontractors' workforce
will also be considered contracted workers. At this time, it is difficult to estimate the number of contract
workers that will be engaged in the project, as the number of contractors and subcontractors required for
the set of project activities. Further, the project will also procure professional services (consultants) to
undertake specific activities like baseline study, midterm evaluation, terminal evaluation, financial audit,
procurement audit, environmental and social audit, gender assessment, etc. The short-term consultants
are guided by written contractual agreement between the project and the consultancy firm.

(c) Primary Supply Workers: The project is anticipated to engage suppliers for the provision of materials
required for construction.



The LMP will apply to project workers including those recruited full time, part-time, and temporary. The
project scope does not include employment of migrant workers or community workers as per the
definition in ESS2.

Timing of Labor Requirements: It is expected that the construction and rehabilitation phase of the SSI
and dams will take four to five years. All semiskilled, skilled, and unskilled labor during the construction
and rehabilitation will be recruited from the local area based on the availability. Rehabilitation sub-
projects, and therefore the requirement for contracted workers will last approximately 4-6 months per
sub-project. All direct project workers are required continuously throughout the project implementation
while experts consultants will be involved intermittently as required.

Labor Risk Assessment: The main types of activities for contracted workers and supply workers will relate
to the implementation of TA and rehabilitation and construction activities in all regions of Ethiopia. Supply
workers will be involved with regard to activities where equipment for construction is prepared or
material for rehabilitation/construction is procured. The table below draws from the anticipated labor




                                                                                                         Official Use Only
requirements analysis to highlight and analyze the potential labor related risks and impacts in view of the
general baseline settings of the project area




                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Table 15 Labor Risk Identification and Analysis

Risk/Impact                                       Analysis (Magnitude, Extent, Timing, Likelihood,           Risk Mitigation Measures
                                                  Significance)
Labor practices are not in                        In reality, laws and standards may not be implemented       Practices are defined in this LMP. The Project will ensure
accordance with national laws and                 by employers.                                               management of contractors to maintain the highest
international standards/ESS2                                                                                  standards of labor practice.
Workers’ lack of understanding of                 Given the level of illiteracy, it is likely that some      Project workers will be provided with information and
their labor rights                                workers may not fully understand their labor rights.       documentation that is clear and understandable regarding
                                                                                                             their terms and conditions of employment.

                                                                                                             The information and documentation will set out their rights
                                                                                                             under national labor and employment law (which will include
                                                                                                             any applicable collective agreements), including their rights
                                                                                                             related to hours of work, wages, overtime, compensation,
                                                                                                             and benefits, as well as those arising from the requirements
                                                                                                             of ESS2. This information and documentation will be provided
                                                                                                             at the beginning of the working relationship, and when any
                                                                                                             material changes, to the terms or conditions of employment
                                                                                                             occur.
Labor disputes over contracts                     Given the generally conflict potential in the Project       The Project will enforce workers’ GRM in line with ESS2, as
                                                  areas, it is possible that disputes about contracts will    well as general project GRM in line with ESS10.
                                                  emerge.
Lack of access to workers’ grievance              Workers may not have adequate access to a grievance        The Project will ensure a workers’ grievance mechanism is in
mechanism                                         mechanism in order to claim their rights                   place and sensitization of all workers on this mechanism is
                                                                                                             undertaken
Underpayment       of   contracted                Since Ethiopia has no statutory minimum wage, there        Project to set minimum wage and to pay workers what they
workers or supply workers                         is a risk that local contractors and sub-contractors       were contracted for (see above for definition), and ensure
                                                  underpay the contracted or supply workers.                 management of contractors and implementing partners to
                                                                                                             be accountable on it.
Poor working conditions: unsafe                   Due to the weakness of formal justice institutions,        Supervision of contractor labor management practices will
work environment                                  employees’ working conditions may be poor.                 be essential under the Project.

                                                                                                             All workers will sign CoCs to commit to safe work
                                                                                                             environments.




                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Risk/Impact                             Analysis (Magnitude, Extent, Timing, Likelihood,         Risk Mitigation Measures
                                        Significance)
                                                                                                 Implementation of workers’ GRM as a feedback system to
                                                                                                 flag out poor working conditions and address them.
Injuries at the workplace / OHS risks   Given that PPE may be scarce for contracted workers,     Contractor OHS risk assessments and mitigation plans will be
(injury, death, fire hazards)           and health and safety regulations may not be             prepared and implemented by the contractor. The
                                        enforced.                                                contractor will further train workers on OHS risks, hazards
                                                                                                 and safe handling of equipment and procedures, based on
                                                                                                 IFC EHS Guidelines. The RPIUs and FPIU will ensure through
                                                                                                 monitoring that all workers are provided with and able to
                                                                                                 use appropriate PPE at all times. Incidents and accidents will
                                                                                                 be reported and documented by the contractor to the FPIU.

                                                                                                 Train workers appropriately on OHS risks, hazards and safe
                                                                                                 handling of equipment and procedures, based on IFC EHSG

                                                                                                 Provide appropriate PPE, continuous reminders to use
                                                                                                 PPE, use of signage and continuous supervision, based on
                                                                                                 EHSG

                                                                                                 Communicate and implement workers’ GRM

                                                                                                 Develop and implement C-ESMP including OHS measures

                                                                                                 Implement Labor Management Procedures (LMP)

                                                                                                 Include OHS requirements into bids and contracts

                                                                                                 GRM/workers’ GRM will be communicated and
                                                                                                 implemented. Sub-project specific ESMPs will include OHS
                                                                                                 measures. Contractor bids and contracts will include OHS
                                                                                                 obligations based on the World Bank EHS Guidelines.
Risk of inadequate PPE                  In some rural areas, appropriate PPE may not be        Provide appropriate PPE, continuous reminders to use PPE,
                                        available.                                             use of signage and continuous supervision of availability and
                                                                                               use of PPE, based on EHS Guidelines on OHS

                                                                                                 Communicate and implement GRM/workers’ GRM




                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        Risk/Impact                            Analysis (Magnitude, Extent, Timing, Likelihood,            Risk Mitigation Measures
                                               Significance)
     OHS risks for workers           during    The installation and storage of solar panels comes with   Use secondary containment to capture leaks from batteries
     installation of solar panels:             particular OHS risks.
-                                                                                                        Provide emergency showers and eye wash stations
-    The emission of lead and battery acid
     to the workspace and the                                                                            Provide training on safe handling of batteries to workers
     environment at large can cause
     severe    and     potentially     life-                                                             Only trained and certified electricians should work on
     threatening health risks for workers                                                                electrical connections
-
-    Electrocution through working with                                                                  Provide PPE ( insulated gloves, dielectric footwear, face
     electrical connections                                                                              shields if necessary)
-
-    Injuries through lifting of heavy                                                                   Establish limits on maximum weight per worker (25 kg and
     materials (e.g. solar panels)                                                                       less) and require team lifting for heavy or awkward loads

    EHS risks associated with solar panel                                                                Train workers on lifting methods
    storage facilities (e.g. maintenance
    work, storage of hazardous goods such                                                                Provide PPE (safety shoes with slip resistant soles, gloves with
    as batteries)                                                                                        good grip, support belts, etc)

                                                                                                         Segregate storage: separate hazardous goods from general
                                                                                                         storage (solar panels, tools)

                                                                                                         Ensure natural or mechanical ventilation to avoid build-up of
                                                                                                         hydrogen gas from lead-acid batteries

                                                                                                         Use acid-resistant flooring, bunds or trays to contain leaks

                                                                                                         Use racks for solar panels to avoid breakage and falling
                                                                                                         hazards

                                                                                                         Provide appropriate PPE to workers (gloves goggles, and
                                                                                                         aprons)




                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
Risk/Impact                          Analysis (Magnitude, Extent, Timing, Likelihood,           Risk Mitigation Measures
                                     Significance)
OHS risks through excavation works   The creation of irrigation channels will include         Install drainage channels or diversion ditches to control
and demolition works                 excavations works, which are subject to particular OHS   stormwater runoff around excavated or demolition areas
                                     risks
                                                                                              Regularly pump out water accumulating in excavations

                                                                                              Ensure safe access/egress in excavations during wet
                                                                                              conditions

Lack of understanding of EHS risks   Given that works will be conducted in rural areas,       Assess capacity of construction company on EHS/OHS
and impacts and of mitigation        there may be a lack of understanding and awareness
measures leads to accidents and      of EHS risks.                                            Train workers on EHS/OHS through toolbox talks
health impacts
Noise and vibration linked to                                                                 Select equipment with lower sound power levels
machinery
                                                                                              Install suitable mufflers on engine exhausts and compressor
                                                                                              components in cases where the service provider uses
                                                                                              generators

                                                                                              Provide fit to work PPEs (ear plug/earmuffs) for all workers
                                                                                              involved in the areas with elevated noise levels

                                                                                              Install acoustic enclosures and/or use vegetation as sound
                                                                                              buffer for equipment casing radiating noise i.e. generator

                                                                                              Use equipment that is/are in good working condition and
                                                                                              periodically maintained
Child labor utilization              The general minimum age for work in Ethiopia is 15         The minimum age of 18 will be enforced in recruitment and
                                     years.                                                     in daily staff team talks by contractors. The FPIU will
                                                                                                supervise this through regular monitoring and supervision.
                                                                                                The age of workers will be verified upon hiring. A track
                                                                                                record search will be conducted of the contractors at the
                                                                                                bidding process (record of health and safety violations, fines,
                                                                                                consult public documents related to workers’ rights
                                                                                                violations, SEA/SH issues etc.)




                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Risk/Impact                             Analysis (Magnitude, Extent, Timing, Likelihood,             Risk Mitigation Measures
                                        Significance)
                                                                                                     Awareness raising will be provided by the project team to
                                                                                                     communities/suppliers to discourage engagement in child
                                                                                                     labor.
Forced Labor                            Forced labor takes place in Ethiopia, hence there is a       Contractors’ obligations will be spelled out in their
                                        risk that forced labor will be deployed under the            respective contracts and the FPIU will monitor compliance.
                                        project.
SEA/SH                                  There is a high incidence of SH of female workers by         Contractors are compelled to safeguard the interests of
                                        male workers, and discrimination in recruitment and          women at the workplace. This includes gender parity at the
                                        employment of women generally.                               workspace; prohibiting SEA/SH toward female workers by
                                                                                                     other project workers by having all workers sign a CoC
                                                                                                     prohibiting such; by providing appropriate sanitation
                                                                                                     facilities at workplace and appropriate PPE for women.
Risks of discrimination and exclusion   Workers may face discrimination during recruitment           A working environment for all workers/employee without
of vulnerable/disadvantaged groups      and while at work. There might be discrimination of          discrimination through posting the country labor law and
                                        workers based on their identity, physical ability or         ESS2 in local language, obey obligations of the vulnerable
                                        disability, political affiliation, HIV/AIDS, religion, and   groups, create supportive environment in terms of
                                        gender; discrimination can also happen in relation to        expressing the grievance/ complain related any issues - will
                                        provision of compensations, benefits and other               be created.
                                        opportunities such as access to training, job
                                        assignment, promotions; application of disciplinary
                                        measures and penalties; termination of employment
                                        or retirement, working conditions and terms of
                                        employment; discriminations may arise due to
                                        favoritism, nepotism and corruption.

Risks of restrictions on worker’s       An employer may interfere and restrict workers from          Provide management support during the formation of the
organization                            forming worker’s organization or joining other similar       workers association/organization
                                        organization for collective rights negotiations, to
                                        express grievances, to enable collective voicing on
                                        conditions of work, benefits, protection of rights, etc….

Labor influx and GBV                    Contracted workers may be brought into communities           Contractors are called upon to recruit as many workers
                                        to conduct construction works. Population movement           locally as possible; a SEA/SH Action Plan has been prepared
                                        due to labor influx may result in SEA/SH cases, and the      and will be implemented, it includes the singing of CoCs by
                                        spread of communicable diseases                              all workers.




                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Risk/Impact                       Analysis (Magnitude, Extent, Timing, Likelihood,          Risk Mitigation Measures
                                  Significance)

                                                                                            A local workforce minimum content for the contractors will
                                                                                            be set up and disclosed to communities. At construction
                                                                                            sites, the minimum expected local workforce is 50%. The
                                                                                            Project will aim to maximize the use of local suppliers (for
                                                                                            food, water, services etc.).
Traffic risks and road safety     Construction activities can cause traffic risks through   The project will implement training and licensing of
                                  heavy vehicles and moving of heavy machinery and          industrial vehicle operators in the safe operation of
                                  jeopardize road safety for drivers.                       specialized vehicles; ensure drivers undergo medical
                                                                                            surveillance; establish rights of way, site speed limits, vehicle
                                                                                            inspection requirements, operating rules and procedures;
                                                                                            include traffic and road safety into the daily toolbox talks;
                                                                                            emphasize safety aspects among drivers; improve driving
                                                                                            skills of drivers; adopt limits for trip duration, e.g. 8 hours at
                                                                                            a time; arrange driver rosters to avoid tiredness; preassign
                                                                                            routes by construction vehicles (project management,
                                                                                            contractor, and traffic authorities) before construction
                                                                                            starts.

                                                                                            Regular maintenance of vehicles and use of manufacturer
                                                                                            approved parts to minimize potentially serious accidents
                                                                                            caused by equipment malfunction.
Lack of safety and security for   Given the fragility in the country, there is a risk of    A Security Risk Assessment and Management Plan (SRAMP)
project workers                   security for all project workers                          has been prepared and will be adopted.




                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Ethiopian Labor Legislation: Terms and Conditions: The following terms and conditions apply for workers
as per the Ethiopia Labor Laws:
    • Labor Proclamation No. 377/2003
    • Federal Civil Servants Proclamation 1064/2017
    • Labor Proclamation No.1156/20193 (does not replace, Labor Proclamation No. 377/2003, but
        complements).
    • Proclamation No. 632/2009, Employment Exchange Service Proclamation
    • Proclamation No. 568/2008, Right to Employment of Persons with Disability

In case of variations between the national legislation, regulations, and the World Bank ESSs, the more
stringent provision will prevail.

For direct workers who are civil servants, the terms and conditions of civil servants are guided by the
national civil service regulations and other labor and employment legislation. Other Project workers are
guided by the terms and conditions of their contractual agreements.

The Labor Proclamation No. 1156/2019 secures durable industrial peace, sustainable productivity, and
competitiveness that will contribute to the overall development of the country. The Proclamation has
introduced new concepts. It has also modified some of the existing provisions which were unclear, and
therefore prone to interpretations. Ethiopia has reformulated the existing labor law (Proclamation
377/2003) to attain the below-stated objectives and under and in conformity with the international
conventions and other legal commitments to which the country is a party.

The major objectives of the proclamation are:

•   To ensure that worker-employer relations are governed by the basic principles of rights and
    obligations;
•   To determine a system that guarantees the rights of workers and employers to freely establish their
    respective associations and to engage, through their duly authorized representatives, in social
    dialogue and collective bargaining, as well as to draw up procedures for the expeditious settlement
    of labor disputes, which arise between them;
•   To create a favorable environment for investment and achievement of national economic goals
    without scarifying fundamental workplace rights by laying down well-considered labor
    administration; and determine the duties and responsibilities of governmental organs entrusted with
    the power to monitor labor conditions; occupational health and safety; and environmental protection
    together with bilateral and tripartite social dialogue mechanisms; political, economic and social
    policies of the Country.

Minimum Age for Employment and Prohibition of Child and Forced Labor: A worker who has attained a
minimum age of 15 years is capable of being employed under the new labor law of Ethiopia; while the
minimum age for Hazardous Work is set as 18 years. Moreover, the definition of young workers has been
amended to include workers between 15 and 18 years of age. It is prohibited to assign young workers to
work, which on account of its nature or due to the condition in which it is carried out, endangers their
lives or health. The Project will only employ workers from the age of 18 and above.

Forced Labor is prohibited under the Constitution of Ethiopia and is a punishable offense under the
Criminal Code 5. If a person compels another by intimidation, violence, fraud, or any other unlawful means




                                                                                                      Official Use Only
to accept particular employment or particular conditions of employment is punishable, upon complaint,
with simple imprisonment at least three (3) months, or fine.

The anti-trafficking legislation also prohibits trafficking in persons for exploitation at the pretext of
domestic or overseas employment. The definition for exploitation includes labor exploitation, forced
labor, or servitude. It is a punishable offense with rigorous imprisonment ranging from 15 to 25 years and
with a fine from 150,000 to 300,000 Eth. Birr.

The Project will apply the following process, before the employment or engagement of an applicant for
work on the project, to verify the person's age. The FPIU will ensure that each contractor/subcontractor
provides the FPIU with written confirmation that each worker they employ or engage with the project is
at least the minimum age of 18 years. Where there is reasonable doubt as to the age of the applicant,
requesting and reviewing available documents to verify age (such as a birth certificate, national
identification card, medical or school record, or other document or community verification demonstrating
age).

If a person under the minimum age of 18 years is discovered working on the project, the FPIU will take
measures to terminate the employment or engagement of that person in a responsible manner,
considering the best interest of that person.

To ensure that the best interests of the child under 18 years are considered, the FPIU will undertake, and
ensure that all contractors/ subcontractors, private sector, cooperative also undertake, remediation
within a reasonable period agreeable to the World Bank. The remediation activities could include, among
other options:

Employment of a member of the child’s family, who is at least 18 years of age, by the primary supplier,
contractor, or subcontractor for project-related or other work.

Provisions Related to Women: The proclamation recognizes further benefits addressing the special needs
of women including provisions related to maternity leave, sexual harassment, and violence. A provision
acknowledging affirmative action to women is also included. Accordingly, women candidates who score
equal points with men will have the right to priority in competitions for employment, promotion, and
related opportunities.

The labor Proclamation of Ethiopia, 1156/2019, articles 87 and 88 state provisions on the working
conditions of women. Women shall not be discriminated against in all respects based on their sex. Without
prejudice to the generality of this provision, priority shall be given to women if they get equal results with
men when competing for employment, promotion, or any other benefit. It is prohibited to assign women
to works that may be listed by the Ministry of Labor and Skill Development to be particularly dangerous
to women or hazardous to their health. No pregnant woman shall be assigned to night work between 10
p.m. and 6 a.m. or be assigned overtime work. She shall be transferred to another place of work if her job
is hazardous to her health or the fetus as ascertained by a physician.

Leave: Proclamation 1156/2019, Article 76-86 amended the provisions of different leaves including the
number of days under the Labor Proclamation 377/2003. Every worker is entitled for annual leave after
completing one year of continuous service with full pay as follows:




                                                                                                          Official Use Only
Rest: Workers are entitled to a weekly rest period consisting of not less than twenty-four non-interrupted
hours in the course of each period of seven days. The weekly rest period shall be calculated to include the
period from 6 a.m. to the next 6 a.m. Where the nature of the work or the service performed by the
employee is such that the weekly rest cannot fall on a Sunday another day maybe made a weekly rest day
as a substitute.

Maternity Leave: A pregnant woman is granted a total of 120 days of maternity leave; 30 consecutive days
of prenatal and 90 consecutive days of post-natal leave. It also granted leave for medical examination
connected with her pregnancy, as confirmed with a medical certificate. Besides, in the case where a
woman encounters miscarriage of pregnancy and it is confirmed by a medical certificate, the provisions
for reduction of wage upon sickness will not apply. Despite the reduction of wage applicable to a worker
who has been sick for more than a month, a woman who encounters miscarriage will be entitled to 6
months sick leave with payment of 100% of her salary.

Annual leave: every worker is entitled for sixteen (16) working days of annual leave for the first year of
service; where, plus one working day for every additional two years’ service. Sub article (5) states that,
Where the length of service of a worker is below one year, the worker shall be entitled to an annual leave
proportional to the length of his service.

Sick leave: a worker should complete six months for sick leave entitlement of up to six months within a
year. However, should notify the employer the next day from absence from work. The worker should
present a sick leave certificate from issued by a duly recognized medical facility. The worker will be paid
(i) first one month, with payment of 100% of his/her wages; (ii) for the next two months, with payment of
50% of his/her wage; and (iii) for the next three months, without pay.

Family events: workers are entitled for leave with pay for events such as marriage, paternity leave,
maximum of two rounds of leave for exceptional and serious events.

Union members: a worker representing a union will be entitled for leave in cases in labor disputes,
negotiating collective agreements, attending union meetings, participating in seminars or training
courses.

Sexual Harassment and Violence: The law stipulates the need for interpretation of sexual harassment and
sexual violence by providing definitions. It also provides prohibitions and punishment specific to the acts.
The commission of either or both of the two acts at workplaces either by the employee or employer may
be used as grounds of termination of an employment contract without notice by the employer or the
employee respectively. Additionally, an employee who resigns on the ground of SH or violence is entitled
to severance pay as well as compensation amounting to 90 times the daily rate of the last week of service
of the employee. As per the definition of the new proclamation:

Sexual Harassment means to persuade or convince another through utterances, signs, or any other
manner, to submit for sexual favor without his/her consent. Sexual Violence means sexual harassment
accompanied by force or an attempt thereof.

Wages: Per the Labor Proclamation, wages mean the regular payment to which the worker is entitled in
return for the performance of the work that he/she performs under a contract of employment. Wages
are independent of overtime premium, allowances, bonuses, commissions, service charges received from
the customers, and other incentives paid for additional work. Wages are only paid for the work done by




                                                                                                        Official Use Only
the worker except in case of interruption on the employer's behalf which makes it impossible to work (i.e.
interruption in the supply of tools and raw materials).

The Labor Proclamation requires employers to pay wages in cash on a working day at the workplace unless
otherwise agreed. In case, date of payment (where already decided) falls on a weekly rest day or public
holiday, the wages are paid on the preceding working day. Wages are paid directly to the worker or the
person authorized by the worker. Wages may be paid in kind but may not exceed the market value in the
area of the payment in kind and no case may exceed 30% of the wages paid in cash.

An employer is under the obligation to pay the worker wages and other emoluments per this law or the
collective agreement. Wages are to be paid at such intervals as required under the national law, collective
agreement, or employment contract.

As per Proc. No. 1156/ 2019, a Regulation of the Council of Ministers shall determine the powers and
responsibilities of a Wage Board which shall comprise representatives of the Government, employees,
and trade unions together with other stakeholders that will periodically revise minimum wages based on
studies which take into account the country's economic development, labor market, and other
considerations.

Generally, the employer is not allowed to make deductions from wages except where it is provided by the
law or collective agreement or work rules or per court order or a written agreement with the worker. The
amount of deduction must not exceed one-third of the monthly wages of the worker.

An employer must keep a record of payment in a register specifying the gross pay and method of
calculation of wages; other variable remunerations; the amount and type of deduction; and the net pay
unless there is a special arrangement on which the signature of the worker is affixed. This register must
be easily accessible to all the workers and the entries are explained to the worker on request.

Workers who are paid monthly shall incur no reduction, in their wages on account of having not worked
on public holiday. A worker shall be paid his hourly wages multiplied by two for each hour of work on a
public holiday.

Hours of Work: Arrangement of Weekly Hours of Work: Hours of work shall spread equally over the
working days of a week, provided, however, where the nature of the work so requires, hours of work in
any one of the working days may be shortened and the difference be distributed over the remaining days
of the week without extending the daily limits of eight hours by more than two hours.

Averaging of Normal Hours of Work: Where the circumstances in which the work has to be carried out are
such that normal hours of work cannot be distributed evenly over the individual week, normal hours of
work may be calculated as an average over a period longer than one week, provided, however, that the
average number of hours over a period shall not exceed eight hours per day or forty-eight hours per week
The labor law defined that normal hours of work for young workers shall not exceed seven hours a day
and it also prohibited to employ young workers on night work between 10 pm and 6 am and overtime
work, weekly rest day or on public holidays.

OHS Legislation: Ethiopia has a legal framework on OHS. The Constitution (1995) under Article 42/2 stated
the Rights of Labor as "workers right for healthy and safe work environment" Proclamation No. 4/1995.
There are also different legal frameworks on OHS which include: the National Occupational Health Policy




                                                                                                       Official Use Only
and Strategy, Occupational Health and Safety Directive (2008), Occupational Health and Safety Policy and
Procedures Manual, and On Work Occupational Health and Safety Control Manual for Inspectors
(2017/18) which will apply to this project. OHS promotion is also included as a priority in the National
Health Policy Statement (1993). Ministry of Labor and Skills (MOLS) and its regional counterparts are
responsible for OHS at Federal and Regional levels. MOLS has OHS & Working Environment Department
responsible for OHS responsibilities. Each administrative region has an OHS department within the Labor
and Skill development office with the responsibilities of inspection service.

In the Labor Proclamation of Ethiopia (Proc. No. 1156/2019), Occupational Safety, Health, and Working
Environment the following are indicated under Obligations of an Employer and an employee respectively.

An employer shall take the necessary measure to safeguard adequately the health and safety of the
workers; it shall in particular:
   • Comply with the occupational health and safety requirements provided for in this Proclamation;
   • Take appropriate steps to ensure that workers are properly instructed and notified concerning
       the hazards of their respective occupations, and assign safety officer; and establish an
       occupational health and safety committee;
   • Provide workers with protective equipment, clothing, and other materials and instruct them of
       their use;
   • Register employment accidents and occupational diseases and report same to the labor
       inspection service;
   • Arrange, according to the nature of the work, at his own expense for the medical examination of
       newly employed workers and those workers engaged in hazardous work, as may be necessary
       except HIV/AIDS Unless and otherwise, the country has the obligation of an international treaty
       to do so;
   • Ensure that the workplace and premises of the undertaking do not pose threats to the health and
       safety of workers;
   • Take appropriate precautions to ensure that all the processes of work in the undertaking shall not
       be a source or cause of physical, chemical, biological, ergonomic, and psychological hazards to the
       health and safety of the workers.
   • Implement the instructions given by the Competent Authority following this Proclamation.

As obligation any worker shall:
    • Co-operate in the formulation of work rules to safeguard the workers’ health and safety, and
        implement same;
    • Inform forthwith to the employer any defect related to the appliances used and incidents of injury
        to health and safety of workers that he is aware of in the undertaking;
    • Report to the employer any situation which he may have reason to believe could present a hazard
        and which he cannot prevent on his own, and any incident of injury to health which arises in the
        course of or in connection with work;
    • Make proper use of all safety devices and other appliances furnished for the protection of his
        health and safety or the protection of the health and safety of others;
    • Observe all health and safety instructions issued by the employer or by the Competent Authority
        It is prohibited for any worker to:
    • Interfere with, remove, displace, damage, or destroy any safety devices or other appliances
        furnished for his protection or the protection of others.




                                                                                                      Official Use Only
The World Bank ESS2 stipulates the compliance with the IFC Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines
(EHSG).

Obstruct any method or process adopted to minimize occupational hazards: The Labor proclamation
gives the power for Regional Bureaus to determine standards and measures for the safety and health of
workers and follow up on their implementation. It is also indicated that regional bureaus must collect,
compile and disseminate information on the safety and health of workers.

It is unlawful for an employer to (a) impede the worker in any manner in the exercise of his rights or take
any measure against him because he exercises his right; (b) discriminate against female workers, in
matters of remuneration, on the ground of their sex; (c) terminate a contract of employment contrary to
the provisions of the Labor Proclamation No. 1156/2019; (d) coerce any worker by force or in any other
manner to join or not to join or to cease to be a member of a trade union or to vote for or against any
given candidate in elections for trade union offices; (e) require any worker to execute any work which is
hazardous to his life; (f) discriminate between workers based on nationality, sex, religion, political outlook
or any other conditions.

Therefore, during project activities implementation, the following activities need to be performed: (a)
identification of OHS risks at the project design stage; (b) provision of PPEs and health, safety, and security
arrangements; (c) arrangement of temporary residence and clean drinking water; and make available food
at an affordable cost for workers in areas where there are no hotel/restaurants around the project sites;
(d) training at regular intervals to workers to enhance their skills.

Benefits in the Case of Employment Injuries: Where a worker sustains employment injury, the employer
shall cover the following expenses, among others, include:
    • General and specialized medical and surgical care;
    • Hospital and pharmaceutical care;
    • Any necessary prosthetic or orthopedic appliances
    • A worker who has sustained employment injury shall be entitled to:
    • Periodical payment while he is temporarily disabled;
    • Disablement pension or gratuity or compensation where he sustains permanent disablement;
    • Survivors' pension or compensation to his dependent when he dies.


The World Bank ESS2 on Labor and Working Conditions
ESS2 recognizes the importance of employment creation and income generation in the pursuit of poverty
reduction and inclusive economic growth. Borrowers can promote sound worker-management
relationships and enhance the development benefits of a project by treating workers in the project fairly
and providing safe and healthy working conditions. The objectives are as follows:
    • To promote safety and health at work
    • To promote the fair treatment, non-discrimination and equal opportunity of project workers
    • To protect project workers, including vulnerable workers such as women, persons with
        disabilities, children (of working age, in accordance with this ESS) and migrant workers, contracted
        workers, community workers and primary supply workers, as appropriate
    • To prevent the use of all forms of forced Labor and child Labor.
    • To support the principles of freedom of association and collective bargaining of project workers
        in a manner consistent with national law




                                                                                                           Official Use Only
    •   To provide project workers with accessible means to raise workplace concerns

The World Bank ESS4 on Community Health and Safety
ESS4 recognizes that project activities, equipment, and infrastructure can increase community exposure
to risks and impacts. In addition, communities that are already subjected to impacts from climate change
may also experience an acceleration or intensification of impacts due to project activities. The objectives
of ESS 4 include:
     • To anticipate and avoid adverse impacts on the health and safety of project-affected communities
         during the project life cycle
     • To promote quality and safety, and considerations relating to climate change, in the design and
         construction of infrastructure
     • To avoid or minimize community exposure to project-related traffic and road safety risks
     • To have in place effective measures to address emergency events
     • To ensure that the safeguarding of personnel and property is carried out in a manner that avoids
         or minimizes risks to project affected community

Terms and Conditions: The project will depend on the various laws; such as, (i) Labor Proclamation No.
42/1993 (replaced by Labor Proclamation No. 377/2003), (ii) Labor Proclamation No. 377/2003, (iii) labor
Proclamation No.1156/2019 (complements (do not replace, Labor Proclamation No. 377/2003), (iv)
Proclamation No. 632/2009, Employment Exchange Service Proclamation, (v) Proclamation No. 568/2008,
Right to Employment of Persons with Disability. Further, Ethiopia is a signatory to the international UN
conventions and has ratified the major international human rights instruments. Ethiopia has also ratified
the following ILO conventions:
    • Forced Labor Convention No. 29/1930;
    • Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize Convention, No. 87/1948;
    • Employment Service Convention, No. 88/1948;
    • Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining Convention, No. 98/1949;
    • Abolition of Forced Labor Convention, No.105/1957;
    • Minimum Age Convention No. 138/1973;
    • Occupational Safety and Health Convention, No. 156/1981;
    • Termination of Employment Convention, No. 158/1982;
    • The Rights of the Child Convention, 1989; and
    • The Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention No. 182/1999.

Hence, the terms of condition follow stringent international requirements where the gaps of the national
law are filled by WB requirements and ILO convention. The terms of the condition include the name and
legal domicile of the employer; the worker's name; the worker's job title; the date employment began;
where the employment is not permanent, the anticipated duration of the contract; the place of work or,
where the work is mobile, the main location; benefit packages; hours of work, rest breaks, leave
entitlements and other related matters; rules relating to overtime and overtime compensation; the
pension and other welfare arrangements applicable to the worker; the length of notice that the worker
can expect to give and receive on termination of employment; the disciplinary procedures that apply to
the worker, including details of representation available to the worker and any appeals mechanism; and
details of grievance procedures, including the person to whom grievances should be addressed.

Given the nature of the workforce involved, the project will not recruit children for project related works
and project monitoring will include this aspect.




                                                                                                       Official Use Only
ESS2 states that the minimum age of employment is 14 years while the newly revised Ethiopian Labor Law
has extended the minimum year of employment to 15 years. However, both WB and Ethiopian law
prohibits the engagement of children under 18 years of age in works that have hazardous nature. The
Project will not allow employment under the age of 18.

The other gap between the WB ESF and Ethiopian law is that the national law does not indicate that it
prohibits an employer to retaliate against a worker or reporting a dangerous work situation or removing
himself/herself from a dangerous work situation. ESS2 of the World Bank ESF provides that project
workers will not be retaliated against or otherwise subject to reprisal or negative action for reporting a
dangerous work situation or removing/themselves from a dangerous work situation. The FPIU will ensure
that all project workers, including those engaged by contractors, will have the right to report and remove
themselves from dangerous work situations without being subject to reprisal or negative action. This and
other provisions of the LMP will be part of the awareness-raising and training sessions of the project.

Institutional Arrangements: Given the categories of project workers (direct workers, contracted workers,
primary supply workers), this section lays out the operational arrangements amongst the various
institutions that will implement the Project and ensures the smooth implementation of the LMP. The
requirements of the LMP apply to all categories of project workers and where there is a special emphasis
for a particular category of workers, this will be highlighted within the applicable section of the LMP.

The requirements of the LMP as applicable to the direct workers will be the responsibilities of the FPIU.
The PIU will, however, have an oversight role through direct reporting arrangements on the requirements
of the LMP in particular and other ESMF requirements in general. The FPIU has the responsibility to ensure
LMP implementation at the interface with its respective contractors and sub-contractors and oversee the
LMP implementation at all levels. The FPIU will also need to stipulate that other Ministries or authorities
that contract workers under this Project comply with the same. The FPIU also has the mandate to ensure
that all the procedures for primary supply workers are observed. ESS2 applies a proportionality approach
to oversight responsibility towards suppliers. That being said it is important that the project ensures
minimum conditions in cases like quarries, or camp service suppliers, or any activities ongoing within
rehabilitation sites.

The approach to the implementation of this LMP is that all the provisions of the LMP are applied to all
project workers. In some cases, special mention for a particular category of project worker is required.

The Social Specialist of the FPIU will be the main responsible person for overseeing the implementation
of the LMP for all workers. The Social Specialist will oversee contractors and ensure that contractors
comply with this LMP, including in regard to OHS. The Social Specialist will further monitor that the
contractor is providing a workers’ GRM and conduct all required training of the workers. Where the Social
Specialist identifies that the contractor does not have the capacity to implement training for workers, he
or she will provide the training directly. The Social Specialist will also request all signed CoCs from the
contractor and monitor that 100% of workers have signed the document.

Contractors are expected to include a health and safety manager into the workforce, which will be the
person responsible for the training of workers, the implementation of all OHS measures and the
engagement with potential sub-contractors on these issues. It is expected that the contractor will have a
human resources function that will assist with the signing of the CoCs and with the implementation of
these LMP.




                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Monitoring and Supervision: The performance monitoring of this LMP will follow the same institutional
arrangement as the monitoring and supervision of the ESMF. Detailed mechanisms are laid out above in
the monitoring section of the ESMF. In general, the FPIU will be responsible for the monitoring of the
implementation of the LMP. In particular, the Social Specialists will ensure that the LMP is complied with.

The Social Specialists will undertake supervision missions and spot checks. Through the initial activity- or
site-specific screening process, the Social Specialists will be aware of potential labor-related risks and
impacts of activities and will develop a monitoring schedule around these.

Non-compliance with the LMP will be reported to the Project Manager and will be taken up in the regular
E&S reporting.

Workers’ Grievances Redress Mechanism: According to Ethiopian Labor Proclamation No. 1156/ 2019,
Workers' GRM for addressing and managing workers and employment-related conflicts or a complaint as
well as Gender-Based Violence (GBV) is mandatory, as well as under ESS2. Labor Proclamation No. 1156/
2019, Chapter 3, Article 141, has also introduced that employers and workers or their respective
associations may use social dialogue to prevent and resolve labor disputes amicably. Article 141, chapter
3.

The Project will provide a grievance mechanism for all direct workers and contracted workers (and, where
relevant, their organizations) to raise workplace concerns. Such workers will be informed of the GRM at
the time of recruitment and the measures put in place to protect them against reprisal for its use.
Measures will be put in place to make the GRM easily accessible to all such project workers. The objective
of the Workers’ GRM is to settle grievance between an employer and employee or between employees
bilaterally before resorting to formal dispute resolution, except in cases where the grievance constitutes
a criminal offense that requires notifying law enforcement. The Workers’ GRM are in accordance with the
provisions of ESS2 and apply to all direct and contracted workers.

Assess and Clarify. Workers will be informed of this grievance mechanism at the time of recruitment and
the measures put in place to protect them from any reprisal for its use. Contractors induct the employee
on the applicable workers’ grievance redress mechanism. Induct all project workers to be aware of their
rights. All records of induction shall be kept and made available for inspection by the FPIU.

Workers will further receive easily accessible information on the contractual details, as well as CoCs
included. They can further request clarifications on any contractual issues from the employer at any time
during the deployment. The provided information will allow the worker to assess whether her or his
concern is valid and should be taken up with the employer.

The RPIUs and FPIU shall contract only contractors with registered CoC or who sign an undertaking to
comply with the provisions of the Labor Act for contracted workers.

Intake, Acknowledge and Follow-Up. In case of a perceived violation, the aggrieved employee must
capture and present the details of the grievance to the person they report to or the supervisor’s superior
in case of conflict of interest. The supervisor or the supervisor’s superior will acknowledge the reception
of the reported grievance to the employee.




                                                                                                        Official Use Only
In case of risk of retaliation, the employee may immediately escalate to the court system. The project can
provide assistance with referrals to legal aid organizations. If confidentiality is requested, the FPIU will
ensure it to avoid any risk of retaliation, including in its follow-up actions.

Verify, Investigate and Act. The supervisor or the supervisor’s superior will verify the details and seek to
address the matter within the shortest time (up to 48 hours). They will escalate the matter if not resolved
within 48 hours if a resolution is not found.

Where no resolution is found, the employee can escalate the matter to the sector specific institutions or
courts who will resolve the matter between employer and employee. The Supreme Court’s decision is
final, where it has exercised lawful jurisdiction.

Where the formal courts are not accessible, do not exist in an area, or cannot render a judgment, the
matter shall be reported to and handled by the NPCU/FPIU, for example through the Project GRM. The
FPIU, in this case, will accommodate a fair agreement between the worker and the contractor.

Monitor, Evaluate and Feedback. The contractor shall keep records of all proceedings of grievance redress
that are within their jurisdiction and furnish PIU as part of the periodic progress reporting. The FPIU will
provide analytical synthesis reports on a quarterly basis to the FPIU, which include the number, status and
nature of grievances to the FPIU. These reports will form the basis of all regular reports to the World Bank.

The FPIU will further provide an excel sheet summary of the feedback and grievances reported, which will
be linked to the Project’s Management Information System (MIS) and to the Results Framework. It will
further maintain a documented record of stakeholder engagements, including a description of the
stakeholders consulted and a summary of the feedback/grievances received during community
consultations.

For grievances related to sexual nature, please refer to the above GRM and the SEA/SH Action Plan.


                                         Sample Code of Conduct

The Code of Conduct should be written in plain language and signed by each worker to indicate that they
have:
Received a copy of the code;
Had the code explained to them?
Acknowledged that adherence to this Code of Conduct is a condition of employment; and
Understood that violations of the Code can result in serious consequences, up to and including dismissal,
or referral to legal authorities.

To Be Signed by All Employees, Sub-contractors, Engineer, and Any Personnel thereof
I, _________________________ agree that in the course of my association with the Employer, I must:
     • treat children and women with respect regardless of race, color, gender, language, religion,
        political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability, birth or other
        status;
     • not use language or behavior towards children and women that is inappropriate, harassing,
        abusive, sexually provocative, demeaning or culturally inappropriate;
     • not engage children under the age of 18 in any form of sexual intercourse or sexual activity (other




                                                                                                         Official Use Only
       than in the context of legal unions that took place between parties under the laws of the country),
       including paying for sexual services or acts;
   •   Not engage sexually with any woman, in a situation, without mutual consent
   •   Wherever possible, ensure that another adult is present when working in the proximity of
       children;
   •   Not invite unaccompanied children into my place of residence, unless they are at immediate risk
       of injury or in physical danger;
   •   Not invite women into my place of residence if this is not acceptable by the code of ethics of the
       company;
   •   Not sleep close to unsupervised children unless absolutely necessary, in which case I must obtain
       my supervisor’s permission, and ensure that another adult is present if possible;
   •   Use any computers, mobile phones, video cameras, cameras or social media appropriately, and
       never to exploit or harass children or access child exploitation material through any media;
   •   Not use physical punishment on children and women;
   •   Not hire children for domestic or other labor which is inappropriate given their age or
       developmental stage, which interferes with their time available for education and recreational
       activities, or which places them at significant risk of injury;
   •   Comply with code of ethics of the company and all relevant local legislation, including labor laws
       in relation to child labor and behavior;
   •   Immediately report concerns or allegations of child and women exploitation and abuse and policy
       non-compliance in accordance with appropriate procedures;
   •   Immediately disclose all charges, convictions and other outcomes of an offence, which occurred
       before or occurs during my association with the Employer that relate to child exploitation and
       abuse.
   •   When photographing or filming a child or using children’s images for work-related purposes, I
       must:
   •   Assess and endeavor to comply with local traditions or restrictions for reproducing personal
       images before photographing or filming a child;
   •   Obtain informed consent from the child and parent or guardian of the child before photographing
       or filming a child. As part of this I must explain how the photograph or film will be used;
   •   Ensure photographs, films, videos and DVDs present children in a dignified and respectful manner
       and not in a vulnerable or submissive manner. Children should be adequately clothed and not in
       poses that could be seen as sexually suggestive;
   •   Ensure images are honest representations of the context and the facts;
   •   Ensure file labels, meta data or text descriptions do not reveal identifying information about a
       child when sending images electronically or publishing images in any form;

I understand that the onus is on me, as a person associated with the Employer, to use common sense and
avoid actions or behaviors that could be construed as child exploitation and abuse.
Signed:
Date:




                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Annex 6: Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment
(SH) Action Plan

Objective
This Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) / Sexual Harassment (SH) Action Plan has been prepared to
accompany the implementation of the CRISP Project. Its objective is to prevent and mitigate SEA/SH risks
connected to Project implementation. It presents operational activities as well as SEA/SH mitigation
measures. The SEA/SH Action Plan is guided by the requirements of the World Bank related to SEA/SH
prevention and response.17

Definition of SEA/SH
According to the World Bank Good Practice Note on addressing SEA/SH in civil works, ‘GBV is an umbrella
term for any harmful act that is perpetrated against a person’s will and that is based on socially ascribed
gender differences.’18 It can thereby occur in a variety of different ways, including through the infliction
of physical, mental, and sexual harm or suffering, threats of such acts, as well as coercion and other
deprivations of liberty. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH) are
manifestations of GBV. Both are relevant for the Project. The Good Practice Note defines these as follows:

SEA: is the exploitation of a vulnerable position, differential power or trust for sexual purpose; or actual
or threatened sexual physical intrusion.

SH at the workplace: are unwanted sexual advances; requests for sexual favors; and sexual physical
contact19.

GBV Context in Ethiopia
The GoE has promoted a conducive legal and policy environment to promote the rights of women and
girls. In 2000 and 2005, Ethiopia adopted the Revised Family Law and the Revised Criminal Code. Other
national instruments with provisions directly related to GBV include the Strategic Plan for an Integrated
and Multi-Sectoral Response to Violence Against Women and Children and Child Justice in Ethiopia (2010)
and the National Strategy and Action Plan on Harmful Traditional Practices Against Women and Children
(2013). The Ministry of Women and Social Affairs (MoWSA) maintains a coordination, policy, and advocacy
mandate for GBV prevention and response, and for child abuse. The Attorney General’s Office, through a
multi-sector steering committee – the National Coordinating Body on a Coordinated and Comprehensive
Prevention and Response to Violence against Women and Children, and on Child Justice – manages and
coordinates the provision of core services, such as counseling, medical treatment, free legal aid, and
survivor safety. It further support judicial processes that bring perpetrators to justice. The Ministry of
Health (MoH) provides medical services and emergency medications to survivors and through the health
sector more generally. In April 2024, the MoWSA launched National Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) for GBV Prevention, Risk Mitigation &Response. These set out systematic protocols for the
identification, prevention, and response to GBV incidents. They further include coordination across


17
 See The World Bank, Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in Investment Project Financing involving
major civil works, Third Edition, October 2022.
18 World Bank, Good Practice Note. Addressing Gender Based Violence in Investment Project Financing involving Major Civil Works, September

2018, p.5.
19
   World Bank 2018, p.6




                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
relevant sectors. In September 2025 the National GBV Case Management Guidelines were launched,
establishing a survivor-centered case management and referral system for victims.

Despite these progressive laws and policies, enactment and implementation remain a challenge,
particularly at local levels, due, in part, to insufficient resources and poor coordination and action, as well
as sensitivities and silence around the issue, which enable continued perpetration of violence. Protection
challenges are generally pronounced and GBV presents a significant barrier to women’s full engagement
in social and economic life. The 2016 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey indicated that 26 percent
of all women aged 15 to 49 reported having experienced physical or sexual violence in their lifetime, with
23 percent reporting physical violence and ten percent experiencing sexual violence.20 This data, however,
likely does not show the full extent of the challenge. A survey conducted by the UN Population Fund
(UNFPA) in 2010 among youths between the ages of twelve and 24 in select regions indicates that GBV
prevalence may be even higher21, with 15 percent of young women reporting having experienced sexual
violence in their lifetime.22 Experience of intimate partner violence is particularly pronounced; more than
one third of women (34 percent) have experienced some form of spousal violence – physical, sexual, or
emotional. The survey found that acceptability of use of violence at home was high with 63 percent of
women and 27.6 percent of men believing that wife beating was justified for at least one specified
reason.23 Help seeking behavior of GBV survivors was found to be limited – only 23 percent of women
who experienced physical and/or sexual violence sought help, while 66 percent of women never sought
help nor told anyone about their experience. As in other countries, fear of stigmatization, retaliation, and
rejection likely impede women from reporting experiences of violence or seeking care.

Recent conditions and compounding risks related to conflict and displacement, worsened by climate
change, have exacerbated the incidence of GBV, including widespread reports of physical and sexual
violence. The November 2021 report of the Ethiopia Human Rights Commission and the Office of the High
Commissioner on Human Rights (OHCHR) on human rights violations and abuses extending from the
conflict in the Tigray Region found that GBV—including varying forms of physical and sexual assault, such
as rape and gang rape, abduction, detention, and intentional transmission of HIV—has been a prominent
feature of the recent violence, committed by all parties to the conflict.24 The government has since
established a task force to address the report’s recommendations. Other reports estimate that more than
100 cases of sexual violence were reported daily between November 2020 and July 2021, while health
facilities in the Tigray Region registered nearly 1,300 cases of rape between February and April 2021.25,26
Displaced women and girls are further vulnerable to other forms of GBV, including harassment and
separation from families; and while conflict-related sexual violence has predominantly affected women
and girls, including women and girls with disabilities, men and boys have been targeted as well.27 Women
and girls are disproportionately vulnerable to the impacts of both climate change and conflict, the effects
of which often compound one another, increasing the incidence of GBV. Experiencing GBV, in turn,

20
     URL: https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR328/FR328.pdf.
21 Survey locations included the Addis Ababa, Afar, Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, Oromia, and SNNPR regions.
22 Population Council and UNFPA, 2010. The age of the survey also highlights the lack of data in this area.
23 Demographic and Health Survey, 2016.
24 EHRC and OHCHR. 2021. Report of the EHRC/ OHCHR Joint Investigation into Alleged Violations of International Human Rights, Humanitarian

and Refugee Law Committed by all Parties. Published 3 November 2021. URL: https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/ET/OHCHR-EHRC-
Tigray-Report.pdf.
25 UN-OCHA. 2021. Ethiopia – Tigray Region Humanitarian Update. Published 19 July 2021. URL:

https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Situation%20Report%20-%20Ethiopia%20-
%20Tigray%20Region%20Humanitarian%20Update%20-%2019%20Jul%202021.pdf .
26 URL: https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2021/08/ethiopia-troops-and-militia-rape-abduct-women-and-girls-in-tigray-conflict-new-

report/.
27
   UN-OCHA, 2021.




                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
reduces victims’ capacity to effectively prepare for and manage any future shocks and stresses, climate-
related or otherwise.

Generally, more than 34 percent of ever-married women have experienced physical, sexual or emotional
violence by the their spouse, and 23 percent have experienced physical violence. Approximately 10
percent have experienced sexual violence, according to a joint statement by UN agencies in November
2023.28

Access to health, social welfare, and judicial services for GBV survivors nationally and in conflict-affected
regions is a challenge, and quality response services are limited. While government and humanitarian
partners have scaled up GBV interventions to respond to the crisis in Northern Ethiopia, the availability of
the basic pillars of GBV response services – case management, psychosocial support, medical care, legal
support, and safety services—remain limited and quality of care provided across the country varies widely.
There are some GBV response services in the country, including 34 One-Stop Centers (OSCs) in several
urban centers, which provide multi-sectoral services to survivors (medical, legal, psycho-social, and police
support). Reportedly, the functioning of OSCs across regions varies significantly and gaps are common in
the capacity of staff and the availability of equipment. OSCs are also only available in urban centers,
impeding the ability of survivors in more rural or remote locations from accessing care. There are legal aid
centers around the country, including in several locations where humanitarian work is taking place, which
provide legal aid to survivors. Provision of mental health and psychosocial support has been limited across
the country even though it is critically needed by GBV survivors and by conflict-affected communities
more broadly.

Contextual SEA/SH Risks
GBV is a key concern within the communities affected by different emergencies in Ethiopia including
conflicts, ethnic clashes/tensions, floods, and droughts. Conflicts and situations of instability exacerbate
pre-existing patterns of discrimination against women and girls, exposing them to heightened risks of GBV
and other harmful practices. However, it is similarly a concern in non-conflict affected areas.

The other major factors and causes of violence are the economic dependency and lack of alternative
income-generating skills and opportunities that push young girls and youth to migrate and cross borders
illegally to different abroad countries. Local cities and town centers migration is another form to search
for domestic work opportunities. Forced survival sex work is often time an easy task to find and engage
in, which predisposes them to sexual, emotional, and physical violence and other reproductive health-
related problems. Substances abuse, social stigma, and discrimination, finally lead them to loss of
personality and related mental health disorders.29

Extreme household poverty, walking distance to school, inadequate school resources, lack of sanitation
facilities, child labor and marriage, and female genital cutting are among obstacles that prevent girls from
education. Lack of education means girls forced into informal labor market at an early age.

Women and girls continue to suffer disproportionately from GBV and violations of basic rights due to
conflict, insecurity, overcrowding in IDP sites, forced relocations and returns, lack of livelihood

28
  UN Women, A Joint Statement by UN agencies and International Partners on gender Equality in Ethiopia, November 2023, accessed at:
https://africa.unwomen.org/en/stories/statement/2023/11/a-joint-statement-by-un-agencies-and-international-partners-on-gender-equality-
in-ethiopia-november-2023
29 CSA (Ethiopia) Demographic and Health Survey 2016 Key Indicators Report. Ethiopians Water Sector Development Program (2016)




                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
opportunities, lack of community awareness on women’s rights as well as lack of access to response
services. In addition, negative coping mechanisms expose them to GBV risks including SEA and survival
sex.

The different factors that can be sited in association with violence against women, girls and children,
include the public deep rooted and long lived traditional insights, socio-cultural beliefs, and limited access
to information (knowledge and awareness) on violence and its health-related consequences. The number
of women and girls accessing multi-sectoral GBV services remains low due to factors such as fear of
stigma, access to services and low availability of services.

Some of the different forms of GBV that are prevalent in Ethiopia include, among others, intimate partner
violence (physical, emotional and sexual), domestic violence, female genital mutilation/cutting, sexual
assault, rape, marriage by abduction, and child marriage.30 These forms of GBV mainly encounter girls and
women, which is rooted in unequal power dynamics between women and men, which hinder women’s
and girls’ development, health, livelihood, and physical and mental well-being.

Since GBV is widely spread, it is also likely to occur in the Project locations, many of which are not defined
yet.

Project-related SEA/SH Risks
Project-specific risks and risk contributing factors in regard to SEA/SH include the following:

   •     Location of project activities in a humanitarian/conflict-affected environment where rates of GBV
         are already likely to be high.
   •     Lack of protective services or GBV response options (health, police, legal, psychosocial, support
         and care) in project locations.
   •     Inability to supervise all locations of the project.
   •     Project activities, specifically under Component 1, 2, and 3 will require contracting of construction
         companies, consultants, and service providers. This can lead to a) labor influx in small communities,
         and b) creates a power differential between project workers and project beneficiaries – both can
         increase risks of women and girls to SEA.
   •     Exclusion of women and girls during the design and rehabilitation of SSI or dam safety works can
         result in recovery and reconstruction decisions aspects that ignore or exacerbate women and girls’
         risks of SEA/SH in those spaces.
   •     Potential for paid security forces to be contracted under the project in order to ensure delivery of
         services/infrastructure in insecure areas. Military or paid security forces contracted as part of a
         project can increase the risk of SEA/SH. These groups are often predominantly or entirely male and
         may exploit the power imbalance arising from their position to engage in inappropriate or harmful
         behavior.
   •     High poverty incidence among communities mean residents of these area are particularly
         vulnerable to many forms of exploitation, including SEA and may lack the resources and agency to
         avoid and report abuse.
   •     Project activities may involve women working alongside men in offices or project sites, which
         increases risks of SH.


30 CSA (July 2017) The 2016 Demographic and Health Survey Addis Ababa Ethiopia




                                                                                                          Official Use Only
   •    Public sector recruitment processes can distort power relations and lead to opportunities for
        abuse. For example, hiring and employment practices that seek to increase the number of women
        in different employment positions under the project may expose women to potential SH, or abuse,
        either because they are pressured to exchange “favors” for jobs, or because the working
        environment legitimizes and allows harassment and exploitation.
   •    Although there are clear statutes prohibiting SEA/SH, enforcement is low and with limited or no
        information on the issue, staff may have no /limited knowledge in identifying, supporting and
        reporting SEA/SH related cases as such may cause more harm than good.
   •    Community perceptions of GBV might lead to more harm against survivors who report SEA/SH
        experiences.
   •    The exclusion of vulnerable groups, including women and girls, from spaces of voice, agency, and
        decision-making can lead to further harm or marginalize them. Women, girls, and other groups
        with less power and status such as people with disabilities, unmarried women/girls, women and
        girls associated with armed groups/forces, displaced/returning individuals and families, and
        minority ethnic/clan groups are more likely to be invisible or hidden in community consultation
        and engagement processes. Additionally, patriarchal norms often lead women and girls – of all
        groups – to be left out of community discussions or have their needs and priorities silenced.

SEA/SH Mitigation Measures
The project will adopt a robust approach to address potential SEA/SH risks. Consistent with World Bank
guidance on addressing SEA/SH in Bank-supported investment operations, and with the GoE Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for GBV Prevention, Risk Mitigation and Response (2024).

Relevant mitigation measures to address these risks are as follows:

    •   Define SEA/SH requirements and expectations included in any contractual obligations as well as
        a mandatory CoC that addresses SEA/SH.
    •   Ensure inclusion of SEA/SH risk management measures in all E&S instruments.
    •   Ensure any contracted entity has or adopts an SEA/SH risk management framework. For
        construction contractors, ensure a C-ESMP includes and SEA/SH Accountability and Response
        Framework and confirm prior to finalizing the contract the contractor’s ability to meet the
        project’s SEA/SH prevention and response requirements.
    •   Develop, translate into simple, understandable language, and ensure that all workers sign the CoC
        to cultivate an environment free from SEA/SH, including health response/services, mental health
        & psychosocial support, legal & justice assistance, safety and security options, and long-term
        assistance, as well as addressing the needs of vulnerable groups.
    •   Implement reporting and referral protocols that outline key requirements for reporting and
        responding to SEA/SH cases if they arise and measures to enable safe, ethical, survivor-centered
        response.
    •   Train all project staff and workers to ensure understanding of CoC, SEA/SH as well as
        accountability and response framework including the referral processes, responsibilities and
        reporting.
    •   Identify relevant organizations for referrals, development of procedures and processes for
        referrals, development of accountability framework for handling allegations, including related to
        investigation (in alignment with national processes) and sanctions for potential perpetrators.




                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    •   Develop materials for all stakeholders providing information, education, and communication to
        indicate that the project and/area is a GBV free zone as well as provide information on GBV
        response services (such as where to seek assistance when needed.
    •   Establish an effective GRM with specific and multiple channels to initiate a complaint related to
        SEA/SH. GBV-related incidents should be reported in a safe, confidential survivor centric manner
        with linkages directly to the Project GRM.
    •   Train identified GRM operators on how to respond to cases that come forward

Reporting and Referral Mechanisms
Based on the Ethiopia SOPs on GBV, victims have the right to disclose the incident to anyone they chose.
Any service provider or GRM recipient who receives a report should follow the following disclosure
guidelines, and service providers should consider the following:
    - Provide support and assistance, and give honest and complete information about the response
        services available, a timeline within which services can be anticipated, and information on how to
        access these services and the necessary support to do so.
    - Respect the wishes of the victim as to where or with whom to seek help.
    - All information should always be kept confidential and can only be shared with the consent of
        victims and on a need-to-know basis.
    - All actors and stakeholders should not attempt to actively identify victims of GBV, as this can lead
        to stigma and put victims and staff at risk.
    - When dealing with disclosure of GBV incidents, it is essential to respect the safety, dignity, and
        rights of the victim. A survivor-centered approach should be well-known to all relevant staff.
    - Non-specialized actors should not interview victims or respond directly.

In the establishment of referral pathways, the following issues are to be considered:
     - Service mapping: At each location conduct service and capacity mapping or assessments.
        Available services should be documented and monitored to ensure quality and maintain the
        minimum standards of care
     - Locate leading actors, such as health, psychosocial, legal/justice or other actors for each thematic
        area of response
     - Consult with women, girls and other community members on entry points to services
     - Establish transparent reporting and referring system for incidents in each location or context ..
     - Referral pathways should be kept up to date.
     - Groups of people who face additional barriers to accessing services, including victims with
        disabilities, implement specific access adaptations
     - Provide information about referral pathways so that as many people as possible know where to
        seek help.

Informed Consent and Information Sharing
Informed consent is a voluntary agreement of an individual to engage in an event or act after careful
consideration and after being provided with all the pertinent information and facts at the time of giving
consent. The victim should sign a form to demonstrate their understanding of and consent to the care
they chose. The GBV actor should make sure the survivor understands how the provider will use, store
and share the information before signing. In cases where informed consent form is not available, verbal
informed consent must be obtained. Steps for ensuring informed consent are as follows:
    - Provide all information
    - Ensure the victim understands the implications of any referral




                                                                                                       Official Use Only
    -   Explain the limitations to confidentiality
    -   Ask for consent
    -   Check limitations of consent.

Confidentiality is one of the key principles for ensuring a survivor-centered approach in service delivery
for victims. Maintaining confidentiality means not disclosing any information at any time to any party
without the informed consent f the person concerned. This encourages safety, trust and empowerment.
Exceptions are where there are concerns about the health or safety of the victim, who is a child; when
there is mandatory reporting, such as in cases of SEA that involve humanitarian workers; and where the
victim is an adult who poses a direct threat to their own safety of the safety or others.

SEA/SH in the GRM
The detailed GRM for the project will include pathways for SEA/SH grievances. The project will be required
to put in place a GRM with multiple channels to facilitate confidential logging in of SEAH/SH complaints in
all the project locations in line with the GRM in the SEP. It will be necessary to identify and integrate
SEA/SH entry points within the GRM with clear procedures and tools for safe, confidential, and ethical
management of related complaints. Considerations related to SEA/SH will be integrated into workers’
GRM as well.

As part of the overall Project GRM, consultations with affected communities will be conducted to
determine the preferred alternatives to in-person complaints (e.g., phone, online, etc.). The process will
emphasize confidentiality and anonymity.

The FPIU will be guided the by the following SEA/SH programming principles:
● Confidentiality: At all stages of the intervention, the privacy and confidentiality of survivors will be
    assured, prioritizing the well-being of survivors and that the delivery of services and support will not
    compromise the privacy or identity of individuals involved.
● Respect: Respect of the wishes, dignity and choices of the survivors will be observed at all times and
    during all stages of any intervention. Survivors will be supported to give their free and informed
    consent, based on a clear understanding of the facts, implications, risks, and consequences of an
    action, before information is shared or action is taken.
● Safety and security: Awareness and consideration of any risks or safety concerns that might
    compromise the physical safety of individuals affected by SEA/SH will be sufficiently addressed and
    factored into any SEA/SH intervention or initiative.
● Non-discrimination: All SEA/SH interventions will be designed to ensure access and the same level of
    quality of care and assistance for all persons seeking support, or persons affected by SEA/SH, without
    regard to sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, ethnicity, religion, or other status.

The Project GRM will implement a survivor-centered approach to managing SEA/SH complaints. The only
information to be collected from the person reporting will be on:
● demographic data, such as age and gender;
● the nature of the complaint (what the complainant says in her/his own words);
● whether the complainant believes the perpetrator was related to the project; and
● Whether they received or were offered referral to services.

SEA/SH Action Plan




                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        Table 16 SEA/SH Action Plan

Activity to address      Steps to be taken                                        Timelines               Institutional   Output indicators     Estimated Budgets (USD)
SEA/SH risk                                                                                               Focal Point
Integrate SEA/SH risk    •    Ensure that SEA/SH issues are incorporated in       As part of the ESMF     FPIU            ESMF contains         N/A
management in the             the ESMF as part of the SEA/SH Action Plan                                                  SEA/SH Action Plan
ESMF

Develop and conduct                                                               Within the first 3      FPIU            # of training         Training costs
SEA/SH orientation        •   Develop a training plan                             months of project                       sessions conducted
training for all                                                                  effectiveness                           for project staff
project staff,            •   Develop training materials for respective Project
including FPIU                implementers                                        Throughout project                      # of staff trained
                                                                                  implementation.
                          •   Conduct training for project staff and PIUs


Ensure all bidding       •    Ensure all contracts signed by contractors and      Throughout Project      FPIU            % of contracts with   Staff costs
documents and                 other implementers contain references to            implementation                          clearly defined
contracts include             SEA/SH risk mitigation measures                                                             SEA/SH
references to SEA/SH                                                                                                      clauses/requiremen
                                                                                                                          ts

CoC signed and            •    Have CoCs signed by all workers                    Prior to construction   FPIU / RPIUs    % of workers that     Staff costs
understood by all         •    Train all project workers on the behavioral        activity                and             have signed a CoC
workers                                                                                                   contractors                           Training costs
                               obligations under the CoCs.
                                                                                                                          # of training
                          •    Display CoC in project sites and translated into                                           sessions
                               the local language(s)

Develop M&E plan         •    Develop a comprehensive M&E plan to monitor         Prior to                FPIU            M&E Plan in place     Staff costs
                              SEA/SH action plan implementation and               commencement of                         .
                              implement throughout project implementation         activities on the                                             Travel costs for
                                                                                  ground                                                        monitoring: 20,000

                                                                                  Throughout Project
                                                                                  implementation.
Inform project stakeholders about SEA/SH risks




                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
Establish                •   Identify and officially inform stakeholders about   Within the first 3      FPIU and       # of stakeholders    See SEP
partnerships with            the components of the projects and project-         months of project       RPIUs          engaged
key stakeholders             related risks of SEA /SH                            effectiveness
                         •   Engage stakeholders and regularly conduct joint                                            # of stakeholder
                             meetings as per SEP                                 Throughout Project                     meetings held
                                                                                 implementation.

Develop information      •   Identity the methods to disseminate the             Within the first 3      FPIU           # of information     10,000
dissemination                information                                         months of project                      disclosure events
strategy in regard to    •   Disclosure of information to stakeholders           effectiveness
SEA/SH                       through multimedia outlets
                                                                                 Throughout Project
                                                                                 implementation.

Identify, train and      •   Establish a trained, dedicated and committed        Within the first 3      FPIU / RPIUs   # of focal points    10,000
establish project            network of project focal persons in each region     months of project                      and persons
focal points at                                                                  effectiveness                          identified and
regional level for                                                                                                      trained
SEA/SH risk                                                                      Throughout Project
management                                                                       implementation.
Conduct outreach         •   Develop SEA/SH information guide for                Within the first 6      FPIU and       # of information     20,000
information and              community engagement                                months of project       RPIUs          guides prepared
sensitization            •   Implement community awareness sessions              effectiveness
campaigns for                                                                                                           # of community
project-affected                                                                 Throughout Project                     sensitization
communities                                                                      implementation.                        sessions conducted

Mapping of service delivery for SEA/SH prevention and response
Map and review                                                                   First quarter after     FPIU           # of maps of         N/A
capacity and quality    • Map all GBV services in the project areas              commencement of the                    services
of GBV service          • Review the capacity and quality of the relevant        project activates and
providers in the             available services                                                                         # of GBV referral
project areas that are • Develop/update a GBV referral list of preferred         Throughout Project                     services reviewed
able to provide care         service providers.                                  implementation.
and support SEA/SH      • Identify key gaps where remedial measures may                                                 Referral pathway
survivors                    be required (e.g., training staff on psychosocial                                          developed/updated
                             first aid)




                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Develop and
maintain updated
multisectoral referral
pathways



Ensure a SEA/SH responsive GRM
Develop/Review GM       • Review Project GRM and ensure strong SEA/SH          Prior to project        FPIU / RPIUs   SEA/SH procedure     10,000
for specific SEA/SH         reporting channels                                 engaging workers and                   integrated
procedures              • Identify and Integrate SEA/SH entry points           maintained throughout                  In the GRM
                            within the GRM with clear procedures and tools     Project
                            for management of related complaints               implementation                         Guidelines and
                        • Develop and regularly update the information                                                protocol on SEA/SH
                            sharing protocol to enhance who is receiving                                              developed
                            information and how best it is used.
                        •    Develop and update disclosure and reporting                                              Tracking system
                            guidelines / protocol for GBV/ SEA/SH with a                                              developed
                            provision for victim protection and assistance.
                        • Create reporting pathways that include support
                            systems and accountability mechanisms
                            including how to handle SEA/SH allegations
                            properly
                        • Develop simple, anonymous and confidential
                            tracking system that community health workers
                            /teachers /or identified focal points can use to
                            document when they observe/support and refer
                            GBV incidents to service providers.
Identify and train      • Identify and select SEA/SH focal persons within      Prior to                FPIU           # of GRM and         Staff costs
GRM operators and           the GRM to manage SEA/SH-related complaints        commencement of                        SEA/SH GBV focal
SEA/SH focal points     • Clarify the role of the GRM and SEA/SH Focal         works                                  points               Training costs
within the GRM, who         Points as referral points
will be responsible     • Train all focal points on SEA/SH basics, survivor-   Throughout project
for SEA/SH cases and        centered approach and the referral pathways        implementation.
referrals s as defined
in the referral
pathway.




                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Review GRM           •   Review logs for SEA/SH documentation to       Prior to          FPIU   # of appropriate   Staff costs
reports/logs for         ensure it follows standards for documenting   commencement of          logs
SEA/SH sensitivity       SEA/SH cases                                  works




                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
SEA/SH reporting
The following incident form will be completed by the FPIU in the case of SEA/SH cases, within 24 hours:

Table 17 Incident Report Form for SEA/SH cases




The following form will be completed by the FPIU in case of SEA/SH cases – following investigations:




                                                                                                       136


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Table 18 SEA/SH incident report form after investigations




                                                            137


                                                            Official Use Only
Annex 7: E&S Reporting Form
The following E&S reporting format should be used for regular E&S reporting from the FPIU to the World
Bank.

 Project Name
 Project Code
 Project Amount (or Component Amount if
 relevant)
 Board Approval Date
 Implementing Agency
 Applicable ESS
 Monitoring Period


Planned/Undertaken Activities
Please provide a synopsis of the main activities planned/undertaken during the reporting period.

Synopsis of the Project Activities Implemented During the Reporting Period
 Description       of      Project Monitoring Indicators during reporting Frequency          (monthly,
 work/activities                     Period                                quarterly)




Pending/Delayed Actions (If any)
Please highlight any pending or delayed actions of the precedent report (if any), as well as activities
planned but not undertaken in the current reporting period, indicating reasons and/or challenges and
actions to address the delay. If there are no pending or delayed actions please mark the Table as not
applicable.

Table for Delayed Actions of the Project
 No. Activities (components, E&S                   Reason      for Actions to be Timeline
       subcomponents) planned requirements delay                   taken
       but not implemented          associated
                                    with       the
                                    activities




Status of Implementation of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).
Please use the ESCP with the following columns in sequence. (The Table can be made landscape to
accommodate text or included as an annex.)

Status of the Implementation of the ESCP.
  ESS# ESCP                Timeframe of Status          of Justification    of Actions to be
           obligations     ESCP           implementation   delays/shortcomings taken and timeline
                           obligations

                                                                                                   138


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Status of the Implementation of the ESMP
This section will inform/update on the status of the mitigation and monitoring measures of significant
project risks, using a matrix approach including the relevant community health and safety measures.
Please use the ESMP matrix with the following columns in sequence as shown below.

Status of Implementation of the ESMP
 Reference E&S            Monitoring Linked to Status        of            Justification    Actions to be
              Mitigation Indicators  Investment Implementation             of               taken     and
              Measures               Activity or                           delays/short     timeline
                                     the ESSs                              comings


Status of the Implementation of the Project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism
This section will inform/update on the status of grievances filed and how the FPIU is responding to the
concerns and grievances (including labour, social, environment grievances) of project-affected parties
related to the environmental and social performance of the project.

    -   State total number of grievances recorded during the reporting period;
    -   How many were resolved?
    -   How many were referred elsewhere? Is the GRC/ GRM following up?
    -   How many issues are unresolved and why?
    -   What is the plan for the unresolved issues?

Overview of Grievances During the Reporting Period
 #     Stakeholder                  Nature       of Total               Status             Remarks/
                                    Grievance (s)   Grievances                             Comment(s)
       (e.g.           institution,                                     Resolved/
       community        members,                                        unresolved
       local leaders, etc)




Stakeholder Engagement
This section will inform/update on the status of stakeholder engagement and how the FPIU is ensuring
that stakeholders are being met with in line with the requirements of the Project and / or SEP as relevant.
The section should outline:

    •   The number of engagement activities undertaken during the reporting period and types of
        stakeholders met with (e.g. communities, districts, neighbouring facilities, etc)
    •   Key issues raised or discussed during the meetings
    •   To what extent are the stakeholders being engaged during the implementation of E&S risks and
        impacts management measures?



                                                                                                       139


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        •     Do they participate in monitoring the implementation of E&S risk and impact management
              measures?
        •     Is the engagement/consultations organized according to the SEP?
        •     Were the participants informed before the meeting and minutes were shared with the
              participants?

Health and Safety Accidents
This section summarizes the accidents and incidences that occurred during the reporting period.
Importantly, the section includes detailed descriptions of the procedures to mitigate recurrence and avoid
further injury. The section includes reports on near-misses and treats these as incidents in line with
comparative accidents. The section includes a table for follow-up of earlier accidents, incidents, and near-
misses.

Accident and Incident Reporting
 Date and time Name of Descriptio                               Severity      of Mitigating      Actions to be   Status of
 of               Victim      n of the                          Accident         measures        taken      to   the
 accident/Incid               accident                          (Minor           taken by the    prevent the     accidente
 ent                                                            /Major           contractor/pr   occurrence      d (open
                                                                injury/          oponent         of        the   /closed31)
                                                                death)                           accident


Environmental and Social Management Capacity
This section details the E&S supervision arrangements for the activities. The section includes a diagram of
the reporting arrangements as well as roles and responsibilities, any vacant positions and timelines to fill
them if relevant. The description may require several diagrams for various project sites.

Administration:
State any changes or updates on administrative requirements e.g. E&S personnel, location, etc.;
Any changes in terms of applicable national and international requirements.

Capacity Building:
Provide an update on any E&S risk management related capacity building activities undertaken
Indicate outstanding capacity building activities and timelines for undertaking them.

Other Project specific issues to flag, raise, report on:

Other Specific Issues
Please answer the following questions:

Is the FPIU adequately staffed with skilled and permanent E&S specialists? Do they have resources
(finance and equipment) to carry out field visits and supervisions?

Are the Implementing Partners adequately staffed with skilled and permanent E&S staff. Are they
preparing their periodic E&S reports to the owner?


31
     Closed incident referring to those that have all the actions completed

                                                                                                                       140


                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Is the project GRM still robust enough to respond to complaints? How many complaints have been
received and resolved (provide current and cumulative data?

Is there sufficient budget allocation for implementing the E&S instruments?

What are the constraints to the achievement of the ESCP and ESMP?

Conclusions and Recommendations

Please summarize the major conclusions during this periodic report and recommendations for actions to
be implemented in the next monitoring period. Include a summary (in a table) of measures or activities
that were planned vs achieved; And state reasons why some activities are still outstanding.

Include a table of planned activities for the next quarter/ reporting period.




                                                                                                  141


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
Annex 8: Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF)
Objectives
The Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF) is aligned with the World Bank’s ESS3 on Resource
Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management. The main objective of the IPMP is to ensure that
pest management is environmentally sounds, socially acceptable and economically viable, while
minimizing risks to human health and the environment.

The purpose of this section is to provide a framework for the integration of pest management
considerations in the planning and implementation of the activities to be implemented within the project
specifically on activities that will involve use of fertilizers and pesticides for agricultural production or that
result in agricultural activities during the operational phase. Use of pesticides can constitute increased
risks to human health and environment. The IPMF promotes the safe, effective and sustainable
management of pests and pesticides to a) reduce reliance on chemical pesticides; b) encourage biological
and ecological pest control methods, and c) prevent adverse impacts on human health, biodiversity, soil,
and water quality associated with pesticide use in irrigation-supported agriculture.

Environmental and Social risks and impacts of Pesticides
The potential adverse effects of pesticide use within the related activities under the project will include
among others:

    •   Pollution and contamination of surface and underground water bodies through pesticide runoff
        or leaching into surface and groundwater
    •   Contamination of rivers, irrigation canals and wetlands =, harming the aquatic ecosystem.
    •   Accumulation of pesticide residues in soils, reducing soil fertility and microbial diversity
    •   Impact on terrestrial fauna due to contamination, such as beneficial insects. And non-target
        species (fish, birds, and amphibians)
    •   Human and animal health related hazards due to indiscriminate exposure to pesticides.
    •   Overuse or misuse of pesticides may lead to pest populations developing resistance, resulting in
        greater chemical dependence.
    •   Human health and safety risks, including through farmer and workers exposure, community
        exposure and improper handling and disposal

All the pesticides banned or under restriction in Ethiopia will not be used in the project. Wherever
possible, non-chemical means of pest control will be exercised, in keeping with the promotion of promote
Integrated Pest Management (IPM). IPM can in some cases facilitate agricultural pest protection without
the application of chemical-based pesticides. Some IPM tactics that could be considered by project
activities that reduce pest risk include:

    •   Biological control methods
    •   Natural physical methods, such as picking of ticks
    •   Mechanical/manual control of pests
    •   Growing of pest resistant crops.



                                                                                                             142


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
IPM Planning, Design & Implementation
This sub-section describes the typical methods that should be used by the project when preparing IPM for
activities specifically when environmental and social screening determines that pesticides will be utilized
and or their use will be promoted in the specific project activity.

IPM is a sustainable approach to managing pests by combining cultural, physical/mechanical, biological,
and chemical tools in a way that keep pests below their economic injury levels and minimizes economic,
health and environmental risks. Fundamentally, IPM aims to maximize the use of biological control; other
control measures, especially chemicals, play a supportive rather than a disruptive role. Every activity
under the project that includes pest management will require the preparation of a site-specific IPM Plan
(site- specific IPMP) and the sections below outline the proposed approach in developing site- specific
IPMPs. The project will utilize its E&S specialists and trained professionals with expertise in agricultural
science and pest management to prepare these site- specific IPMPs.

The following are preconditions for an IPM approach, which will be adopted by all project activities that
will be screened and found to require pesticide use:

    a) Understanding of the ecological relationships within a farming system (crops, plants, pests,
       organisms) and factors influencing their development
    b) Understanding of economic factors within a production system (infestation, loss)
    c) Understanding of socio-cultural decision-making behavior of the farmers (traditional preferences,
       risk behavior)
    d) Involvement of the farmers in the analysis of the pest problems and their management
    e) Successive creation of a legislative and agricultural policy framework conducive to a sustainable
       IPM strategy (plant quarantine legislation, pesticides legislation, pesticide registration, price
       policy).

This Project IPMP has been developed following and applying the key elements of IPM, namely:

    1. Ensuring that activities/subprojects under the project use available, suitable, and compatible
       methods which include resistant varieties, cultural methods, biological control, safe pesticides,
       etc. to maintain pests below levels that cause economic damage and loss
    2. Ensuring that activities/subprojects under project conserve the ecosystem to enhance and
       support natural pollinators
    3. Ensuring that activities/subprojects under project integrate the pest management strategies in
       the farming systems
    4. Ensuring that activities/subprojects under project conduct analysis based on pests and crop loss
       assessments.

Setting up IPM
Planning is at the core of any IPM. Every irrigation farm has pests that need to be considered. Waiting
until problems arise will increase reliance on pesticides more and more. Good IPM has four parts and all
the site-specific IPMPs that will be prepared under the project will have to follow these parts:

    a)   Identifying problems
    b)   Selecting tactics
    c)   Considering economic and environmental factors
    d)   Evaluating the program.

                                                                                                        143


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
A. Proper Identification of Problems
The correct IPM approach promotes “proactive” rather than “reactive” management. Correct
identification is the first and most important step in controlling a problem. This first step is critical to
future success, since an incorrect diagnosis leads to mismanagement. Scouting is, in fact, the key feature
of any IPM. By scouting, the ability to detect potential problems early is increased. The earlier a problem
is discovered, the better your chances are of avoiding economic losses. Primary beneficiaries of the project
will use pesticides or promote use pesticides and will be trained in scouting techniques to identify pests
early to promote the proactive approach in pest management as described above. To scout effectively,
the above-mentioned primary beneficiaries of the project will be encouraged and trained to:

    •   Identify the cause of the problem to find out what kind of pests they are dealing with.
    •   Contact agricultural extension officers or DAs if they encounter something that they cannot
        identify.
    •   Determine the stage of growth of the pests and crops. This is essential for proper timing of control
        methods.
    •   Decide whether the infestation is increasing or decreasing.
    •   Assess the condition of the crops.
    •   Map out problem areas. It may be possible to limit the area that needs treatment.
    •   Use the right scouting method for the specific pest.

B. Select Tactics
Once the problem has been identified, considerations on how to control it will have to be made. The
goal in selecting control tactics is to use methods that are effective, practical, economical, and
environmentally sound. To select the best control tactics, there is a need to:

    •   Understand the life cycle and habits of the pests. Some control methods will work only if they are
        used at the right time.
    •   Decide whether the infestation is serious in terms of economic loss.
    •   Compare the costs and benefits of various control methods.
    •   Make plans for the future. Not every part of IPM can be put into effect immediately.

Sampling to determine the extent of the problem: Once the pest is correctly identified, the next question
which will need to be answered will be, Is there a risk of significant loss? Is the problem occasionally seen?
Localized? Or commonly found throughout? What is the extent of the damage? Is the problem a growing
threat? Correct sampling will help to eliminate the guesswork in pest control by providing a means to
quantify an old problem or discover a new one. Sampling knowledge and information on pests and crop
biology should be used to make better management decisions.

Analysis to assess problem importance: This step in the pest management process entails analyzing the
identification and sampling information and evaluating the need for a pest control action to make a
determination on how bad the problem really is. There is need to assess whether the potential control
measures are more costly than the damage potential? There is need to weigh economic, environmental,
and times concerns and assess the impact of the current pest control decision on future management
decisions.



                                                                                                          144


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
Selection of appropriate management alternative: The action plan needed must entail a strategy that fits
with the short- and long-term plans, labor force, capital, equipment, and finances of the farm. Therefore,
an evaluation of the costs, benefits, and risks of employing various management options is needed.
Opportunities to integrate different pest control strategies must be considered.

C. Choosing Controls
There is no such thing as a completely safe and natural pesticide. Pesticides can vary greatly in their level
of toxicity to non-target organisms such as people, pets or beneficial insects. Even organically approved
pesticides can pose a danger to people and the environment if they are not used properly.

Pesticides are grouped into various types or categories. For example, there are fungicides, insecticides,
herbicides (for weeds), nematicides (for nematodes) and miticides (for mites).

While many pesticides control specific problems, there are still some broad-spectrum controls. In
addition, there are many products that are only effective if they are used at a specific growth stage of the
pest, so timing is critical.

It is never wise to use blanket applications of pesticides on large areas or to use them based on a calendar
alone. The improper use of pesticides can pose a risk to the applicator, family, plants, beneficial organisms
and the environment. There are times when pesticides are needed to prevent major losses. The judicious
and proper use of pesticides can occur with a sound IPM program. The following are examples of
management tactics which can be employed:

    •   Biological - Parasites, predators, pest
    •   Chemical - Pesticides, pheromones, baits, attractants
    •   Physical

Consider Economic Factors: Know When It Pays to Use a Pesticide Despite efforts to avoid using
chemicals, there are times when only pesticides can control the damage. Even so, it may not pay to use
them. Pesticides should be used in an IPM program only when the benefits (yield, quality, aesthetic value)
exceed the costs of control. Otherwise, time and money are wasted. It’s not easy to figure out when it
pays to use pesticides. There are many variables: the pest population, variety, and growth stage, weather,
and cost of the control.

D. Evaluate IPM
Evaluation means deciding how effective a program is and whether any changes are needed. All
subprojects that will prepare site-specific IPMPs will have to evaluate IPM, and should:

    •    Monitor fields and keep records: Each time field visits are made, a note of crops and pest
        conditions, record yields and quality and record any counts on pest populations.
    •   Record control measures: Records should include dates, weather conditions, pest levels,
        application rates and timing, and costs. Good records are a guide if the same problem occurs.
    •   Compare effectiveness: Whatever control tactics are chosen, use a different method on some
        strips. That way comparison can be made, which worked better, taking into account costs and
        environmental impacts.




                                                                                                         145


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Reporting and Performance Review Requirements: The MILLs through the FPIU will integrate pesticide
use activities within the regular project specific quarterly progress safeguards reports for all subprojects,
including site-specific IPMPs for submission to the World Bank specifically for identified sub-projects
during the feasibility study phase of the sub-projects following detailed screening.

Pest Management for Agriculture Subprojects:
Project activities may involve strengthening existing practices, introducing, diversifying or the
intensification of crop production. Support for the development of large-, medium, and small-scale
irrigation may lead to the introduction or increased use of pesticides and other agricultural chemicals such
as herbicides and fertilizers. Pests are organisms that compete with humans, domestic animals, or crops
for nutritional resources. They include species of insects, mites, nematodes, mollusks, plant pathogens,
vertebrates and weeds. Fertilizers are used to promote crop growth. It is critical that appropriate planning,
design and management be adopted for the handling, use, and management of all agricultural chemicals
to avoid potential negative environmental impacts. If appropriate for the irrigation sub-projects, the site-
specific pest management plan should address the following issues:

    1. Proper use of agricultural chemicals such as fertilizers to avoid reduction in soil and groundwater
       quality.
    2. Prevent fertilizer run-off into surface water sources to avoid negative impacts on aquatic
       environments.
    3. Proper use of pesticides and herbicides to avoid contamination of crops, soils and water.
    4. Proper use, handling and storage of all agricultural chemicals to avoid adverse health impacts on
       the rural population.
    5. Ensure that banned or unauthorized agricultural chemicals are not used.
    6. Proper handling and disposal of unused agricultural chemicals and packaging materials (i.e. sacks,
       plastic containers, etc.).

Guideline for site-specific Integrated Pest Management Plan for Irrigation Sub-projects

Pest Management Approach

     i. Current and anticipated pest problems relevant to the project: common pest problems and
        estimated economic impact
    ii. Current and proposed pest management practices: Describe current and proposed practices,
        including non-chemical preventative techniques, biological and chemical control. Is optimum use
        being made of agro-ecosystem management techniques to reduce pest pressure and of available
        non-chemical methods to control pests? Do farmers and extension staffs get sufficient
        information about IPM approaches that reduce reliance on chemical control?
   iii. Relevant IPM experience within the project area, woreda, region or country describe existing IPM
        practices, projects/programs, research
   iv. Assessment of proposed or current pest management approach and recommendations for
        adjustment, where necessary. Where the current or proposed practices are not consistent with
        the principles of an IPM approach, the discrepancies should be discussed, and a strategy should
        be proposed to bring pest management activities into line with IPM.

Pesticide Management
  i.    Describe present, proposed and/or envisaged pesticide use and assess whether such use is in line
        with IPM principles. Provide purpose of pesticide use, type of products used, frequency of

                                                                                                         146


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
        applications, and application methods. Does pesticide use part of an IPM approach and is it
        justified? Justification of pesticide use under the project should (a) explain the IPM approach and
        the reason why pesticide use is considered, (b) provide an economic assessment demonstrating
        that the proposed pesticide use would increase farmers’ net profits, or for public health projects,
        provide evidence that the proposed pesticide use is justified from the best available (probably
        WHO supported evidence) public health evidence.
  ii.   Indication of type and quantity of pesticides envisaged to be financed by the project (in volume
        and ETB value) and/or assessment of increase in pesticide use resulting from the project.
 iii.   Circumstances of pesticide use and the capability and competence of end-users to handle
        products within acceptable risk margins (e.g. user access to, and use of, protective gears and
        appropriate application equipment; user’s product knowledge and understanding of hazards and
        risks; appropriateness of on-farm storage facilities for pesticide).
 iv.    Assessment of environmental, occupational and public health risks associated with the transport,
        storage, handling and use of the proposed products under local circumstances, and the disposal
        of empty containers.
  v.    Pre-requisites and/or measures required to reduce specific risks associated with envisaged
        pesticide use under the project (e.g.: protective gear, training, upgrading of storage facilities,
        etc.).
 vi.    Selection of pesticides authorized for use, taking into consideration: (a) criteria set at national (if
        there is any) or international, (b) the hazards and risks and (c) the availability of newer or less
        hazardous products and techniques (e.g. bio-pesticides, traps).

Monitoring and Supervision
   i.  Description of activities that require local monitoring during implementation.
  ii.  Description of activities that require monitoring during supervision visits (e.g. regarding
       effectiveness of measures to mitigate risks; progress in strengthening regulatory framework and
       institutional capacity; identification of new issues or risks arising during implementation).
 iii.  Monitoring and supervision plan, implementation responsibilities, required expertise and budget.



Screening/Exclusion criteria

Do not use pesticides restricted under applicable international conventions (align with Bank ESF/ESS3),
meaning any active ingredients listed for elimination/restriction under Stockholm, and any Annex III
chemicals/severely hazardous formulations under Rotterdam should be excluded, unless an applicable,
lawful, and fully PIC-compliant trade is permitted—and even then, the framework should default to
safer alternatives

Maintain IPM-first approaches and only use pesticides as a last resort within the Government’s IPM
guidelines for small-scale irrigation.


For each pesticide considered for use or procurement:

Check the registration status (Ethiopia/Ministry of Agriculture (MoE)):



                                                                                                          147


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
     Registerd-pesticides-
     as-of-JULY-2018-Ethiopia.docx



1.   Is the product registered by MoA/EAA for the intended crop/pest and use pattern? Yes/No

         a. Registration expiry date valid? Yes/No

         b. Label in Amharic and per MoA requirements available and followed? Yes/No

2. Hazard classification:

         a. WHO class: Ia/Ib/II/III/U (verify; exclude Ia/Ib in agriculture)

         b. Does it meet criteria for HHP (e.g., GHS Cat 1A/1B CMR, acute tox, etc.)? Yes/No

3. International conventions:
       a. Is the active on Stockholm POPs lists (Annex A/B)? If yes, exclude.

         b. Is the active/formulation on Rotterdam Annex III/SHPF list? If yes, exclude (or only
            proceed if legally PIC-compliant and an exception is justified; default: exclude) [8][11].

4. Ethiopian bans and organochlorines:
       a. Is the active among historically banned in Ethiopia (e.g., aldrin, dieldrin, DDT-
           agricultural, heptachlor, zinc phosphide) or other organochlorines? If yes, exclude.

5. Destination market compliance (if exporting):
      a. EU approval status/non-approval? MRL alignment? Yes/No

         b. US EPA registration/tolerances? Yes/No

6. Stewardship and use conditions: (continue only if Yes id marked)
      a. Is pesticide the last-resort option after IPM measures? Yes/No

         b. Proper PPE, application technique, weather restrictions, buffer zones in place? Yes/No

         c. Empty container and waste disposal plan consistent with national requirements? Yes/No

7. Decision:
      a. Approved for use / Not approved / Approved with conditions (document rationale)




                                                                                                    148


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Annex 9: Gap analysis between the World Bank ESF and the National
Legislations
The comparison between the World Bank’s ESF and the relevant national legislations (policies,
proclamations, guidelines and regulations) shows that there is significant coverage of most of the ESF
standard provisions in the national legislation., with some exceptions. Where there are gaps between the
two, the more rigorous measures apply.




                                                                                                   149


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
      Table 19 Gap analysis between World Bank ESS and national legislation


                           ESS                                            National Law or Policy                            Gap                           Measures

Objectives of ESS 1 are:                                   The Federal EIA Proclamation No. 299/2002 and        Apart from the presence of      The application and use of EHS
                                                           related regional EIA regulations mandatorily         effluent    standards     for   guidelines as appropriate to
To identify, evaluate and manage the                       requires a project proponent to undertake an EIA.    specified industrial sectors,   sub-projects is required by the
environmental and social risks and impacts of the          The Federal EIA procedural guideline (2003)          the EIA proclamation is not     present ESMF.
project in a manner consistent with the ESSs.              classifies projects into Schedule I, II and III to   complemented         by     a
                                                           facilitate the undertaking of EIA proportionate to   guideline similar to EHS and
To adopt a mitigation hierarchy approach to:               the risks and impacts of each project. The EIA       do not require its use.
(a) Anticipate and avoid risks and impacts                 proclamation and regulations seek all direct,
(b) Where avoidance is not possible, minimize or           indirect and cumulative impacts likely to occur
reduce risks and impacts to acceptable levels              during project life cycle are considered in the
(c) Once risks and impacts have been minimized or          assessment. The stated legislation and regulation
reduced, mitigated; and                                    also require stakeholder          and community
(d) Where significant residual impacts remain,             consultations to be carried as part of the EIA
compensate for or offset them, where technically           process. The preparation of an ESMP based on
and financially feasible                                   mitigation hierarchy and monitoring plan is also
                                                           required by the EIA proclamation and associated
To adopt differentiated measures so that adverse           guidelines.
impacts do not fall disproportionately on the
disadvantaged or vulnerable and they are not
disadvantaged in sharing development benefits and
opportunities resulting from the project.

To utilize national environmental and social
institutions, systems, laws, regulations and
procedures in the assessment, development and
implementation of projects, whenever appropriate.

To promote improved environmental and social
performance, in ways which recognize and enhance
borrower capacity.



                                                                                                                                                                     150


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
The Objectives of ESS 2 are:                          The former Labor Proclamation No.377/2003 is             All the rules of the labor law    The ESMF adopts the provisions
                                                      repealed and substituted by the new Proclamation         are        applicable        to   of both the labor law and ESS 2
To promote safety and health at work.                 1156/2019. The new legislation remains to be the         employment relations based        in its Labor Management
                                                      labor legislation applied invariably all over the        on      a      contract      of   Procedures. Where gaps exist,
To promote the fair treatment, non-discrimination     Country without customization to regional contexts.      employment that exists            ESS2 will apply.
and equal opportunity of project workers.             The labor law is applied to govern all aspects of        between a worker and an
                                                      employment relations based on a contract of              employer.
To protect project workers, including vulnerable      employment that exists between a worker and an
workers such as women, people with disabilities,      employer. The legislation covers the contract of         The labor law is not
children (of working age, in accordance with this     employment defining the rules and conditions of          applicable to community
ESS) migrant workers, contracted workers,             employment, nondiscrimination, equal opportunity         workers as it is not based on
community workers and primary supply workers, as      for women workers, the right to form trade unions        employment           relations
appropriate.                                          (workers organizations), working conditions of           between       worker       and
                                                      young labor setting the minimum age for child labor      employer.
To prevent the use of all forms of forced labor and   to be 15 and working conditions, and
child labor.                                          arbitration/conciliation mechanism to handle             As most workers of sub-
                                                      grievances and disputes of workers in relation to        projects are likely to be
To support the principles of freedom of association   employment.                                              contracted through formal
and collective bargaining of project workers in a                                                              employment process, there
manner consistent with national law.                  The labor law also covers occupational safety,           are major gaps between
                                                      health and work environment aspects.                     ESS2 and the labor law
To provide project workers with accessible means to
raise workplace concerns.                             The labor law largely fulfills the requirements of ESS
                                                      2.

                                                      Proclamation No. 568/2008 Rights to employment
                                                      for Persons with Disabilities makes null and void any
                                                      law, practice, custom, attitude and other
                                                      discriminatory situations that limit equal
                                                      opportunities for persons with disabilities.
The Objectives of ESS 3 are:                          The requirements of ESS3 are largely fulfilled by the    Detailed   guidelines   to        The application of relevant
                                                      following national legislations and International        support efficient use of          sections of the General EHS and
To promote the sustainable use of resources,          Conventions. These include:                              resources like water and          sector-specific EHS guideline
including energy, water and raw materials.                                                                     energy are not sufficiently       will apply when appropriate.
                                                      The Pollution Control Proclamation no. 300/2002          available.
To avoid or minimize adverse impacts on human         which sets the binding provisions for prevention and                                       The application of measures
health and the environment by avoiding or             control of pollution addresses management of                                               and actions developed to assess
minimizing pollution from project activities.         hazardous waste; chemicals and radioactive                                                 and     manage     sub-project

                                                                                                                                                                     151


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                                                          materials,     management     of    non-hazardous                                         specific risks and impacts are
To avoid or minimize project-related emissions of         municipal waste, and sets the provisions for issuing                                      outlined in the ESMF and
short and long-lived climate pollutants.                  environmental standards including for air, water                                          subsequent sub-project ESMPs.
                                                          and various effluents. The proclamation is
To avoid or minimize generation of hazardous and          complemented by effluent standards for certain
non-hazardous waste.                                      industrial sectors.


The Objectives of ESS4 are:                               EIA legislation enshrines public ‘s right to review and   ESS4                 requires   Measures       and     actions
                                                          comment on environmental studies.                         comprehensive ESIAs before      developed to assess and
To anticipate and avoid adverse impacts on the                                                                      initiating dam construction,    manage      subproject-specific
health and safety of project-affected communities                                                                   with meaningful public          community health and safety
during the project life-cycle from both routine and                                                                 consultation             and    risks   and     dam      safety
non-routine circumstances.                                                                                          stakeholder     participation   requirements as outlined in the
                                                                                                                    throughout the project life     ESMF      and      subsequent
To avoid or minimize community exposure to                                                                          cycle.       In     practice,   subproject ESIAs/ESMPs
project-related traffic and road safety risks, diseases                                                             consultations in Ethiopia are
and hazardous materials.                                                                                            often limited.                  The SEP lays out consultation
                                                                                                                                                    strategies for the Project.
To have in place effective measures to address                                                                      ESS4      requires     public
emergency events.                                                                                                   disclosure of ESIAs, safety
                                                                                                                    documentation            and
To ensure that the safeguarding of personnel and                                                                    monitoring. In practice, this
property is carried out in a manner that avoids or                                                                  is not always taking place.
minimizes     risks   to     the  project-affected
communities.                                                                                                        ESS4 requires regulatory
                                                                                                                    bodies to have authority and
                                                                                                                    oversight to enforce dam
                                                                                                                    safety.           However,
                                                                                                                    institutional powers may be
                                                                                                                    weak        in     enforcing
                                                                                                                    regulations.
The Objectives of ESS5 are:                               The Proclamation No. 1161/2019 and 1336/2024:             Entitlements in the law are     The Project will follow ESS5.
                                                          Expropriation of Land for Public Purposes, Payments       centered             around
To avoid involuntary resettlement.                        of Compensation and Resettlement of Displaced             landholders with recognized
                                                          People: gives priority rights to develop land for the     rights, while under ESS5
To avoid forced eviction                                  landholders when the capacity of the landholders to       informal tenants and users
                                                          develop the land as per the approved land use plan;       also have rights.

                                                                                                                                                                         152


                                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
To mitigate unavoidable adv1erse social and          urban structural plan; or development master plan
economic impacts                                     is presented.                                          Detailed     methods  for
                                                                                                            replacement costs    are
To improve living conditions of poor or vulnerable   Compensation and resettlement Assistance for the       missing in the law, while
persons                                              expropriated land shall sustainably restore and        stipulated in ESS5.
                                                     improve the livelihood of displaced people. Article
To conceive and execute resettlement activities as   13(3a) also states compensation for communal           Provision of livelihood
sustainable development programs                     landholding shall be based on the use of the           restoration and assistance
                                                     communal land or the lost benefits and livelihood of   to achieve WB ESS5
To ensure that resettlement activities are planned   the displaced People. Furthermore, Article 25 (5)      objectives      to   assist
and implemented                                      mentions support for and ensuring the                  displaced persons in their
                                                     improvement of the livelihood of displaced farmers     efforts to improve, or at
                                                     and pastoralists.                                      least      restore,   their
                                                                                                            livelihoods     and  living
                                                     The proclamation does not provide guidance on          standards.
                                                     voluntary land donations.
                                                                                                            WB ESS 5 sets conditions in
                                                                                                            which affected people
                                                                                                            choose to voluntarily donate
                                                                                                            land or assets as indicated in
                                                                                                            footnote 10 of ESS 5: in such
                                                                                                            a way that the borrower will
                                                                                                            maintain a transparent
                                                                                                            record of all consultations
                                                                                                            and agreements reached

The Objectives of ESS6 are:                          The Federal EIA Proclamation no.299/2002               There is a lack of a legal       This Project will rely on ESS6.
To protect and conserve biodiversity and habitats.   mandates environmental screening, scoping, and         mandate for biodiversity
                                                     preparation of EIA/EIS before project approval.        hierarchy,     offsets    and
To apply the mitigation hierarchy and the                                                                   critical habitat safeguards
precautionary approach in the design and
implementation of projects that could have an
impact on biodiversity.

To promote the sustainable management of living
natural resources.



                                                                                                                                                                   153


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
To support livelihoods of local communities,
including Indigenous Peoples, and inclusive
economic development, through the adoption of
practices that integrate conservation needs and
development priorities.
The Objectives of ESS7 are:                           There are gaps in the          The     ESMF      lays    out
                                                      definition of Indigenous       requirements for HUTLC Plan in
To ensure that the development process fosters full   Peoples     between     the    each sub-project site where
respect for the human rights, dignity, aspirations,   national system and ESS7       SSAHUTLCs are present.
identity, culture, and natural resource-based
livelihoods of Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan         General       administrative
African Historically Underserved Traditional Local    processes may require some
Communities (IP/SSAHUTLC).                            consultation,    but      no
                                                      systematic requirement for
To avoid adverse impacts of projects on               meaningful,       informed
IP/SSAHUTLC, or when avoidance is not possible, to    participation of affected
minimize, mitigate and/or compensate for such         communities.
impacts.

To promote sustainable development benefits and
opportunities for IP/SSAHUTLC in a manner that is
accessible, culturally appropriate and inclusive.

To improve project design and promote local
support by establishing and maintaining an ongoing
relationship based on meaningful consultation with
the IP/SSAHUTLC affected by a project throughout
the project’s life-cycle.

To obtain the Free, Prior, and Informed Consent
(FPIC) of affected IP/SSAHUTLC in the three
circumstances described in this ESS.

To recognize, respect and preserve the culture,
knowledge and practices of IP/SSAHUTLC, and to
provide them with an opportunity to adapt to
changing conditions in a manner and in a timeframe
acceptable to them.

                                                                                                        154


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
The Objectives of ESS8 are:                              Article 41 of Proclamation No. 209/2000 on              Though natural and cultural      The ESMF includes Chance Find
                                                         research and conservation of cultural heritage also     heritage is required to be       Procedures
To protect tangible and intangible cultural heritage     contains the measures that should be taken during       included during the EIA
from the adverse impacts of project activities and       chance finding of heritages.                            process, the preparation of
support its preservation.                                                                                        a      Cultural      Heritage
                                                                                                                 Management Plan (CHMP)
To address cultural heritage as an integral aspect of                                                            as indicated in the ESF is not
sustainable development.                                                                                         required by the national EIA
                                                                                                                 law.
To promote meaningful consultation               with
stakeholders regarding cultural heritage.

To promote the equitable sharing of benefits from
the use of cultural heritage.
The Objectives of ESS10 are:                             Article 15 of the EIA Proclamation requires public      The stakeholder and public       The application of ESS10
                                                         participation / consultation during EIA study process   consultations requirement        requirement for a SEP is
To establish a systematic approach to stakeholder        and public disclosure of EIA reports.                   are focused on initial EIA       advisable     to     continue
engagement that will help borrowers to identify                                                                  study phase and do not           engagement of stakeholders
stakeholders and build and maintain a constructive       Current practice also shows public consultations are    continue      through     the    during project implementation
relationship with them, project-affected parties.        carried during EIA studies and minutes of               project lifecycle as required    and beyond when appropriate.
                                                         consultation produced. Incorporation of the views       by ESS10. Thus, preparation
To assess the level of stakeholder interest and          and concerns of stakeholders into the EIA report        of the SEP is not required by
support for the project and to enable stakeholders’      usually carried out.                                    the EIA proclamation.
views to be considered in project design and
environmental and social performance.                                                                            Establishing GRM to address
                                                                                                                 public concerns is also not
To promote and provide means for effective and                                                                   required by the EIA
inclusive engagement with project-affected parties                                                               proclamation.
throughout the project life cycle on issues that could
potentially affect them.

To ensure that appropriate project information on
environmental and social risks and impacts is
disclosed to stakeholders in a timely,
understandable, accessible and appropriate manner
and format.



                                                                                                                                                                     155


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
To provide project-affected parties with accessible
and inclusive means to raise issues and grievances
and allow borrowers to respond to and manage
such grievances.




                                                      156


                                                      Official Use Only
Annex 10: Entitlement Matrix for Involuntary Resettlement

The below Table indicates the different impacts from involuntary resettlement processes and their
respective compensation entitlements.

Table 20 Entitlement Matrix for involuntary resettlement

   Land     &      Types of Impact        Person(s)Affec       Compensation/Entitlement/Benefits
   Assets                                 ted
   Agricultur      Partial loss of        Farmer/ title         Cash compensation for the harvest or product from the
   al land         farmland, less         holder                affected land or asset, equivalent to fifteen times (fifteen
                   than 20% of                                  years) the highest annual income generated during the last
                   landholding                                  three years preceding the expropriation of the land.
                   affected    and                              Depreciation and salvage value does not be deducted, PAPs
                   land     remains                             are allowed to salvage materials and all cash compensation is
                   economically                                 based on prevailing/current market rates (any applicable
                   viable 0.5 ha                                transaction cost shall be covered).
                   threshold              Tenant/ lease         Cash compensation for the harvest or product from the
                                          holder- 1 and         affected land or asset, equivalent to fifteen times (fifteen
                                          above    years        years) the highest annual income s/he generated during the
                                          duration    of        last three years preceding the expropriation of the land.
                                          lease                 Depreciation and salvage value does not be deducted, PAPs
                                                                are allowed to salvage materials and all cash compensation is
                                                                based on prevailing/current market rates.
                   Loss          of       Farmer/     Title   Cash compensation for the harvest or product from the
                   farmland,              holder              affected land or asset, equivalent to fifteen times the highest
                   greater     than                           annual income generated during the last three years preceding
                   20%           of                           the expropriation of the land where equivalent substitute land
                   landholding lost                           is not available. Depreciation and salvage value will not be
                                                              deducted, PAPs will be allowed to salvage materials and all
                                                              cash compensation will be at prevailing/current market rates.

                                                              Replacement land of same value of land lost and at location
                                                              acceptable to PAPs where feasible. Land for land replacement
                                                              will be in terms of a new parcel of land of equivalent size and
                                                              productivity with a secure tenure status at areas/ location
                                                              acceptable to PAPs. Transfer of the land to PAPs shall be free
                                                              of taxes, registration, and other costs. Where equivalent
                                                              substitute land is given, the landholder shall be paid a one-year
                                                              compensation equivalent to the highest income s/he annually
                                                              used to generate in the last three years preceding the
                                                              expropriation of the land. Transfer of the land to the PAP shall
                                                              be free of taxes, registration, and other costs.

                                                              Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + assistance in
                                                              reestablishing economic trees + allowance up to a maximum of
                                                              12 months while short- term crops mature)
                                          Tenant/Lease        Cash compensation equivalent to fifteen times the highest
                                          holder              annual income generated during the last three years preceding
                                                              the expropriation of the land (with 1 and above years of
                                                              lessee).
                                                              Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + assistance in
                                                              reestablishing economic trees + allowance up to a maximum of
                                                     12 months while short- term crops mature)
  Grazing     PAPs land used       Title               Cash compensation for protected grasses on affected land for
  land        for grazing          holder/farmer       fifteen years. The amount of compensation for protected
              partially                                grass shall be determined based on the productivity of the
              affected;                                land and the current market price of the grass per square
              remaining area                           meter as outlined in the Council of Ministers Regulation No.
              sufficient  for                          472/2020
              continued use-       Lease holder        Cash compensation for protected grasses on affected land.
              20% and 0.5ha                            The amount of compensation for protected grass shall be
              threshold                                determined on the basis of the productivity of the land and
                                                       the current market price of the grass per square meter
              PAPs land used       Title             Cash compensation for protected grass on affected land for
              for       grazing    holder/farmer     fifteen years. The amount of compensation for protected grass
              severely                               shall be determined on the basis of the productivity of the land
              affected;                              and the current market price of the grass per square meter.
              remaining area
              insufficient for                       Replacement land of same value of land lost and at location
              use                                    acceptable to PAPs where feasible. Land for land replacement
                                                     will be provided in terms of a new parcel of land of equivalent
                                                     size and market potential with a secured tenure status at an
                                                     available location that is acceptable to the PAP. Transfer of the
                                                     land to the PAP shall be free of taxes, registration, and other
                                                     costs.

                                                     Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + assistance in
                                                     reestablishing economic trees + allowance up to a maximum of
                                                     12 months while short- term crops mature)
                                  Lease holder       Cash compensation for protected grasses on affected land. The
                                                     amount of compensation for protected grass shall be
                                                     determined on the basis of the productivity of the land and the
                                                     current market price of the grass per square meter
  Commerci     Land used for       Title   holder/    Land for land replacement where feasible or cash
  al Land     business             business owner     compensation for affected land, taking into account
              partially                               replacement cost for the lost property and viable business.
              affected;
              remaining land                          Opportunity cost compensation equivalent to land plus 5% of
              viable      for                         net annual income based on tax records for previous year (or
              business                                tax records from comparable business, or estimates where
              purpose                                 such records do not exist).
                                   Business owner     Opportunity cost compensation equivalent to 10% of net
                                   is lease holder    annual income based on tax records for previous year (or tax
                                                      records from comparable business, or estimates where such
                                                      records do not exist)

                                                      Relocation assistance (costs of shifting)

                                                      Assistance in rental/ lease of alternative land/ property to
                                                      reestablish the business
              Assets used for      Title             Land for land replacement or compensation in cash according
              business             holder/busines    to PAPs choice; cash compensation to take into account
              severely             s owner           replacement values. Land for land replacement will be
              affected;                              provided in terms of a new parcel of land of equivalent size and
              remaining assets                       market potential with a secured tenure status at an available

                                                                                                          Page 1
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
               become                                 location, which is acceptable to the PAP. Transfer of the land
               insufficient   for                     to the PAP shall be free of taxes, registration, and other costs.
               business
               purposes                               Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + allowance)

                                                      Opportunity cost compensation equivalent to 6 months net
                                                      income based on tax records for previous year (or tax records
                                                      from comparable business, or estimates)
                                    Businessperson    Opportunity cost compensation equivalent to 2 months net
                                    is lease holder   income based on tax records for previous year (or tax records
                                                      from comparable business, or estimates), or the relocation
                                                      allowance, whichever is higher.

                                                      Relocation assistance (costs of shifting)
  Residentia   Land used for        Title holder       Cash compensation at full replacement cost for affected
  l Land       residence                               assets situated on land without factoring depression
               partially            Rental/lease       Cash compensation equivalent to 10% or affected %of lease/
               affected;            holder             rental fee for the remaining period of rental/ lease agreement
               remaining land                          (written)
               viable       for
               present use
                Land used for       Title holder      Cash compensation at full replacement cost without factoring
               residence                              depreciation or replacement land of same value of land lost
               severely                               and at location acceptable to PAPs where feasible
               affected;
               remaining land                         Land for land replacement shall be of minimum plot of
               insufficient for                       acceptable size under the zoning law/ s or a plot of equivalent
               use                                    size, whichever is larger, in either the community or a nearby
                                                      resettlement area (i.e., which is acceptable by the PAPs)with
                                                      adequate physical and social infrastructure systems as well as
                                                      secured tenure status.

                                                      When the affected holding is larger than the relocation plot,
                                                      cash compensation to cover the difference in value will be
                                                      provided Transfer of the land by government to the PAP shall
                                                      be free of taxes, registration, and other costs.

                                                      Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + assistance in
                                                      reestablishing economic trees + allowance up to a maximum of
                                                      12 months while short- term crops mature)
                                    lease holder      Refund of any lease/ rental fees paid for time/ use after date
                                                      of removal

                                                      A residential house shall be given for two years free of charge
                                                      until he constructs his residential housing or displacement
                                                      compensation equal to two-year housing rentals estimated on
                                                      the basis of the rental market comparable to the house of the
                                                      displaced.

                                                      Cash compensation equivalent to 3 months of lease/ rental fee

                                                      Assistance in rental/ lease of alternative land/ property
                                                      equivalent to the expropriated land in standard and size

                                                                                                           Page 2
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
                                                    Compensation for the breakup of their social ties and moral
                                                    damage they suffer as result of the expropriation.

                                                    Relocation assistance,( Where the property on the land can be
                                                    relocated and continue its service as before, the cost of
                                                    removing, transporting, and erecting the property shall be paid
                                                    as compensation.

                                                    Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + assistance in
                                                    reestablishing economic trees + allowance up to a maximum of
                                                    12 months while short- term crops mature)
  Buildings    Structures are      Owner             Cash compensation for affected building and other fixed
  and          partially                             assets, taking into account Replacement costs of structures
  structures   affected;                             and materials. In addition, Cash assistance to cover costs of
               remaining                             restoration of the remaining structure
               structures viable   lease holder      Cash compensation for affected assets, taking into account
               for    continued                      replacement costs for assets and materials (verifiable
               use                                   improvements to the property by the tenant).
                                                     Disturbance compensation equivalent to two months rental
                                                     costs
               Structures          Owner             Cash compensation, taking into account replacement costs
               severely                              for structures and materials, for entire structure and other
               affected;                             fixed assets without consideration of the depreciation costs,
               remaining                             or alternative structure of equal or better size and quality in
               structures not                        an available location, which is acceptable to the PAP.
               suitable     for
               continued use                         Right to salvage materials without deduction from
                                                     compensation

                                                     Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + allowance)

                                                     Rehabilitation assistance if required (assistance with job
                                                     placement, skills training)
                                   lease holder      Cash compensation for affected assets, taking into account at
                                                     replacement cost for materials (verifiable improvements to
                                                     the property by the tenant)

                                                     Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + allowance
                                                     equivalent to four months rental costs)

                                                     Assistance to help find alternative rental arrangements

                                                     Rehabilitation assistance if required (assistance with job
                                                     placement, skills training)
                                   Squatter/infor    Cash compensation for affected structures without
                                   mal dweller       consideration of depreciation costs, taking into account
                                                     replacement cost of the lost structure.

                                                     Right to salvage materials without deduction from
                                                     compensation

                                                     Relocation assistance (costs of shifting + assistance to find

                                                                                                        Page 3
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
                                                       alternative secure accommodation preferably in the
                                                       community of residence through involvement of the
                                                       program)

                                                       Assistance in lieu of land compensation sufficient to provide
                                                       such persons with an opportunity to reestablish their
                                                       livelihood elsewhere.

                                                       Rehabilitation assistance if required assistance with job
                                                       placement, skills training.
                                   Street vendor       Opportunity cost compensation equivalent to 2 months net
                                   (informal           income based on tax records for previous year (or tax records
                                   without title or    from comparable business, or estimates), or the relocation
                                   lease to the        allowance, whichever is higher.
                                   stall or shop)
                                                       Relocation assistance (costs of shifting)

                                                        Assistance to obtain alternative site to re- establish the
                                                        business.
  Standing      Crops affected     PAP     (owner,    If the crop is not harvested, the compensation payable will be
  crops         by          land   tenant,     or     based on the amount of produce available and/or the amount
                acquisition   or   squatter)          of produce that the produce could produce if the crop had
                temporary                             arrived. The cost of the property owner’s deduction will be
                acquisition                           deducted until the crop or vegetable is harvested.

                                                       Revenue from crop surplus will be determined based on
                                                       current market prices of the leftover produce.

                                                       If one crop is produced more than once in a year, the amount
                                                       of the crop per year will be the sum of the produce produced
                                                       during the year.

                                                       Crop Revenue = (area of the land per hectare x current market
                                                       price of crop per Quintal x yield from 1hectare per Quintal)

                                                       Revenue from surplus crop product = (area of the land per
                                                       hectare x yield from 1hectare per Quintal x current market
                                                       price surplus of crop pro
  Trees         Trees lost         Title               Cash compensation at full replacement cost based on type,
                                   holder/farmer/      age and productive value of affected trees
                                   rental
  Temporary     Temporary          PAP (whether        Cash compensation for any affected assets for that temporal
  land          acquisition        owner, renters,     time period plus compensation for loss of income during the
  acquisition                      or                  period and it is also similar for renters
                                   squatter)
  Communal      Lost benefit and   Member of the       Cash compensation based on the use of the communal land;
  land          livelihood from    community           or the lost benefits and livelihoods of displaced people as
                use           of   using               well as its benefit to the community
                communal land      communal land
                                                       Members of the community using the communal land should
                                                       be identified and shall be compensated the lost benefit and
                                                       livelihoods which were originally obtained from the
                                                       communal land

                                                                                                        Page 4
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
                                                         Private and communal property on the expropriated
                                                         communal land shall be identified and included on the
                                                         compensation package whenever appropriate

  Impacts on     Fence                Owners            Fence compensation is calculated by calculating the price of
  Fence                                                 the existing square meter or cubic meter required to build a
                                                        new fence that is equivalent to the fenced fence.

                                                        If the construction material of the fence cannot be estimated
                                                        per square meter or cubic meter, it can be calculated at a single
                                                        price.

                                                        Based on number 1, it is possible that the reimbursement shall
                                                        be made as the property to be relocated shall be payable.
                                                        If there are walls and fences with better technology, if the
                                                        owner wants to take them, the compensation will be
                                                        reimbursed based on the compensation calculation of the
                                                        property.

                                                        Fence Compensation = amount of fence in square/cubic meter
                                                        x single price of fence per square/cubic meter
  Livelihood     Loss           of    Screened           Livelihood restoration measures will be planned and provided
                 livelihood     or    Households for     supplementary to the compensation paid for lost assets. To
                 source         of    LR support         restore or improve their income level and livelihood; and
                 income                                  ensure an improved standard of living or foster development
                                                         benefits.

                                                         Depending on the severity of impact on the livelihoods of the
                                                         affected households, livelihood restoration interventions will
                                                         be designed to ensure that affected persons are not worse off
                                                         in the end, and if possible have improved livelihoods and
                                                         standards of living. Measures will be designed in close
                                                         consultation with PAPs and stakeholders at different levels
                                                         (Woreda to Federal). The RP document will provide further
                                                         details on the planned livelihood restoration measures once
                                                         the impacts on household’s livelihoods are assessed and
                                                         appropriate support measures identified. The LRP will be fully
                                                         integrated in and implemented as part of the RP.

                                                         The alleviation of economic displacement will be considered
                                                         complete when affected persons or communities have
                                                         received compensation and other assistance as per the
                                                         requirements of the ESS5, and are believed to have been
                                                         provided with adequate opportunity to reestablish their
                                                         livelihoods. Thus, for better management and positive
                                                         comprehensive outcome; LRP will be integrated with RP
                                                         during its preparation and implementation when needed
  Impact on     Discrimination        Vulnerable         Special measures for effective participation, compensation,
  Pastoralist   and       disaster    pastoral    and    assistance and livelihood restoration will be defined in the
                vulnerability, etc.   agro-pastoral      RAP. This is to ensure food security during this transitional
                                      individuals and    period. Additional assistance will also be offered to
                                      groups             particularly vulnerable individuals and households during and

                                                                                                             Page 5
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
                                              after relocation.

                                              Additional support (in addition to the entitled compensation
                                              and relocation allowance) to support during relocation and
                                              restoration of livelihood). Such support could be in terms of
                                              labor during the reconstruction of affected houses, or in
                                              terms of money to cover expenses associated to failure of
                                              using his/her labor to rehabilitate or adjust at the relocated
                                              area. Furthermore, they should be linked to assistance
                                              programs and networks.

                                              Assistance in the compensation payment procedure (e.g.
                                              specifically explain the process and procedures, make sure
                                              that documents are well understood);

                                              Assistance in the post payment period to secure the
                                              compensation money and reduce risks of misuse/robbery;

                                              Assistance in moving: providing vehicle, driver and assistance
                                              at the moving stage, assist the person in identifying his/her
                                              resettlement plot;

                                              Assistance in building: providing materials, workforce, or
                                              building houses;

                                              Assistance during the post-resettlement period, particularly if
                                              the solidarity networks that the vulnerable person was
                                              relying on have been affected: food support, health
                                              monitoring, etc; and

                                             Health care if required at critical periods, particularly the
                                             moving and transition periods




                                                                                                 Page 6
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
Annex 11: Voluntary Land Donation Procedures
Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) procedures applies when a household wishes to make a voluntary
donation of land for the purpose of subproject implementation. In the context of Ethiopia, where land is
owned by the Government, “land donation” is taken to mean “donation of land use”. In some
circumstances, it may be proposed that part or all of the land to be used by a sub-project is donated on a
voluntary basis without payment of full compensation. This may be acceptable providing the Project
demonstrates that:
    • The potential donor or donors including their family members have been appropriately informed
        and consulted about the project and the choices available to them;
    • Potential donors are aware that refusal is an option, and have confirmed in writing their
        willingness to proceed with the donation;
    • It should be verified that the donation does not result from any form of coercion or manipulation
        and is offered in good faith;
    • The amount of land being donated is minor and will not reduce the donor’s remaining land area
        below that required to maintain the donor’s livelihood;
    • The proportion of land that may be donated should not significantly affect the donor’s livelihood;
        voluntary land donation cannot exceed 10% of an individual’s total land holdings;
    • Voluntary land donation should not be resulted to household relocation or physical displacement,
        loss of structures or fixed assets on affected portion of land;
    • The donor is expected to benefit directly from the project;
    • Community or collective land donation can only occur with the agreement of individuals using or
        occupying the land i.e. verification of the voluntary nature of land donations must be obtained
        from each person donating the use of land; the Project will maintain a transparent record of all
        consultations and agreements reached;
    • If community services are to be provided under the project, land title must be vested in the
        community;
    • The land to be donated must be free of other claims or encumbrances; and
    • Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) must be available

As an indicative procedure to consider in voluntary donation of land, the following points provide
guidance on the process:
         • Verify the requirements of the donation and the formalization of the donation;
         • Carry out due diligence on the owners and users of land donated;
         • Ensure appropriate consultation and disclosure;
         • Establish informed consent of the person donating the land;
         • Sign written agreement; and
         • Establish grievance redress mechanism.




                                                                                                   Page 7
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
Annex 12: Sample TOR for ESIAs under Component 1 Activities




                 Terms of Reference
       ENVIRONMENTAL & SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
        (ESIA) FOR GIDABO LARGE SCALE IRRIGATION
                         SCHEME




                                         UNDER
              ETHIOPIA: CLIMATE RESILIENT IRRIGATION FOR
                    SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION (P506818)



           Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLs)




                                                              Page 8
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
                                                            Table of Contents

1.     BACKGROUND.............................................................................................................................3

1.1.     SECTOR CONTEXT .....................................................................................................................3

1.2.     CLIMATE RESILIENT IRRIGATION FOR SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTIVITY COMPONENT 1 ...................3

1.3.     PURPOSE OF THE TOR ...............................................................................................................2

2.     OBJECTIVES OF THE CONSULTANCY SERVICE ................................................................................5

3.     SCOPE OF WORK AND EXPECTED OUTPUT ...................................................................................3

3.1.     GENERAL ..................................................................................................................................3

3.2.     INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................6

3.3.     LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK .................................................................................4

3.4.     SUBPROJECT DESCRIPTION .......................................................................................................7

3.5.     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE CONDITIONS ..............................................................8

3.6.     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS & IMPACTS ......................................................................6

3.7.     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MITIGATION MEASURES .......................................................... 11

3.8.     ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLANS .................................8

3.9.     CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING ............................................................................... 12

3.10.      ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ...................................................................................................9

3.11. STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION, CONSULTATIONS, INFORMATION DISCLOSURE AND
GRIEVANCE REDNESS MECHANISM .....................................................................................................9

3.12.      RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................................................................................... 10

3.13.      APPROVAL............................................................................................................................ 10

4.     APPROACHES AND METHODOLOGIES ........................................................................................ 10

                                                                                                                                           Page i
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
4.1.     DESK REVIEW: ........................................................................................................................ 10

4.2.     SITE VISIT: .............................................................................................................................. 13

5.     IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT ........................................................................................... 11

6.     SCHEDULE AND WORK PLAN...................................................................................................... 12

7.     DELIVERABLES ........................................................................................................................... 13

7.1.     REPORTS ................................................................................................................................ 13

8.     REPORTS ................................................................................................................................... 13

8.1.     SUBMITTAL PROTOCOL ........................................................................................................... 13

8.2.     REPORT OUTLINE.................................................................................................................... 14

8.3.     REPORTING FORMAT .............................................................................................................. 14

8.4.     CLIENT REVIEW OF REPORTS ................................................................................................... 14

8.5.     FINALIZATION OF THE REPORTS .............................................................................................. 15

9.     QUALIFICATION OF CONSULTANT .............................................................................................. 15

9.1.     CONSULTANT’S ORGANIZATION AND EXPERIENCE ................................................................... 15

9.2.     QUALIFICATION OF KEY-STAFF ................................................................................................ 15

10.     CONSULTANT’S PROPOSAL ...................................................................................................... 16

ANNEX-A: INDICATIVE OUTLINE FOR ESIA REPORT ............................................................................ 20




                                                                                                                                            Page ii
ESIA Terms of Reference for the GIDABO (CRISP) Project
  1. BACKGROUND

1.1.      Sector Context

          While the agricultural sector in Ethiopia is the backbone of the country’s economy and jobs, the
          productivity is low due to heavy reliance on rain-fed agriculture. The agricultural sector accounts
          for 33 percent of GDP, 73 percent of employment, and 77 percent of exports.32 Despite its
          significant role, agricultural productivity remains very low, primarily due to the heavy reliance on
          traditional rain-fed farming. Erratic and increasingly unpredictable rainfall leads to inconsistent and
          often insufficient crop yields. The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) has set ambitious goals to reduce
          reliance on rain-fed agriculture by developing irrigation capacity. The Ten-Year Development Plan
          of Ethiopia (2020-2030)33 aims to expand irrigation, promote private sector participation, increase
          crop production fivefold through irrigation, and create over 1 million job opportunities in irrigation
          sector.

          Rehabilitation and modernization of existing irrigation schemes offer opportunities to boost
          irrigation capacity in Ethiopia. Most existing irrigation schemes in Ethiopia exhibit low performance,
          due to poor design and construction, a lack of quality assurance system, limited institutional and
          community capacity, inadequate funding, and insufficient operation and maintenance (O&M). The
          existing schemes have deteriorated significantly, failing to fulfill irrigation demands. The
          performance of existing schemes is generally below 50 percent in terms of irrigated areas, crop
          intensity and yields. Rehabilitating and modernizing the existing schemes can boost irrigation
          capacity within a relatively short period at a lower cost, improve resilience to droughts and floods,
          and enhance food security.

          A new ministry, the Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLs), was established in 2021 to lead
          irrigation development in Ethiopia. Previously, the Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Energy
          (MoWIE) oversaw irrigation development, while the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) managed small-
          scale irrigation development. MILLs is mandated to develop and implement irrigation policies,
          strategies, and laws; design and implement irrigation projects; and promote private sector
          participation. MILLs is responsible for constructing, operating and managing federal-level large- and
          medium-scale irrigation schemes, as well as providing technical support and capacity building to
          the regions for regional-level medium- and small-scale irrigation project.

1.2.      Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Productivity Component 1

          The proposed World Bank-financed Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRIPS)
          Project will support the preparation and implementation of the NIP (National Irrigation Program),
          transitioning the sector from the project-based approach to a more comprehensive, program-based
          model. It is expected that the NIP will be developed and launched within the first years of CRISP
          implementation, and then further implemented and operationalized during the remaining
          implementation period, ensuring that the NIP will serve as a practical, implementable program,
          rather than a high-level strategy.



   32
        Ministry of Agriculture, Ethiopia’s National Agricultural Investment Plan (2021-2030) (link)
   33
        Ten-Year Development Plan of Ethiopia (2020-2030) (link)
       The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Project is to improve access to resilient irrigation
       services for sustainable production in Ethiopia.

       The CRISP consists of five components:

       Component 1: Irrigation Rehabilitation and Modernization
       Component 2: Small-Scale Irrigation Development
       Component 3: Dam Safety and irrigation Storage Improvement
       Component 4: Irrigation Service Improvement
       Component 5: Project Mangement and Capacity Building

       This TOR is in reference to activities planned under Component 1.

       Component 1: Irrigation Rehabilitation and Modernization. Component 1 will support the
       rehabilitation and modernization of existing federal-level large- and medium-scale irrigation
       schemes. Comprehensive screening and prioritization criteria were co-developed.

       Gidabo Large Scale Irrigation Scheme is one of those that have been prioritized. This scheme has
       recent feasibility studies and detailed designs, which will be advanced. In addition, Component 1
       will support the development of the Investment Plan by financing the necessary studies and designs
       for pipeline projects.

       Component 1 will be primarily led and implemented by MILLS. Key activities include:

  •    Irrigation Rehabilitation and Extension: CRISP will support the rehabilitation of key irrigation
       infrastructure. In this scheme, a Dam and main canals have already been completed; the absence
       of secondary and tertiary canals continues to hinder water delivery to the fields. To address this,
       CRISP will also finance critical extension works to complete the distribution network. All
       interventions will include improvements of on-farm systems to ensure that irrigation water
       effectively reaches the farm level and contributes to agricultural productivity.

  •    Irrigation Modernization: CRISP will support the modernization of existing schemes to enhance
       water use efficiency, irrigation energy optimization, and agricultural productivity. Modernization
       efforts will be tailored to the local context, with careful consideration of cost-effectiveness,
       community capacity for O&M, and long-term sustainability.

  •    Investment Plan Preparation: Preparing pipeline projects for rolling out the rehabilitation and
       modernization investments in the Investment Plan, including preparing feasibility studies, detailed
       designs (FS/DD), site-specific E&S instruments, and bidding documents.

       Design already available will be shared with the consultant.


1.3.   Purpose of the TOR

   The Project seeks to contract a consulting firm for the Component 1 Investment Plan Preparation, in
   particular the preparation of site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for the
Gidabo Large Scale Irrigation Project that has been identified for project interventions: Gidabo
irrigation site.

The main purpose of this TOR is to provide an overview of the methodology to be used as well as key
activities expected in the preparation of the ESIA. This TOR was developed to be used as a general
guideline for the following major activities.

   Conduct Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), which is intended to address all
   environmental and social issues that are likely to arise during the planning and design,
   construction/rehabilitation, operation, and decommissioning phases while taking into account
   national laws and regulations as well as the World Bank Environment and Social Standards (ESS)
   and Guidelines. A gap analysis between Ethiopian laws and the applicable World Bank ESS is
   expected in order to identify legal gaps and close them.

   The consultant is in charge of preparing the ESIA report addressing the comments/feedback
   provided by the Ministry and the World Bank and prepare the relevant documents for approval by
   the World Bank (WB) and the Ethiopia Environmental Protection Authority (EPA).



2. OBJECTIVES OF THE CONSULTANCY SERVICE


   The consultant is required to prepare an ESIA for Gidabo irrigation systems rehabilitation
   Subproject. The main objectives of the consultancy are to:
       1)       Conduct participatory consultation and engagements with different level of
                stakeholders for the impact assessment and the identification of E&S mitigation
                measures.
       2)       Identify baseline data on the physical and biological environment, as well as the social,
                gender equality issues, cultural heritage aspects, demographic, and economic
                characteristics of the population in and around the selected sites.
       3)       Assess all environmental and social issues that are likely to arise during the planning,
                construction/rehabilitation, operation, and decommissioning phases of the irrigation
                systems while taking into account national laws and regulations as well as the World
                relevant World Bank ESS.
       4)       Identify potential environmental and socio-economic receptors and impacts
                associated with the planned sub-project activities and suggest mitigation and
                monitoring measures so adverse impacts do not outweigh the expected positive
                environmental benefits.
       5)       Discuss potential alternative designs or activities in order to avoid identified E&S risks
                and impacts.

3. SCOPE OF WORK AND EXPECTED OUTPUT

   The scope of the required consultancy service is to conduct an ESIA in order to make the project
   environmentally and socially acceptable.
3.1.   GENERAL
       In general, the Consultant will perform the following key tasks as part of the ESIA:

       1. Describe the Project including its main components, ancillary components/facilities, resources
          input, and outputs/produces.
       2. Establish baseline information on the environmental and relevant social aspects of the
          respective area of influence.
       3. List legal and institutional frameworks under which the Subprojects will be implemented and
          operated.

       4. Identify beneficial and adverse environmental and social risks and impacts of the Subprojects
          during planning, construction/rehabilitation, operation and decommissioning.
       5. Propose suitable, practical, and site-specific enhancement and mitigation measures to avoid,
          reduce, mitigate, and compensate/offset the identified risks and impacts with operational
          details.
       6. Conduct meaningful stakeholder consultations to capture the Subproject-affected people and
          parties’ aspirations, concerns, and recommendations towards the planned interventions.
       7. Carry out and analysis of alternatives and compare various Subproject planning and design
          options in terms of their environmental and social consequences.
       8. Develop environmental and social management and monitoring plans with institutional
          arrangement, human resources, and budget requirement.
       9. Develop specific environmental and social requirements and procedures to be included in
          contractor’s contract documents.
          Further, the details of the various activities and outputs of the ESIA are described in the below
          sections.

3.2.   INTRODUCTION

       At the onset of the ESIA, the following the description of the respective Project should be provided.

       ➢   The Project (the CRISP) background/context
       ➢   The specific Subproject background/context
       ➢   Rationale for the Subproject
       ➢   The objectives of the ESIA
       ➢   The scope of the ESIA
       ➢   Approach/methodology of the ESIA
       ➢   The structure of the ESIA report.

3.3.   LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

       A detailed review of relevant national, regional, international and World Bank regulatory
       frameworks shall be made to establish the setting against which the Project will be implemented.
       The review shall include (but not limited to):

   ➢   Applicable national policies and strategies for water and irrigation:
   ➢   Applicable national legislations (proclamation, regulations, directives, guidelines) for water and
       irrigation, environmental and social management
   ➢   Applicable relevant regional and international conventions and protocols (ratified by Ethiopia)
   ➢   Applicable regional agreements, cooperative frameworks, guidelines, etc. including on energy
       sector and associated environmental and social management
   ➢   The World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), the relevant Environmental and
       Social Standards (ESSs), specifically:
            ▪ ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
            ▪ ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
            ▪ ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
            ▪ ESS4 Community Health and Safety

            ▪   ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
            ▪   ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
            ▪   ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local
                Communities
            ▪   ESS8 Cultural Heritage
            ▪   ESS9 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
            ▪   Operational Policy 7.50 on Projects on International Waterways

   ➢   Applicable guidelines, such as the IFC Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines

       In addition, the national, regional, and local institutional frameworks under which the Subproject
       will be implemented shall be identified and assessed as part of the ESIA. Relevant institutions, their
       mandates, institutional structure, and capacities shall be identified. The key institutions including
       Regional and woreda land administration offices, city administrations, and independent asset
       valuators.
       Other relevant organizations and institutions shall be identified, and their structures, relationships,
       roles, responsibilities, and capacities shall be assessed and described.

3.4.   SUBPROJECT DESCRIPTION
       The Project shall be described comprehensively including the following, but not limited to:

   ➢   The CRIPS Project

       ▪    The Project development objective (PDO)
       ▪    The Project components and subcomponents
       ▪    The Project environmental and social risks ratings
       ▪    The Project beneficiaries
       ▪    The Project implementation arrangements

   ➢   The specific Subproject

        ▪    The location of the Subproject (geographic and administrative locations), with location map(s)
        ▪    Specific site location
        ▪    Accessibility of the site
        ▪    The Subproject design and its main components
        ▪    Construction materials used for construction of various components of the Subproject
             including sources of the construction materials (market or own source)
        ▪    Machineries to be used during construction and operation of the Subproject
        ▪    Energy consumption by the Subproject
        ▪    Waste generated from the Subproject
        ▪    Human resources requirements during implementation and operation phases
        ▪    Subproject implementation activities (during planning, construction/rehabilitation, and
             operation/maintenance stages)
        ▪    Respective land and resettlement requirements
        ▪    List of activities for the implementation of the Subproject
        ▪    Subproject implementation schedule.

       The Subproject description shall form a basis for the ESIA including to establish environmental and
       social baseline conditions, identifying and prioritizing key environmental and social issues, and
       recommending measures to avoid, reduce, mitigate, and offset the identified impacts.

3.5.   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE CONDITIONS

       Environmental and social baseline conditions against which the Subproject will be implemented
       shall be described in detail. The basic environmental and social baseline conditions of the
       Subproject area of influence shall include:

   ➢   The physical environment (climate, topography, geology/geomorphology, soils, water resources,
       irrigation modalities, land use, land cover, etc.)
   ➢   The biological environment (flora, fauna, key biodiversity areas, natural, critical, and modified
       habitats). This includes:
        a) Ecosystems Affected. The different types of habitats that could be affected by the project and
       the existing quality of the potentially affected habitats.
       (b) Species Affected. Species of global or national conservation interest; and of significant local
       interest for livelihoods, nutrition, or other reasons which may potentially be affected by the project.
       Species of global or national conservation interest include those classified as Critically Endangered,
       Endangered, Vulnerable, or Near Threatened under international Red List criteria.
       (c) Ecosystem Services Affected. Any important ecosystem services that are provided by the
       biodiversity and living natural resources that may be affected by the project, and their value to
       project-affected and other interested parties. Ecosystem services are the benefits that people
       derive from ecosystems.
       (d) Protection Status. Whether the ecosystems (land, water, and air), species, or ecosystem services
       affected by the project have protected status, such as any category of formal protected area, other
       protection under national or local laws or regulations such as restrictions on forest clearing or
       wetland conversion, or local parks; formal or informal protection by local communities or
       traditional authorities or have existing or proposed recognition as a Ramsar Wetland of
       International Importance, UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, World Heritage Natural Site, or other special
       international or national status.
       (e) Site Ownership and Control. Ownership, control, and/or use of the biodiversity and natural living
       resources where project risks and impacts may occur.

       (f) Baseline Threats. The description of the existing baseline including (i) habitat loss or degradation;
       (ii) trends with and without the project; and (iii) existing and likely future threats, including
       cumulative impacts (as defined in ESS1). Threats might include, for example, ongoing habitat loss
       or degradation (including from the decline of overexploited species) from long-standing or recently
       initiated human activities, existing development plans for the area, or expected climate change.
       The socio-economic environment (demography, ethnic composition, traditionally underserved
       communities, social structure, religion, cultural heritage sites, settlement patterns/land uses,
       livelihood strategies, household income and employment, food security, access to social services
       and utilities, community level irrigation arrangements, water committees etc.).

       The environmental and social baseline conditions shall be done through desk study and field
       surveys. Gaps and reliability of baseline data used for the description shall be identified and
       indicated in the assessment.

3.6.   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS & IMPACTS

       i. The ESIA shall identify and evaluate significance of potential environmental and social risks and
       impacts that will result from implementation of the Subprojects. The ESIA shall focus on
       environmental and social effects that are significant in their likelihood and consequences. Further,
       the assessment shall consider both, beneficial/positive and adverse/negative impacts. The nature
       of the impacts shall be described as direct/indirect/induced/cumulative, temporary/long-term,
       local/regional, and reversible/irreversible and the impact of the substation and transmission line
       shall indicate separately. The Projects’ adverse Risk/impacts and mitigation measures shall be
       identified including (but not limited to) the following:

       ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts: Institutional
       capacity, ESCP requirements, impact on vulnerable people.

       ESS2: Labor and Working condition: Physical hazards including; rotating and moving
       equipment/machinery, noise and vibration, electrical hazard, eye hazards due to flying debris,
       hazards from hot works, traffic accidents from the site traffic and offsite movements of Project
       vehicles/trucks, excavation hazards, ergonomics, repetitive motion, manual handling, working
       environment temperature and illumination, poor housekeeping, slip, trip, fall; chemical hazards
       including; poor air quality, fire and explosions, hazardous chemical; biological hazards including;
       exposure to wastewater, transmittable diseases/infections; potential use of child labor and/or
       forced labor, and special hazard environments such as confined space, lone and isolated workers;
       non-compliance with labor conditions; risks of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual
       Harassment (SH) among workers, etc.

       ESS3-Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management: Air emissions/fugitive dust
       and ambient air quality impacts; impact of loss of soil and land degradation; impact on water
       quality; noise and vibration impacts; impacts of waste generation and disposal; impact of hazardous
       waste; impact due to non-hazardous waste, visual impacts; depletion of groundwater; etc.

       ESS4-Community Health and Safety: Water quality and availability, structural safety of Sub-project
       interventions; fire risk, traffic risk, risk from hazardous materials/wastes during transport and
       disposal; transmittable disease and public health impact, vis-à-vis community members, SEA/SH
       risks, security risks, etc.

       ESS5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary Resettlement: forced evictions
       and access restrictions; land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; economic losses.
 ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources:
impact due to clearing of vegetation cover and disturbance of habitat; biodiversity loss; impacts on
critical Habitats and Protected Areas, etc. Potentially significant physical, biological, chemical, and
hydrological impacts to biodiversity and living natural resources resulting from the project. This
includes an estimate of the extent of the impacts, for example, the size of habitats expected to be
converted (lost) or modified (including degradation), and the proportion of the specific species
populations at risk. Temporary or seasonal impacts on biodiversity and living natural resources are
included as well.

ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local
Communities: Impacts on Indigenous Peoples, lack of voice of IPs, in particular in relation to
potential land and water resource impacts.

ESS8 Cultural Heritage: Impact on tangible and intangible cultural heritage.

ESS9 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure: Risk and impacts associated with
impacts on project-affected people, lack of access to consult vulnerable groups, lack of access to
functioning Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), etc..

ii. Risks related to development and operation of ancillary facilities (if any).
     ▪ The risks/impacts shall be segregated by Subproject phases, i.e., (i) pre-construction, (ii)
          construction, (iii) operation and maintenance, and (iv) decommissioning.
     ▪ In addition to the direct and/or indirect impacts, the cumulative impacts (aggregate,
          incremental, and synergistic impacts) of Subproject implementation in the Subproject area
          of influence shall be comprehensively identified. The cumulative Subproject impacts shall
          be distinguished between their national, regional, and local effects.
     ▪ The environmental and social impacts shall consider identified challenges during Subproject
          planning, design, and implementation.
     ▪ The identified environmental and social impacts shall be prioritized based on their risk
          significance, magnitude, spatial and temporal extent.

iii. Cumulative Impact assessment

    ✓ Describe the subproject site, its siting, construction schedule, operational features and
      other projects and activities that may give rise to cumulative effects.

    ✓ The consultant will use all the available information including consultation with relevant
      authorities, ground information. The cumulative impact assessment will need to sequence
      planned developments of the project, and ancillary and local infrastructure. The consultant
      will need to propose geographic and temporal boundaries based on the screening of
      potential impacts on key environmental components. The geographic context should
      include administrative, watershed and transboundary context or any other suitable
      context.

    ✓ The consultant is expected to identify key-related contributions to cumulative effects on
      selected resources of concern, such as biodiversity, livelihood of local communities, land
      use, fragmentation of habitats (add other from project context); Assess the level of
      cumulative effects; determine the significance of cumulative effects; provide
               recommendations: Analyze reasonable, feasible options for mitigating or avoiding
               contribution to any significant cumulative effects, at the project level and at the national
               level beyond the scope of the CRISP project.

3.7.   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MITIGATION MEASURES

       Potential environmental and social risks/impacts that will result from Subproject implementation
       and operation shall be provided with recommendations on impacts enhancement or mitigation
       measures. The recommended measures shall be based on the risk mitigation hierarchy of
       avoidance, reduction, mitigation, and compensation/offsetting. The proposed mitigation
       measures shall bring the adverse impacts to the levels required by national standards and
       guidelines, the World Bank ESF and EHS guidelines, and good international industrial practice (GIIP).
       The recommended mitigation measures shall also be commensurate with the level or significance
       of the adverse impacts. The mitigation measures should have operational details to enable their
       implementation. The mitigation measures shall be presented as environmental and social
       requirements or clauses to be included in contractors’ works contract.

3.8.   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLANS

       The ESIA should present environmental and social management plan (ESMP) outlining procedures
       and institutional responsibilities to manage the identified risks and impacts.
       The ESMP shall include:
   ➢   Potential environmental and social benefits and impacts resulting from Subproject implementation
       (identified in the earlier exercise)
   ➢   Type, extent, and significance of the benefits and impacts
   ➢   Recommended enhancement measures for the beneficial/positive impacts
   ➢   Recommended mitigation measures for the adverse impacts to enable the sustainable
       implementation and operation of the Subproject
   ➢   Location of the mitigation measures within the Subproject setup
   ➢   Frequency of mitigation or measures implementation timeframe
   ➢   Success indicators for the mitigation measures
   ➢   Institutional responsibility for implementation of the enhancement or mitigation measures
   ➢   Capacity building recommendations for the institutions
   ➢   Estimate of measures implementation budget.
       The monitoring plan for Subproject implementation and operation shall be recommended as part
       of the ESIA. Main components of the monitoring plan are:
   ➢   Potential environmental and social benefits and impacts resulting from Subproject implementation
       (identified in the earlier exercise)
   ➢   Recommended enhancement and mitigation measures
   ➢   Key Subproject parameters or aspects to monitor
   ➢   Specific and measurable indicators
   ➢   Monitoring location, if applicable
   ➢   Measurement methods and/or equipment
   ➢   Frequency of monitoring
   ➢   Responsible institutions/parties for monitoring
   ➢   Monitoring budget.
3.9.    CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING

        For effective implementation of environmental and social risk management, the existing
        institutional capacity of the parties concerned shall be assessed and measures to strengthen their
        capacities (such as training) shall be recommended as well as a capacity development and training
        budget.

3.10.   ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

        Systematically compare feasible alternatives to the proposed project site, technology, design, and
        operation—including the “without project” situation—in terms of their potential environmental
        and social impacts.

   ➢    Assesses the alternatives’ feasibility of mitigating the environmental and social impacts; the capital
        and recurrent costs of alternative mitigation measures, and their suitability under local conditions;
        and the institutional, training, and monitoring requirements for the alternative mitigation
        measures.
   ➢    For each of the alternatives, quantifies the environmental and social impacts to the extent possible,
        and attaches economic values where feasible.
   ➢    The ESIA shall identify (along with the Subproject design team) various Subproject implementation
        alternatives including:
               ▪ The ‘no-action’ option which considers maintaining the current status quo in the
                    Subproject area of influence
               ▪ The ‘proposed Subproject’ option including all of its technologies, facilities, and activities
               ▪ ‘Other options’ to be identified as part of the ESIA which are deemed to achieve the
                    overall objectives of the Subproject while using different technology, methodology, and
                    facilities.
        A multi-criteria approach shall be used for analysis of the identified Subproject alternatives.

3.11.   STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION, CONSULTATIONS, INFORMATION DISCLOSURE AND GRIEVANCE REDNESS MECHANISM

        Stakeholder identification and analysis shall be done as part of the ESIAs with the objective of
        involving the stakeholders in the decision-making process. The main tasks include:

   ➢    Identify Subproject stakeholders including government bodies/authorities, beneficiary
        communities, Indigenous People, community leaders, civil society organizations (CSOs), non-
        governmental organizations (NGOs), women groups, youth groups, academia, vulnerable groups,
        etc.
   ➢    Disclose Subproject information to the stakeholders
   ➢    Consult on stakeholders’ understanding, views, aspirations, and recommendations on the
        Subproject and on E&S risks and impacts and potential mitigation measures.
   ➢    Recommend ways to integrate the findings of the stakeholder engagement into the Subproject
        plan, design, and implementation.

        Subproject stakeholders may have grievances during implementation and operation stages and
        thus stakeholders should be given a means to voice their grievances and obtain redress. The ESIA
        process will create awareness of the Project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that has been
          adopted as part of the overall Project. During consultations stakeholders can be consulted on the
          available GRM channels and potential improvements.

3.12.     RECOMMENDATIONS

          The ESIA shall provide recommendations based on the findings of the assessment. The
          recommendations shall, among other points, include:

   ➢      Promoting integration and collaboration on environmental and social management by the various
          stakeholders participating during the Subproject implementation and operation;
   ➢      Strengthening institutions responsible for implementation and management of environmental and
          social issues;
   ➢      Capacity building needs for institutions responsible for environmental and social management;
   ➢      Dissemination and disclosure of environmental and social information;
   ➢      Environmental and social requirements and management measures to be included in the works
          procurement and contract documents;
   ➢      Recommendations on other key environmental and social management issues.

3.13.     APPROVAL
          The Consultant must submit the final ESIA report for each Subproject, independently to be disclosed
          separately. Before the ESIA documents are approved by EPA and the Bank, the consultant is
          accountable for carrying out any changes that the client, authorities, may request, and they must
          keep working until there are no World Bank, PIU and EPA objections.

       4. APPROACHES AND METHODOLOGIES
          The approach and methodology for the ESIA follows the established pattern for infrastructure
          projects. The following section provides the highlight of the approach and methodology that should
          be adopted for the ESIA.

4.1.       DESK REVIEW:
          The consultant must hold a briefing meeting with client in the first days after signing the contract.
          Subsequently, the consultant shall prepare assessment tools, formats, checklists for primary data
          collections instruments at all levels (district, regional and federal level). Besides, the consultant will
          also systematically review all relevant secondary data (e.g.,
          The GoE financing agreement provisions, pertinent documents related to Environmental and social
          issues, Legal frameworks, project Appraisal Reports, guidelines, project E&S instruments
          (Stakeholder Engagement Plan, Environmental and Social Commitment Plan).

4.2.      SITE VISIT:
          In consideration of the nature and the location of the potential future conditions and
          consequences, the Study area will be identified. This will be the Project area in which
          implementation will definitely bring about measurable and sometimes significant direct changes to
          the physical environment and ecology, as well as the social and economic conditions. This will
          include downstream considerations.

       1) Collection of Available Information: to identify potential sources of the impact of the project on
          the environment and the consultants collected publications, laws and regulations, and census
      reports. Information on existing environmental conditions, necessary to provide the background
      for impact identification and assessment will obtain from the published sources and field visits.
 2)    Maps and Images: the consultant should use the topographic maps, Satellite images and area map
      used to identify and delineate villages, resources and facilities that could potentially be affected in
      the proposed scheme and to assess the land use, vegetation cover, infrastructure, settlements, and
      other socio-economic activities within the area of influence.
 3)   Field Investigation: the field investigation on physical resources, ecological resources, socio-
      economic aspects, health, cultural and other values in the project area will be collect.
 4)   Public Consultations: The consultant should conduct the consultations with various community
      members in the project-affected area.
 5)   Description of the Environment and Social Baseline: Information on the existing natural and socio-
      economic resources is of fundamental importance for evaluation of environmental impacts. So the
      consultant should collect the baseline data on the physical, biological and social, cultural and socio-
      economic setting of the project will be assemble, evaluate and present.
 6)   Identification of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts: Key beneficial as well as adverse
      impacts on the physical, biological including critical habitat and socio-economic environment
      associated with the construction/rehabilitation and operation phases of the project will be identify
      and quantify where possible.
 7)   Environmental and Social Mitigation and Benefit Enhancement Measures: Feasible and cost-
      effective mitigation and benefit enhancement measures that may avoid or reduce potentially
      significant adverse environmental impacts to acceptable levels shall be identified and
      recommended.

 5. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT

      The Consultant will work closely with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in MILLs and the
      Environmental, Health and Safety Department. The Consultant’s team leader will be the principal
      contact. The Consultant will be responsible for all aspects of performance of services set forth in
      the TOR.
      The PIU will be responsible for providing the information and supporting arrangement for the
      necessary field investigations and consultations. The PIU will provide the following facilities and
      documents:
      The Consultant shall hold periodic progress review meetings with the Client at least once in a
      month. Additional meetings shall be scheduled if necessary. The intent of these meetings will be
      for the Client to provide input and to discuss options for addressing the Client's comments. The
      Consultant shall fully cooperate with the Client in scheduling and attending such meetings as
      requested by the Client. The Client will be responsible to prepare meeting minutes during each of
      these meetings. Minutes will be distributed to participants for review and comment. The consultant
      is also required to make presentation to higher management of the Project implementing agencies
      and the World Bank as and when necessary.

6.    SCHEDULE AND WORK PLAN
      The contract period is as given in Table-1 below that count after the authorized project
      commencement date. The consultant will work closely with MILLs in this contract period and will
      submit the progress of activities as agreed.
       The Final ESIA report of the assignment must be submitted in its completeness and final form within
       the given project duration in Table-1 below. The report is assumed final when the client receives
       no objections from the World Bank and clearance from EPA.
       Table 21: Project Duration to the Submission Documents

       S/N                                       Activity                                          Milestone
        1       Submission of Inception Report from the signing of the contract                  After 2 Weeks


        2       Draft Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report                         After 12 Weeks
                submission, from the signing of the contract
        3       Addressing comments on the draft ESIA by the PIU, World Bank &                   After 16 weeks
                EPA, from the reception of the comments
        4       Revise and submit the final ESIA                                                 After 20 weeks
        5       Approval and clearance on the Final ESIA from the Bank and EPA.                  After 22 weeks



       Both the consultant and PIU shall compare the actual project area conditions to what was
       anticipated in the ToR and make recommendations for any changes to the study schedule and other
       actions deemed crucial to the project's success. The PIU and the consultant must come to an
       agreement on this.

       The consultant should outline the plan for the implementation of the main activities/tasks of the
       assignment, their content and duration, phasing and interrelations, milestones (including interim
       approvals by the Client), and tentative delivery dates of the reports. The proposed work plan should
       be consistent with the technical approach and methodology, showing your understanding of the
       ToR and ability to translate them into a feasible working plan.

       A list of the final documents (including reports) to be delivered as final output(s) should be included
       here. The work plan shall be submitted in Gant-chart that illustrates all the project activities, as
       follows:
        ✓ List the deliverables with the breakdown for activities required to produce them and other
             benchmarks such as the Client’s approvals. For phased assignments, indicate the activities,
             delivery of reports, and benchmarks separately for each phase.
        ✓ Duration of activities shall be indicated in a form of a bar chart.
        ✓ Include a legend, if necessary, to help read the chart.

 7.    DELIVERABLES
7.1.   Reports

       The reports are to be written in English language and should explain the activities performed in
       detail up to the satisfaction of the client. . The consultant must provide the client with the following
       reports:

  A. Inception Report: Inception Report shall be submitted, reflecting the agreed methodology,
     techniques, schedule, deliverables and an outline of the proposed contents of the assignment.
  B. Draft Report: In a stakeholder workshop, the consultant must present the ESIAs and take feedback
     into account. Deliveries must be based on the client's priorities.
  C. Final Report: All issues brought up during stakeholder engagements, as well as the comments of
     the client and bank shall be covered in the final report.
  D. Progress Report: The Consultant shall furnish the PIU with a written Weekly Progress Report that
     summarizes all aspects of the completed monthly and cumulative work progress. The objectives of
     the Progress Report are to:
        ✓ Provide a reliable and readily accessible summary record of the project activities with daily
             activities performed by each individual at the site and progress of work during last week with
             verification of daily task in the site signed by the project's representative.
        ✓ Provide a detailed description of all work actually completed up to the date and revision to
             the project schedule required, which shall reflect changes in the critical path since the date
             of the last revision.
        ✓ Identify issues and problems requiring action by the PIU or the Consultant, including issues
             of conflicting priorities.
        ✓ Provide a forecast of the work to be accomplished in the next month and information to help
             substantiate the Consultant’s pay request.

 8.    REPORTS

8.1.   Submittal Protocol
       No later than seven (07) days after the Commencement Date, the Consultant shall submit a
       submittal protocol for the Consulting Services.
       The submittal protocol shall identify the submittal documents/reports to be prepared by the
       Consultant including but not limited to detailed listing of the content, the expected dates of the
       submittals, number of copies, and distribution of the submittals by the Consultant based on
       distribution information provided by the Client.
       The Consultant has obligation to provide submittals for review consistent with the submittal dates.
       The Consultant acknowledges that the Client’s review will often involve input from, or consultation
       with, a number of individuals. Therefore, should submittal dates to the Client be delayed, the
       Consultant shall provide prompt notice to the Client of the delay. In no case shall this notice be
       given less than five (05) calendar days prior to the scheduled submittal date for that submittal. The
       submittals shall identify any proposed change to the requirements, or the design concept, project
       delivery approach, or the project schedule provided in the Consultant’s proposal, accompanied by
       the rationale behind the proposed change. No changes shall be implemented without the Client’s
       acceptance. Such acceptance shall not, however, relieve the Consultant of any of its obligations
       under the contract.

8.2.   Report Outline
       The reports outline should provide information that will enable the Bank and clients to identify,
       evaluate and manage environmental and social, health and safety risks relating to the projects. The
       reports should be with the outline acceptable to competent local authorities (EPA), and World Bank
       ESS.
       Executive summaries, a list of the projects affected and their socioeconomic profiles, maps, meeting
       minutes, and some relevant photos must be included in all reports (aside from the progress report).
  8.3.      Reporting Format
            Reports for each project must be submitted in one main volume (A4 format) and with the
            appropriate number of appendices, drawings, photographs, and other exhibits in additional
            volumes, in either A4 or A3 format as needed.

            The Submittal form for each document is electronical (both PDF as well as editable version) and in
            hard copies as may be required by the approving Authorities in Ethiopia (EPA), with a cover letter
            to the PIU. The PIU is responsible for distribution of submittals to reviewers. Electronic submittals
            shall be in the original file format. The Consultant is responsible for the accuracy and completeness
            of the information submitted.

  8.4.      Client Review of Reports
            The PIU will review submittals for consistency with the methodology concept presented in the
            Consultant’s proposal. The primary purpose of the Client’s review is to satisfy itself that the
            submittals generally conform to the intent of the contract. The Client’s review shall not relieve the
            Consultant of the sole risk and responsibility for all defects, errors or omissions, or of sole
            responsibility for meeting all requirements of the contract.
            The Consultant shall make submittals far enough in advance of subsequent activities to allow time
            for reviews, consultations with other entities, for securing necessary acceptance, for possible
            revisions and re-submittals. The Client intends to process the submittals as quickly as practical.

  8.5.      Finalization of the Reports
            Following approval of the final report by the PIU, the World Bank and EPA, the Consultant shall
            make necessary revisions and finalize the report for public disclosure. The approved report
            prepared for disclosure shall be submitted in electronic copy to be distributed to the project
            stakeholders.

       9.   QUALIFICATION OF CONSULTANT

 9.1.                Consultant’s Organization and Experience
            Submit a brief description of the Consultant’s organization and an outline of the recent experience
            of the Consultant that is most relevant to the assignment. In the case of a joint venture, information
            on similar assignments shall be provided for each partner. For each assignment, the outline should
            indicate the names of the Consultant’s Key Experts and Sub-consultants who participated, the
            duration of the assignment, the contract amount (total and, if it was done in a form of a joint
            venture or a sub-consultancy, the amount paid to the Consultant), and the Consultant’s
            role/involvement.

9.2.                Qualification of Key-Staff
            The Consultant shall assemble a team of both key and non-key experts as per the Table-2 below.
            List of Experts (LOE) and estimates are indicative, and Consultants are free to propose their own
            LOE to match their methodology and staffing plans, noting any deviations from the notional LOE
            as well as the reasons behind them. Additional staff and staffing requirements may be proposed
            by the Consultant as necessary and based on the Consultant’s proposed methodology and
            approach that will achieve the objectives of the assignment. Consultant shall provide and
            maintain all Key Personnel. Once the LOE is approved by the PIU, any changes are subject to prior
  approvals by the Project implementing agencies in accordance with the terms of the contract.
  International staff with the required expertise and based internationally can also be proposed if
  they are able to demonstrate required country expertise.

  The consultant will be expected to work closely with the PIU staff, in particular the Environmental
  and Social Specialists and other third parties relevant to the required services, particularly
  relevant representatives from the Regional and local Governments where those projects are going
  to be built. Therefore, the consultant will also be expected to have good communication, writing,
  and analytical skills as well as have a good command of languages, namely English.

  Backstopping Staff: The Consultant shall ensure and demonstrate in the proposal that the firm has
  the expertise not explicitly covered in the above list but needed for the assignment. In addition to
  the key staff positions above, the consultant shall include in its proposal the CVs of a pool of experts
  that would be assigned to the study as and when required, including a contract management staff
  member (the pool of experts will not be included in the evaluation of key staff positions but are
  required to demonstrate the firms access to a pool of experts).

  The required key staff specific Educational Qualification and Experience shall be as follows:

  Table 22: Key Staff Educational Qualification and Experiences

       Role                  Qty                             Required Qualification
Project Manger                1       ✓ The project manager shall have Master’s Degree in
                                        Civil/Irrigation   Engineering/     Environmental      Science/
                                        Environmental Engineering / Environmental Management/
                                        Natural Resource Management / Ecology with 8 years of
                                        professional experience in the related field.
                                      ✓ The expert is required to have specific experience in
                                        preparation of ESIA in large to mid-scale irrigation projects as
                                        per national requirements, and have the knowledge and
                                        working experience in preparation of ESIA according to the
                                        World Bank/any other international financer’s Environmental
                                        and Social Standards.
Senior                         2      ✓ Minimum of MSc degree in Environmental science/
Environmentalist                        Environmental Engineering and Related fields/ with at least 8
                                        years of general experience.
                                      ✓ At least 5 years of similar experience in preparing an ESIA
                                        preferably on irrigation projects.
Biodiversity expert            1      ✓ Minimum       of     MSc     degree     in     Conservation
                                        Ecology/Ecology/Botany/       Environmental         science/
                                        Environmental Engineering and Related fields/ with at least 8
                                        years of general experience.
                                      ✓ At least 5 years of similar experience in preparing an
                                        ESIA/Biodiversity Management Plan preferably on irrigation
                                        projects.
 Senior Sociologist/           2      ✓ Minimum of BA degree or equivalent in Rural Development/
 Anthropologist                         Sociology/Anthropology with at least 8 years of general
                                        experience,
                                      ✓ At least 5 years of similar experience in preparing an ESIA
                                        preferably on irrigation projects.

 Data                          1      ✓ Minimum of the BSc degree or equivalent in Data Management
 Management                             / Statistic/ Computer science with at least 5 years of
 Specialist                             professional experience.

 GIS Expert /Land              1      ✓ Minimum of BSc degree or equivalent in GIS/ Studies or other
 use expert                             relevant field with at least 5 years of professional experience.



    Team compositions, assignment, and key expert’s inputs shall be submitted using the Appendix:
    Technical Proposal Forms Submitted with the RFP. Attach the CVs (updated and signed by the
    respective Key Experts) demonstrating the qualifications of Key Experts using the Appendix: CV
    Submission Form in the RFP.

10. CONSULTANT’S PROPOSAL

   The consultant shall submit the following information to demonstrate the capability to perform the
   assignment successfully.
1. Work Approach/Methodology: The scope of work should include a description of the specific
   activities that will be performed to accomplish the required tasks identified in this Terms of
   Reference. This should include any proposed site visits/surveys, documents to be reviewed,
   interviews, etc. If the Consultant feels that additional tasks or components within the scope of
   work are required or warranted, these should be stated and delineated as “Optional Tasks”.

2. Organization and Staffing: The consultant should describe the structure and composition of its
   team, including the list of the Key Experts, Non-Key Experts and relevant technical and
   administrative support staff.
3. Consultant’s Team and Qualifications: This should include the name of the principal staff members
   (indicated above). Qualifications of staff should include relevant technical capabilities, previous
   relevant project experience, specific in-country and regional experience and knowledge, and
   specific language skills.
4. Schedule: A proposed schedule for performance of the assignment must be presented with
   breakdown of specific tasks and activities. The schedule must indicate the proposed start and
   completion dates for each activity listed in the “Scope of Work and Expected Output” section of
   this Terms of Reference and any important or specific Subproject milestones (e.g., report submittal,
   etc.)
5. Financial Proposal: A total cost of the consultancy service must be provided. Breakdown of the
   estimated costs by tasks/activities must also be presented (e.g. tabular format) and should include
   Direct Labor Costs (number of days per staff and their associated unit costs) and reimbursable
   expenses (e.g., travel, per diem, etc.). Any assumptions related to the estimated costs must be
   clearly stated. If any additional Optional Tasks are recommended, then a separate cost estimate
   must be provided.
    Annex-A: INDICATIVE OUTLINE FOR ESIA REPORT

    The ESIA team is required to follow the below outline of the ESIA:

     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY/INTRODUCTION
  0.1. Project Background/Context
0.2.      Rationale of the Subproject
0.3.      Objectives of the ESIA
0.4.      Scope of the ESIA
0.5.      Approach/Methodology of the ESIA
0.6.      Structure of the ESIA
 1. LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS
1.1. Policies and Strategies
1.2. Legal Framework
1.3. International Conventions and Protocols
1.4. Regional Agreement and Cooperative Frameworks
1.5. World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)
1.6. Institutional Framework, Structure and Capacity
 2. SUBPROJECT DESCRIPTION
2.1. Subproject Features and Components
2.2. Equipment Use during Construction
2.3. Construction Materials Need
2.4. Energy and Water Use during Construction
2.5. Manpower Requirement
 3. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE CONDITIONS
3.1. Physical Conditions
3.2. Biological Conditions
3.3. Socio-economic Conditions
 4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS
4.1. Beneficial/Positive Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
4.2. Adverse/Negative Environmental and Social Risks and Impact
     i.    Inherent E&S risks and impacts of the subprojects and any associated facilities (see the
           criteria under ESF) and (scale, magnitude and extent and significance defined)

    ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
    ESS2: Labor and Working conditions
    ESS3-Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
    ESS4-Community Health and Safety
    ESS5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary Resettlement
    ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
    ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local
    Communities
    ESS8 Cultural Heritage
    ESS9 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure

    ii. Risks related to development and operation of ancillary facilities (if any).
         ▪ The risks/impacts shall be segregated by Subproject phases, i.e., (i) pre-construction, (ii)
              construction, (iii) operation and maintenance, and (iv) decommissioning.
       ▪   In addition to the direct and/or indirect impacts, the cumulative impacts (aggregate,
           incremental, and synergistic impacts) of Subproject implementation in the Subproject area
           of influence shall be comprehensively identified. The cumulative Subproject impacts shall
           be distinguished between their national, regional, and local effects.
       ▪   The environmental and social impacts shall consider identified challenges during Subproject
           planning, design, and implementation.
       ▪   The identified environmental and social impacts shall be prioritized based on their risk
           significance, magnitude, spatial and temporal extent.

     iii. Cumulative Impact assessment
f) ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MITIGATION MEASURES
g) ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLANS
                         1. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                         2. Environmental and Social Monitoring Plan
h) CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING
i) ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES AND DESIGN OPTIONS
j) GRM AND STAKEHOLDER’S CONSULTATIONS
k) ESIA IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE
l) ESIA IMPLEMENTATION BUDGET
m) CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
• Conclusions
• Recommendations
     ANNEXURE
     Annex 1: List of the Consultant’s Team
     Annex 2: References
     Annex 3: Records of Stakeholders Consultations
      Annex 4: stand-alone Biodiversity Management Plan
     Annex 5: A template for the following plans, in applicable
  a. Occupational health and safety plan
  b. Emergency Preparedness Plan
  c. Community health and safety plan including Traffic Management Plan,
  d. Site Rehabilitation and Restoration Plan
  e. Construction Waste Management Plan.
  f. SEA/SH action plan
  g. Security risk management plan
  h. Stakeholder consultation and engagement
Annex 13: Terms of Reference and Outline for Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP)
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE
The technical services of an independent environmental and social consultant (“Consultant”) are required
to prepare an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the CRISP Project.

The main objectives of the consultancy service are:
    - To identify the environmental and social impacts due to project implementation and operation.
    - To analyze, evaluate, and recommend measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate, and
       compensate/offset potential environmental and social impacts of the project so that it complies
       with the national, and World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards (ESS), policies and
       frameworks.
    - To prepare environmental and social management and monitoring plans for implementation and
       operation phases of the project.

SCOPE OF WORK
In general, the Consultant will perform the following key tasks as part of the Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) preparation of the sub-project of the CRISP:

    -   Describe the sub-project including its main components, ancillary components/facilities,
        resources input, and outputs/produces.
    -   Identify project adverse environmental and social impacts and propose mitigation measures
        based on the mitigation hierarchy.
    -   Develop an environmental and social monitoring plan based on the mitigation plan developed.
    -   Assess the capacity of the implementing institution and recommend capacity development and
        training plan.
    -   Prepare implementation schedule and cost estimate for the ESMP implementation.

The details of the various activities of the ESMP are described in the below sections.

Introduction
The following key aspects of the sub-project should be defined and described.
    1. The Project background/context
    2. The specific sub-project background/context
    3. Rationale for the sub-project investment
    4. The objectives of the ESMP
    5. The scope of the ESMP
    6. Approach/methodology of the ESMP
    7. The structure of the ESMP report.


Project Description
The sub-project shall be described briefly including the following (but not limited to):
    - The location of the subproject (geographic and administrative locations)
    - Specific site location and key baseline conditions
    - Accessibility of the site
    -   The project intervention design and its main components/features
    -   Construction materials used for construction of various components of the project including
        sources of the construction materials (market or own source)
    -   Machineries to be used during construction and operation of the project
    -   Energy consumption for the project
    -   Waste generated by the project
    -   Human resources requirements during implementation and operation phases
    -   Project    implementation      activities   (during   pre-construction,  construction, and
        operation/maintenance stages)
    -   Project standard and regulatory requirements that should be maintained/satisfied
    -   Project implementation schedule.


Environnemental & Social Impacts Identification & Mitigation
As part of the ESMP preparation, the project adverse risks and impacts shall be identified, including
environmental risks, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks, Community Health &Safety risks, Social
risks, labor-related risks, land and resettlement issues, risks related to development and operation of
ancillary facilities (if any).

The ESMP shall identify measures and actions in accordance with the mitigation hierarchy that reduce the
potential adverse environmental and social impacts to acceptable levels. The plan will include
compensatory measures, if applicable. Specifically, the ESMP shall:
    - Identify and summarize all anticipated adverse environmental and social impacts (including those
        involving indigenous people or involuntary resettlement).
    - Describe, with technical details, each mitigation measure, including the type of impact to which it
        relates and the conditions under which it is required (e.g., continuously or in the event of
        contingencies), together with designs, equipment descriptions, and operating procedures, as
        appropriate.
    - Estimate any potential environmental and social impacts of these measures.
    - Take into account, and consistent with, other mitigation plans required for the project (e.g., for
        involuntary resettlement, indigenous peoples, or cultural heritage).

A management plan shall be developed to implement the ESMP.

Monitoring
The ESMP shall identify monitoring objectives and specifies the type of monitoring, with linkages to the
impacts assessed in the environmental and social assessment and the mitigation measures described in
the ESMP. Specifically, the monitoring section of the ESMP provides (a) a specific description, and
technical details, of monitoring measures, including the parameters to be measured, methods to be used,
sampling locations, frequency of measurements, detection limits (where appropriate), and definition of
thresholds that will signal the need for corrective actions; and (b) monitoring and reporting procedures to
(i) ensure early detection of conditions that necessitate particular mitigation measures, and (ii) furnish
information on the progress and results of mitigation.

Capacity Development and Training
To support timely and effective implementation of environmental and social project components and
mitigation measures, the ESMP shall draw on the environmental and social assessment of the existence,
role, and capability of responsible parties on site or at the agency and ministry level.
Specifically, the ESMP shall provide a specific description of institutional arrangements, identifying which
party is responsible for carrying out the mitigation and monitoring measures (e.g., for operation,
supervision, enforcement, monitoring of implementation, remedial action, financing, reporting, and staff
training).

To strengthen environmental and social management capability in the agencies responsible for
implementation, the ESMP shall recommend the establishment or expansion of the parties responsible,
the training of staff and any additional measures that may be necessary to support implementation of
mitigation measures and any other recommendations of the environmental and social assessment.

Implementation Schedule and Cost Estimate
For all three aspects (mitigation, monitoring, and capacity development), the ESMP shall provide (a) an
implementation schedule for measures that must be carried out as part of the subproject, showing
phasing and coordination with overall project implementation plans; and (b) the capital and recurrent
cost estimates and sources of funds for implementing the ESMP. These figures shall also be integrated
into the total project cost tables.

 Integration of ESMP with the Project
Each of the measures and actions in the ESMP to be implemented shall be clearly specified, including the
individual mitigation and monitoring measures and actions and the institutional responsibilities relating
to each, and the costs of doing so shall be integrated into the subproject’s overall planning, design, budget,
implementation, and operation.

DELIVERABLES
The documents to be prepared as output of the consultancy service are Draft and Final Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMP). Detailed description and contents of the reports are presented in
the below sections. The deliverables shall be produced in English. The Consultant should prepare the draft
and final versions of the ESMP to the desired and acceptable quality to avoid several iterations of the plan.

TIMELINE OF THE CONSULTANCY SERVICE

The table below summarizes the timeline of the consultancy service.
      Deliverable                                        Timeline*
      Draft Environmental and Social Management
  1                                             4 weeks from the signing of the contract
      Plan
      Final Environmental and Social Management 1 week after receiving comments on the Draft
  2
      Plan                                      ESMP


CONSULTANT’S TEAM AND QUALIFICATIONS

The Consultant’s team shall be comprised of an Environmental Specialist and a Social Specialist. The
qualifications and input of the Consultant’s team are indicated in the table below.
                                                                                                          Input
      Consultant   Qualifications
                                                                                                          (workdays)
                   Master’s (or above) in a field relevant to environment studies such as
                   environmental science, environmental engineering, etc …
                   At least 10 years of experience in environmental assessment, management,
                   monitoring, and audit
                   Experience in preparation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA),
      Environme
                   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental and Social
  1   ntal                                                                                                15
                   Monitoring Plan, Environmental Audit, and other related documents, preferably
      Specialist
                   for large-scale development partner funded infrastructure projects
                   Knowledge on country legal and institutional framework
                   Work experience in/with World Bank funded projects and knowledge of the World
                   Bank ESF provisions/requirements
                   Fluency in English, particularly in written and spoken English
                   Master’s (or above) in a field relevant to socio-economic studies such as sociology,
                   social science/studies, anthropology, community development, gender studies,
                   etc,
                   At least 10 years of experience in social assessment, management, monitoring,
                   and audit
                   Experience in preparation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA),
                   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental and Social
      Social
  2                Monitoring Plan, Social Audit, Resettlement Plan (RP), Stakeholder Engagement          15
      Specialist
                   Plan (SEP), and other related documents, preferably for large-scale development
                   partner funded infrastructure projects
                   Knowledge on country/ regional legal and institutional framework
                   Experience in conducting stakeholder engagement
                   Work experience in/with World Bank funded projects and knowledge of the World
                   Bank ESF provisions/requirements
                   Fluency in English, particularly in written and spoken English



                                              Outline for ESMP

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

INTRODUCTION
Project Background/Context
Rationale of the Project Infrastructure Investment
Objectives and Scope of the ESMP
Approach/Methodology of the ESMP
Structure of the ESMP

PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The Project Infrastructure Investment
Project Implementation Activities
Project Implementation Schedule

ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS AND MITIGATION MEASURES
Beneficial/Positive Environmental and Social Impacts and Mitigation Measures
Adverse/Negative Environmental and Social Impacts and Mitigation Measures
Environmental
Occupational Health and Safety
Community Health and Safety
Social

ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLANS
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
Environmental and Social Monitoring Plan

CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING

IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE AND COST ESTIMATES
Implementation Schedule
Mitigation and Monitoring Cost Estimates

INTEGRATION OF ESMP WITH THE PROJECT
Annex 14: Terms of Reference and Outline for Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP)
Background
The Government of Ethiopia, through the Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLS) is implementing
the Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production Irrigation (CRISP) Project in different regions
of Ethiopia. The project development objective (PDO) is to to improve access to resilient irrigation
services for sustainable production in Ethiopia.

The project involves land acquisition, restrictions on land use, and potential physical and/or economic
displacement in view of site-specific sub-projects. In accordance with the Ethiopian legal
framework (Proclamation No. 1161/2019 on Expropriation of Land for Public Purposes and its amendment
1336/2024) and the World Bank Environmental and Social Standard 5 (ESS5), a Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) must be prepared to mitigate these impacts and ensure that Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are
not left worse off as a result of the project.

Objectives of the Assignment
The objective of this consultancy is to prepare a RAP that is:
    • Compliant with ESS5 and Ethiopian legal requirements.
    • Based on a census of displaced persons and inventory of affected assets.
    • Designed to provide fair, transparent, and adequate compensation, livelihood restoration, and
        resettlement support.
    • Inclusive, ensuring special attention to vulnerable and disadvantaged groups.
    • Implementable, with clear institutional arrangements, schedule, budget, and monitoring
        framework.

Scope of Work
The Consultant shall carry out the following:

    a) Legal and Institutional Review
    • Review national laws and regulations governing land acquisition, compensation, and
       resettlement.
    • Analyze gaps between Ethiopian laws and ESS5 requirements, and propose measures to bridge
       them.
    • Review institutional roles and capacities for RAP implementation.

    b) Socio-Economic Baseline and Census
    • Conduct a census of all Project Affected Persons (PAPs) to establish eligibility and prevent in-
       migration.
    • Carry out socio-economic household surveys to establish baseline conditions, including income
       sources, land use, tenure arrangements, and vulnerability status.
    • Identify vulnerable groups (e.g., women-headed households, elderly, landless, people with
       disabilities, minorities).

    c) Impact Assessment
    • Identify all project-induced land acquisition and restrictions on land use.
   •    Quantify impacts on households, assets (land, crops, structures), businesses, community facilities,
        and natural resources.
   •    Assess potential impacts on livelihoods, income streams, and social networks.

   d) Eligibility and Entitlements
   • Define categories of PAPs in line with ESS5 (those with legal rights to land, those without legal
      rights but with recognizable claims, and those without recognizable claims).
   • Develop an Entitlement Matrix, consistent with ESS5, covering compensation, assistance, and
      livelihood restoration.

   e) Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration Measures
   • Identify feasible resettlement site options (if physical relocation is necessary), ensuring adequate
      housing, infrastructure, and access to services.
   • Develop livelihood restoration programs, including agricultural support, vocational training,
      micro-enterprise opportunities, and employment linkages.
   • Propose special measures for vulnerable PAPs.

   f)   Stakeholder Engagement and Grievance Redress
   •    Prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan in line with ESS10, ensuring free, prior, and informed
        consultations.
   •    Design a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), accessible to PAPs and tailored to local
        institutions and culture.

   g) Implementation Arrangements
   • Define roles and responsibilities of the Project Implementation Unit, woreda administrations, and
      other relevant stakeholders.
   • Provide a time-bound implementation schedule linked to the project construction timeline.
   • Prepare a cost estimate and budget for RAP implementation, including compensation, livelihood
      restoration, institutional strengthening, and monitoring.

   h)   Monitoring and Evaluation
   •    Develop internal and external monitoring arrangements.
   •    Propose indicators for tracking outputs, outcomes, and impacts of RAP implementation.
   •    Recommend third-party/independent monitoring if needed.

Deliverables
The Consultant shall deliver the following deliverables:
    1. Inception Report – methodology, detailed work plan, survey instruments.
    2. Draft RAP – covering all ESS5-required elements:
           a. Project description and impacts
           b. Census and baseline socio-economic data
           c. Legal and institutional framework
           d. Entitlement matrix and eligibility criteria
           e. Resettlement and livelihood restoration strategies
           f. Stakeholder engagement and GRM
           g. Implementation arrangements, schedule, and budget
           h. Monitoring and evaluation framework
    3. Consultation Report – documenting PAP and stakeholder engagement.
    4. Final RAP – incorporating comments from the GoE, World Bank, and stakeholders.
    5. Non-technical Summary in local language(s) for disclosure to PAPs.

An outline for the RAP is listed in the Table below.

Consultant Team and Qualifications
The team should comprise specialists with experience in World Bank ESSs (specifically ESS5), Ethiopian
land acquisition frameworks, and resettlement planning:
    • Team Leader/Resettlement Specialist (10+ years, ESS5 experience).
    • Sociologist/Anthropologist (socio-economic survey, community engagement).
    • Land Tenure/Legal Expert (Ethiopian expropriation law, customary tenure).

Duration
The assignment is expected to be completed within 2 months, allowing sufficient time for census, surveys,
consultations, and report preparation.

Reporting
The Consultant will report to the FPIU under MILLS, and coordinate closely with woreda administrations
and local authorities.
                                                      Outline For RAPs
     Section             Description of Content
1.   Sub-project or      Description of the sub-project or activity
     activity
2.   Potential Impacts   Description of activities that will cause displacement, including explanation why the selected land
                         must be acquired for use within the timeframe of the activity

                         Description of the zone of impact;

                         Description of the scope of land acquisition and impacts on structures and other fixed assets;

                         Description of any project-imposed restrictions on use of or access to land or natural resources;

                         Listing of alternatives that have been considered to avoid or minimize displacement and why
                         those were rejected;

                         Description of mitigation measures to minimize displacement

1.   Objectives          Description of objectives of RAP
2.   Census / socio-     Description of characteristics of displaced households, including a description of relation of
     economic survey     Head of HH, sex, place of birth, age, marital status, ethnic group, occupation, educational level,
                         income earners, economic activities, number of persons in HH, total land holding, land to be
                         acquired, land use type, existing structure, loss of % in total, loss of assets, loss of crops, other
                         losses,
                         Information on vulnerable groups or persons for whom special provisions may have to be
                         made;

                         Description of public or community infrastructure, property or services that may be affected;

                         Description of design and budget of resettlement activities;

                         In conjunction with establishment of a cut-off date, provide a basis for excluding ineligible
                         people from compensation and resettlement assistance;

                         Description of baseline conditions for monitoring and evaluation purposes.

6.   Legal framework     Description of the applicable legal and administrative procedures, including a description of the
                         remedies available to PAPs in the judicial process and the normal timeframe for such procedures,
                         and the available GRM;

                         Description of laws and regulations relating to the agencies responsible for implementing
                         resettlement activities;

                         Analysis of gaps, if any, between laws of the Republic of South Sudan and ESS5, and the
                         mechanisms to bridge them.
7.   Institutional       Description of entities responsible for resettlement activities
     Arrangements
8.   Eligibility         Provision of definition of displaced persons and criteria for determining eligibility for
                         compensation and other resettlement assistance, including cutoff dates.
     9.    Valuation of and   Description of methodology for valuing losses to determine replacement cost;
           compensation for
           losses             Description of the proposed types and levels of compensation for land, natural resources and
                              other assets under the national law and such supplementary measures as necessary to achieve
                              replacement cost for them.

     10.   Community          List involvement of communities in the in the design and implementation of the resettlement
           consultations      activities;

                              Provision of a summary of the views expressed and how these views were taken into account in
                              preparing the resettlement plan;

                              Provision of a review of the resettlement alternatives presented and the choices made by
                              displaced persons regarding options available to them; and

                              Presentation of arrangements through which displaced people can communicate their concerns
                              to the project, and measures to ensure that vulnerable groups are adequately represented.
1.   11.   Additional         List additional planning requirements where resettlement involves economic displacement
           Planning
           requirements       Provision of measures relating to livelihood improvement or restoration (establish entitlements
                              of affected persons or communities; pay particular attention to gender aspects and the needs of
                              vulnerable groups)

                              Provision of arrangements to monitor the effectiveness of livelihood measures
     12.   Implementation     Provision of an implementation schedule with dates for displacement, and estimated initiation
           Schedule           and completion dates for all resettlement plan activities – and linkages to the overall project.
     13.   Costs              Table showing categorized cost estimates for all resettlement activities, including allowances
                              for inflation, population growth, and other contingencies;

                              Timetables for expenditures; sources of funds; and arrangements for timely flow of funds, and
                              funding for resettlement.
     14.   GRM                Description of GRM including the availability of judicial recourse and customary dispute
                              settlement mechanisms.
     15.   M&E                Description of the monitoring of displacement and resettlement activities by the local
                              authorities, supplemented by Independent Verification Agents (IVA) to ensure complete and
                              objective information;

                              Listing of performance indicators to measure inputs, outputs, and outcomes for resettlement
                              activities;

                              Description of involvement of the displaced persons in the monitoring process; evaluation of
                              results for a reasonable period after all resettlement activities have been completed; using the
                              results of resettlement monitoring to guide subsequent implementation.
     16.   Arrangements for   Provisions for adapting resettlement implementation in response to unanticipated changes in
           adaptive           project conditions, or unanticipated obstacles to achieving satisfactory resettlement outcomes.
           management
Annex 15: Stakeholder Consultations
A series of local level stakeholder consultations were undertaken in November and December 2025 in various Project regions:

                   -   Gambella Irrigation and Lowland Bureau
                   -   Benishangul-Gumuz Region
                   -   Oromia Irrigation Development and Pastoralist Bureau
                   -   Amhara Region (ANRS Agricultural Bureau)
                   -   Central Ethiopia Regional State
                   -   Harari Region
                   -   Tigray Region
                   -   Somali Region
                   -   Dire Dawa Administration
                   -   South West Ethiopia Region
                   -   Afar Regional State
                   -   Sidama Regional State
                   -   South Ethiopia

Participants included regional and local government entities from different sectors (agriculture, water, energy, irrigation, land, mining,
environment); regional staff from MOA and MILLS, and staff from ongoing development projects. The below Table presents a summary of
comments and concerns from the stakeholders and the Project’s responses.

Table 23 Stakeholder inputs
          Region                 Stakeholder                    Comments and Concerns                                                          Project
                                                                                                                                               responses
 Amhara                  Regional administration and   Current challenges in irrigation include: Institutional gaps between ministry   The Project aims to
                         irrigation sector projects    and regional implementation; Gaps in water use management and resulting         address a number of
                                                       conflict; Dilapidated Infrastructures that has not been maintained; Lack of     these concerns, for
                                                       O&M; IWUAs don’t work; Budget Constraints; Power outages for pump               example the lack of O&M
                                                       projects; Unlined canals causing seepage and sedimentations; Lack of
                                                       proper compensation for PAPs; Weak market linkages; Limited adoption of
                                                       modern irrigation technologies
                                                       Potential environmental risks and impacts of large and medium-scale             The Project ESMF has
                                                       irrigation systems include Soil erosion, siltation and sedimentation; Water     assessed those risks and
logging; Impacts on local ecosystem; Dust and noise from construction           proposed mitigation
work; Land loss and loss of livelihood.                                         measures.
In dam rehabilitation, water quality problems may occur, downstream
release might be compromised, erosion might be aggravated, and
biodiversity loss might happen
Potential social risks and impacts in the rehabilitation of large and medium-   The Project team has
scale irrigation systems include: Issues around compensation for land loss      prepared the relevant
or loss of livelihoods; Conflicts around distribution of water; Breeding of     E&S instruments for
mosquitos and related; Labor influx, during construction works; SEA/SH          mitigation of these risks,
during construction works; Unequal pay through construction works               including Labor
                                                                                Management Procedures
                                                                                (LMP), SEA/SH
                                                                                prevention and
                                                                                mitigation measures, and
                                                                                resettlement policy
                                                                                measures
Additional stakeholders of the Project are: Allied Bureau’s, research           These are included in the
institutions, consulting firms, contractors, ATI, Universities, Woreda          SEP
administration, Environment and Forest Protection Authority, Women’s
and Children Bureau
The Project could trigger conflict where downstream water release is            This will be assessed in
compromised during construction                                                 the site-specific E&S
                                                                                instruments
Operations & Maintenance of irrigation systems should include providing         The development of
standard and project-specific O&M measures in local language,                   improved O&M will be
communities and area mechanics should be trained, irrigation fees and           part of the Project
financial arrangement made
Women’s, elderly people, children’s, and people with disabilities,              These have been
disadvantaged groups, and landless individuals are the most vulnerable          included in the SEP
groups
A GRM shall be established at community, kebele, woreda-region-federal          The Project has prepared
levels. The channel shall be through suggestion box, direct issuance of         a GRM
grievances at all levels, through provision of toll-free hotlines, in person,
email or via telegram.

Make available responsible experts at site level to assist communities
including the illiterate, women, elderly, and disabled individuals are aware
of the situation and how to address them and to register grievances.
Promote transparency & awareness such as the date for response to any
claim, and provide clear line and procedures to solve such disputes and
grievances.

Apart from proper grievances the following are suggestions for handling
grievances are: Dialogue & mediation: prioritize amicable, constructive
solutions over conflict escalation; Timely response and define steps for
unresolved grievances, potentially involving higher authorities or external
bodies; Define the responsible organ or institutions and let them the
communities know those institutions; Let the communities know the place
where the issue is to be forwarded, the receiver, the response, and the
feedback.
Key challenges in dam safety information management are: Data                 The Project will address
accessibility and quality; Lack of experienced experts; No appropriate        these dam safety issues
database; Poor communication facilities and network; Lack of awareness
at all level

Recommendations are to: Prepare guidelines for dam safety; Conduct
regular inspection and monitoring by experienced experts; Put in place
community-based monitoring and early warning system for dam
breach/break analysis; Maintain a dam and Dam Safety Data Base;
Introduce watershed and catchments-based management; Establish
appropriate buffer zone; Timely operation of gates to safely remove flood
Environmental concerns in regard to the dam-related activities are:           The Project will aim to
Sedimentation; Total dam failure; Water quality issue; Flood hazards;         include measures against
Downstream water release might be compromised if gates are closed for         these issues
maintenance; Disturbance or loss of fish; Occurrence of invasive weeds

Recommendation include sediment management, periodic inspection and
assignment of experienced staff, test water quality, awareness creation
and provision of bank protection and convey some water to the canal,
provision of fish traps, and clearing and selective hand weeding
Social concerns in relation to the dam safety works include: Impede           The Project will pay
movements; inequitable share of water; loss of life/human and animals;        attention to these issues
water-borne disease                                                           in its work on dams.
Recommendations include a provision of detours and other access means,
water allocation distribution platform, warn the community to stay away
from the dam and its vicinities, and drain the water properly.
The current legal and regulatory framework has significant gaps,                The Project will support
particularly in the areas of dam safety regulations, water allocation           the formulation of
criteria, climate resilience integration, and enforcement mechanisms.           regulatory frameworks

It should strengthen local level structure for close regulation & skill
development.

A fee should be stipulated for water for irrigation and enforced based on
agronomic practice and landholding size, etc.

Enforce IWUAS at federal level and for those regions that do not have any.

The organ responsible for small and large dam safety is not clearly known;
some assume it is the Ministry of Irrigation, and others think the Ministry
of Water and Energy.

Standards and guidelines issued by Ministry of Irrigation shall be
communicated at all levels, training and awareness creation shall be in
place required.

It is better to synchronize the dam safety guidelines of the federal
environmental authority and other institutions like MOA and MILLS.

Integrate climate adaptation measures into irrigation policy.

Enhance cross-sectorial coordination between water, agriculture, and
environment sectors

Improve and inculcate information and Knowledge management system

Necessary logistics to be fulfilled at lower level for regular monitoring
work
O&M for irrigation should include harmonization of the Regional and             The Project will aim to
Federal O&M irrigation system, maintain institutional hierarchy. It is better   support O&M measures
              to give the O&M tasks to the responsible regions/regions have by far better
              access and capacity to manage those projects.

              Create a dedicated O&M fund; Build capacity of regional and woreda staff
              in     O&M;      Promote public-private-community          partnerships for
              maintenance.
              IWUAS are partly functional, but women’s participation is limited.               The Project will support
                                                                                               the formation of further
              IWUAs exist but functionality varies.                                            IWUAs and strengthening
                                                                                               existing one
              We recommend mandatory women representation quotas and targeted
              leadership training/Empowering women is very essential/.
Benishangul   Social concerns during construction works include the following:                 The Project ESMF has
              Community health issues through labor influx; Communicable disease               addressed these issues
              through labor influx, such as HIV AIDS issue; Child labor; Violation of social
              norms, culture & religious factors; Involuntary resettlement &
              compensation management issues; Water conflicts; Inequitable
              distribution of irrigable land; SEA/SH through labor influx; Underpayment
              of workers; Limitation of land tenure certification; Limitations on
              redistribution of irrigable land; Limitation on implementation of land
              administration laws and using customary by law; Lack of participation in
              planning &implementation; Damage to crops and riverine trees; Conflict
              due to improper redistribution of land and inefficient water use; Lack of
              irrigation water use application efficiency; Lack of Irrigation water use
              management
              Environmental concerns include the following: Soil and water pollution;          The Project ESMF has
              Soil acidity; Water logging effect leads to soil salinity; Deforestation; Land   addressed these issues
              degradation; Biodiversity loss; Depilation of water resource; Inefficient
              use of irrigation water; Inappropriate use of Land use management
              system
              Women and vulnerable groups should be involved in IWUA committees                The project will pay equal
                                                                                               attention to vulnerable
              Provision of equal opportunity for women &vulnerable groups in land              groups and GBV risks
              distribution

              Project should create equal employment opportunity
                                                Project should support through cash crops income, irrigation technology
                                                &credit saving service
                                                The most vulnerable members of the community are women, youth,                 The SEP has included
                                                female headed house hold, people with disability, people with land less,       these groups
                                                orphans, land renters
                                                The Project should have a GRM that is based on the principles of               The Project team has
                                                grievance redress and include social media, telephone, project focal           developed a GRM
                                                persons, written letter s, etc as main means of filing grievances
                                                IWUAS are not fully functional                                                 The Project will address
                                                                                                                               O&M issues
                                                The level of women participation in the associations is limited

Central Ethiopia   Irrigation Development and   Current challenges in irrigation include: Poor O&M; Siltation; Weak            The Project will address
Regional State     Scheme Administration        institutional coordination; Limited financing and outdated                     some of these issues.
                   Agency                       infrastructure; Absence of Conservation works around the project
                                                watershed; Poor quality Irrigation project construction and maintenance;
                                                Poor irrigation design in selecting effective and efficient method; Absence
                                                of proper distribution and delay of compensation for the land holders.
                                                Potential environmental risks and impacts include: Lack of public              The Project ESMF is
                                                consultation during study design and construction; Waterlogging and            addressing these issues
                                                salinization; Biodiversity loss; Poor quarry site management and poor
                                                disposal management during construction; Erosion; Reduced
                                                downstream flow; Salinity, due to lack of enough drainage structures;
                                                Quarry sites restoration problem
                                                Potential social risks include: Involuntary displacement; Inequitable water    The Project ESMF
                                                distribution; Community disappointment when works get delayed;                 includes these risks and
                                                Communities don’t always have common ideas; Lack of public                     proposed mitigation
                                                consultation; Exclusion of communities from benefits or inequal                measures
                                                distribution; HIV / AIDS; SEA/SH risk during works; Risk of conflict over
                                                land use and ownership; Perennial crops and trees and types of fodder
                                                may be affected
                                                Ensure disaggregated data on women and vulnerable groups and provide           The Project will take up
                                                capacity building measures for them.                                           the suggestion
                                                The most vulnerable members of the community are women-headed                  The Project SEP includes
                                                households, disables, youth, landless or less land holders, project affected   these groups
                                                people
                                        GRM committee members need to be selected from the community,                   The Project team has
                                        ensuring a mix of both women & men.                                             designed a GRM for the
                                                                                                                        Project
                                        Establish a confidential grievance receiving & handling mechanism. In
                                        addition, it is important to use the local language to receive & address
                                        grievances.

                                        Grievances can be received through phone calls, written submissions, in-
                                        person reporting, & community meetings.

                                        Also it is important to identify the grievance response time & record each
                                        grievance to track progress.
                                        Environmental concerns around dam rehabilitation include: Pollution             The Project team has
                                        (dust and noise) from machinery/trucks, improper disposal of                    prepared an ESMF to
                                        construction debris, salinization, waterlogging.                                address these issues.
                                        Social risk around dam rehabilitation include: Grievances related to            The Project team has
                                        compensation for land; SEA/SH through labor influx; Water use conflicts         prepared an ESMF to
                                        and land conflicts                                                              address these issues.
                                        The current legal frameworks on irrigation needs to be updated based on         The Project will aim to
                                        the current situation, technological advancements, & national priorities.       support the updating of
                                                                                                                        the legal framework
Diredhawa   Diredhawa Administration,   Current challenges include: Maintenance issues which are leading to high        The Project noted these
            Water Mining and energy     cost; Lack of strong community engagement; Absence of modern                    concerns
            Office, Agricultural        irrigation technologies
            Development Bureau          Potential environmental risks of irrigation work include: Mosquito              The Project team has
                                        breeding in ponded water; Degradation of water and soil resources;              prepared an ESMF that
                                        Water logging and soil salinity due to poor irrigation water management         lists these issues.
                                        practices
                                        Potential social risks of irrigation works include: Involuntary displacement;   The Project team has
                                        Water utilization conflict between upstream and downstream community;           prepared an ESMF that
                                        Lack of legal certification of WUA and regular follow up; Stagnant water        lists these issues.
                                        formation in the quarry sites and the associated invasion of malaria;
                                        Dissatisfaction in compensation for property losses; Gender-based
                                        discrimination as male heads of HH receive compensation payments;
                                        Disturbance of the local culture
Government and non-       Social risks include: mismanagement of compensation payment; Land             The Project team has
government organization   expansion beyond the limits of the permitted work area (failure to            prepared an ESMF that
                          maintain the boundaries of the working area); SEA/SH; Disturbance of the      lists these issues.
Individual farmers        local culture
                          Potential environmental risks of the project include: Water, soil, air        The Project ESMF
                          degradation/pollution, water logging; Siltation; Deforestation; Formation     includes environmental
                          of stagnant water; Land, perennial and annual crops and other property        mitigation measures as
                          losses; Salinity, due to lack of enough drainage structures; Problem in       well as resettlement
                          identification of the right land owner due to lack of ownership certificate   policy
                          to some farmers; During construction annual and perennial crops and
                          trees may be affected. However undertaking the construction work in off
                          /dry seasons may save annual crops loss; There is potential for conflict
                          because of awareness creation/consultation gap and inappropriate
                          compensation and resettlement
                          Women can best benefit by engaging them in IWUA leadership roles;             The Project has taken
                          Availing employment opportunities to women and vulnerable groups;             note of these suggestions
                          Giving priority for women and vulnerable groups in capacity building
                          programs
                          The most vulnerable members of the community are female-headed                These groups have been
                          households, pregnant and lactating women, disabled people, youth,             included in the SEP
                          landless or less land holders, project affected peoples (PAPs), elderly,
                          minority groups …etc.
                          A grievance resolution committee should be established at woreda and          The Project team has
                          kebele levels                                                                 designed a GRM
                          Key challenges in dam safety information management include: Lack of          The Project will support
                          record data on dam safety (deigns information); Problem in buffer zone        these issues in its dam
                          development and conservation; Siltation; Watershed and water                  safety works
                          management problem

                          Recommendation are the modernization of information management
                          systems and institutional framework; Upgrading information
                          management system; Establishment of institutional framework and
                          regulatory system; buffer zone conservation
                          Environmental concerns include: Water, soil and air pollution; Landslide;     The Project team has
                          Deforestation; Water logging; Sedimentation                                   included these issues in
                                                                                                        the ESMF
                          Recommended is a proper waste and pollution management plan, regular
                          watering, the implementation of water-efficient technologies, and the use
                  of green/renewable energy, watershed management, buffer zone
                  conservation, Afforestation, desalting/silt removal, etc…
                  Potential social risks include: Grievance related to compensation, GBV,         The Project includes a
                  water use conflict, & land acquisition.                                         GRM and a resettlement
                                                                                                  policy framework
                  The regulatory framework needs to be updated based on the current               The Project will support
                  situation, technological advancements, & national priorities.                   the amendments of
                                                                                                  regulations
                  There are inconsistency in the treatment of Up Stream and downstream
                  water Users that needs legislations improvement
                  There are irrigation water users associations (IWUAs). But they are not         The Project will support
                  capable of maintaining their infrastructures. Some of the IWU are not           improved O&M
                  fully functioning due the lack of budget and skill and logistics, lack of
                  awareness and capacity, etc..

                  Women's participation is there but not in the desired degree, which is
                  very low
Gambella Region   Key challenges of irrigation include: Collection of irrigation service /water   The Project will address
                  use fee (inconsistency); Financial constraints for the capacity building of     some of these issues
                  IWUA ; Maintenance issues which are leading to high cost; Constraints of
                  compensation budget; Lack of strong community engagement;
                  Institutional integration problem; Lack of sense of ownership among
                  irrigation water users and IWUA Committee; Monitoring and evaluation
                  gaps; Limited consultation of upstream and downstream communities
                  Potential environmental risks of the Project include: Degradation of water      The Project has taken up
                  and soil resources; Water logging and soil salinity due to poor irrigation      some of these risks in the
                  water management practices; Formation of stagnant water                         ESMF and other E&S
                                                                                                  instruments
                  Potential social risks include: Stagnant water formation in the quarry sites    The Project has taken up
                  and the associated invasion of malaria; Displacement and land and other         some of these risks in the
                  property losses; Dissatisfaction with compensation for property losses;         ESMF and other E&S
                  Gender-based discrimination when the male head of HH receives                   instruments
                  compensation; Disturbance of the local culture

                  During construction: Access road problems; Impacts on cemeteries,
                  cultural, religious, archeologically important sites; Consultation gaps
                  during the project study and design works; Compensation payment and
                  resettlement issue; SEA/SH; Problem in identification of the right land
         owner due to lack of ownership certificate to some farmers; Annual and
         perennial crops and trees may be affected; Conflicts may arise due to lack
         of awareness /consultation gap and inappropriate compensation and
         resettlement conflicts are anticipated to occur.
         The most vulnerable members of the community are female headed                 This has been included in
         households, pregnant and lactating women disabled people, youth,               the Project SEP
         landless or less land holders, project affected peoples(PAPs), elderly,
         minority groups …etc.
         Key challenges in dam safety information management are: Lack of               The Project has taken
         technical experts assigned; Lack of record data on dam safety; Problem in      note of these issues
         buffer zone development and conservation; Siltation; Watershed and
         water management problem
         Environmental concerns around dam rehabilitation are as follows: Water,        The Project has taken
         soil and air pollution; Landslide; Deforestation; Water logging;               note of these issues
         Sedimentation
         Social concerns in regard to dam rehabilitation include: Grievance related     The Project has included
         to compensation; SEA/SH cases through labor influx; Water use conflict;        these items in the ESMF
         Land acquisition conflicts
         The current legal framework needs to be updated based on the current           The Project will support
         situation, technological advancements, & national priorities.                  addressing issues of
                                                                                        legislation
         There is Inconsistency in the treatment of upstream and downstream
         water users that needs legislations improvement
Harari   Key challenges include: Maintenance issues which are leading to high           The Project team has
         cost; Lack of strong community engagement; Absence of modern                   taken note of these
         irrigation technologies                                                        challenges
         Potential environmental risks due to Project activities include: Poor          The Project ESMF has
         Environmental Management Plan as well as insufficient regular                  taken up these issues.
         monitoring resulting in environmental risks; Water logging and soil salinity
         due to poor irrigation water management practices; Salinity, due to lack
         of enough drainage structures; Poor attention given to environmental
         aspects (Polly ethane plastic wastage such as highland jog and pack from
         Harar city)
         Potential social risks due to Project activities are: Resource utilization     The Project ESMF has
         conflict between upstream and lower stream community;                          taken up these issues.
         Mismanagement of compensation payment; Land expansion beyond the
         limits of the permitted work area (failure to maintain the boundaries of
                                        the working area); Conflict: some farmers may complain and oppose
                                        them to road infrastructure in his farm.
                                        The most vulnerable members of the community are women headed                   These have been
                                        households, persons with disabilities, youth, less land holders, PAPs           included in the Project
                                                                                                                        SEP
                                        Key challenges in dam safety information management include: Lack of            The Project will take up
                                        awareness about dam safety; No institutional framework and regulations          these issues
                                        Environmental risks in relation to dam rehabilitation include: Pollution        The Project ESMF has
                                        through polyethane plastic from waste disposal                                  included these issues
                                        Social risks in view of the dam rehabilitation include: Grievance related to    The Project ESMF has
                                        compensation; SEA/SH issues; Water use conflict; Conflict around land use       included these issues
                                        and ownership
                                        The legal framework needs to be updated based on the current situation,
                                        technological advancements, & national priorities.
Oromia   Oromia Irrigation              Current challenges in large and medium-scale irrigation and water               The Project will address
         Development and pastoralist    resource management include: Maintenance issues which are leading to            some of these issues
         Bureau                         high cost; Lack of strong community engagement; Absence of modern
                                        irrigation technologies; Weak water management, water saving, project
         Oromia Agricultural Bureau     administration and agronomic practices – due to lack of detail designs;
         (OAB), Oromia Irrigation and   Limited consultation of upstream and downstream communities
         Pastoralist Development
         Bureau (OIPDB)
         OIPDB, Environmental           Potential environmental risks due to Project activities include: Lack of        The Project will address
         Protection Agency (EPA)        quarry site management; When the design and implementation phases               these issues
                                        are significantly separated, several risks can arise – calling the need for a
                                        robust design review; Poor Environmental Management Plan as well as
                                        insufficient regular monitoring resulting in environmental risks; Water
                                        logging and soil salinity due to poor irrigation water management
                                        practices; Salinity, due to lack of enough drainage structures; Quarry sites
                                        restoration problem; Poor attention given to environmental aspects
         OIPDB                          Potential social risks include the exclusion of social concerns and             The Project will address
                                        customary institutions and the lack of proper handling of compensation          these issues

                                        In view of construction, mismanagement of compensation payment and
                                        resettlement activities is a risk, and land expansion beyond the limits of
                                        the permitted work area (failure to maintain the boundaries of the
                                        working area); as well as SEA/SH due to labor influx.
                                    Some trees and fodder species may be affected; while this is a nature of
                                    irrigation projects, it could be managed through consultations with local
                                    communities and stakeholders

                                    While there might be occasional conflicts, these could be easily solved by
                                    the community and IWUAs
         OIPDB                      The most vulnerable members of the community are women headed                   The Project SEP has
                                    households, persons with disabilities, youth, landless or less land holders,    included these groups
                                    project affected people
                                    Key challenges in dam safety information management include: Limited            The Project will address
                                    experience in information management system; No institutional                   these issues
                                    framework and regulations
                                    Environmental risks in relation to dam rehabilitation include: Pollution        The Project ESMF has
                                    (dust and noise) from machinery/trucks; Improper disposal of                    included these issues
                                    construction debris; Salinization; Waterlogging..
         OIPDB,EPA, Oromia Water    Social risks due to dam rehabilitation include: Grievances related to           The Project ESMF has
         and Energy Bureau (OWAB)   compensation; SEA/SH due to labor influx; Conflict around water use;            included these issues
                                    Conflict around land acquisition
Sidama                              Key challenges to irrigation include: Water availability and scarcity;          The Project will address
Region                              Climate change impacts (Increased Droughts, and floods); Poor                   some of these challenges
                                    infrastructure (leakages, seepage)and siltation damaging structures;
                                    Inefficient water use and management; Unequal water distribution;
                                    Conflicts over water rights; Market access problems affect farmers
                                    Potential environmental risks due to Project activities include: Soil erosion   The Project ESMF
                                    and landscape alliteration; Sedimentation and water pollution; Habitat          addresses these risks
                                    and biodiversity loss; Public health and safety; Water logging and
                                    salinization; Spread of water-borne diseases etc.

                                    Construction related risks include: Soil, air degradation/pollution; Water
                                    pollution; Groundwater depletion; Erosion and sedimentation; Land,
                                    perennial and annual crops and other property losses
                                    Potential social risks include: Conflicts around land acquisition and           The Project ESMF
                                    displacement; Conflicts over water use and equity; Exclusion of vulnerable      addresses these risks
                                    groups ( female headed households, landless youth); Loss of livelihood
                                    during construction( affect crop production)
                                         During construction, the following issues may arise: Access road
                                         problems; Impacts on cemeteries, cultural, religious, archeologically
                                         important sites; Consultation gaps during the project study and design
                                         works; Compensation payment and resettlement issues; SEA/SH due to
                                         labor influx; Labor influx; Economic disparities; Lack of security; Problem
                                         in identification of the right land owner due to lack of ownership
                                         certificate to some farmers.

                                         Social risks in regard to dam rehabilitation are: Grievances related to
                                         compensation; SEA/SH; Water use conflict; Land acquisition conflicts
Somali region   Irrigation Development   Key challenges in irrigation are: Sedimentation and silt blocking canals;        The Project aims to
                Bureau                   Frequent breakdown of pumps; Flood damage during Gu and Deyr                     address these challenges
                                         seasons; Limited technical capacity for O&M
                                         Environmental risks due to project activities include: Increased salinity if     The Project ESMF has
                                         drainage is not improved; Risk of vegetation loss along canals;                  included these risks
                                         Disturbance to natural water flows; Interference with grazing routes
                                         during construction; Over extraction of water
                                         The Social risks for the project activities include: Exclusion of marginalized   The Project ESMF has
                                         people; Temporary land access restrictions; Conflict between construction        included these risks
                                         companies and local clan; Poor communication with elders and
                                         community leasers during construction; Limited employment
                                         opportunities for locals; Community safety issues re construction
                                         machinery; SH through labor influx
                                         The most vulnerable groups are female headed households, IDPs, landless          The Project SEP has
                                         youth, PwD, Poor pastoralists and agro-pastoralists                              included these vulnerable
                                                                                                                          groups
                                         The challenges with dam safety information management include limited            The Project team
                                         capacity at woreda level and poor documentation of previous dam                  acknowledges these
                                         incidents                                                                        challenges

                                         Potential environmental risks in regard to dam rehabilitation include            The Project ESMF has
                                         sedimentation, contamination, construction dust and clearing of                  included these risks
                                         vegetation for construction

                                         Potential social risks in regard to dam rehabilitation include conflict          The Project ESMF has
                                         among water users; land acquisition and access issues; lack of operational       included these risks
                                         rules
                                 Current regulations have gaps and require modernization and                     The Project team
                                 harmonization to adjust to current irrigation practices; provide clearer        acknowledges these
                                 institutional roles and responsibilities and strengthen IWUAs and Local         challenges and will
                                 Governments                                                                     support legislation
South West Region   MOA, MILLS   Key challenges in irrigation include maintenance issues leading to high         The Project will aim to
                                 cost; lack of community engagement; absence of modern irrigation                address some of these
                                 technologies                                                                    challenges
                                 Potential environmental risks associated with the Project include: risks        The Project ESMF has
                                 with quarry site management; design and implementation phases are not           included these risks
                                 connected; poor ESMPs; water logging; salinity due to poor irrigation
                                 practices
                                 Potential social risks associated with the Project include the exclusion of     The Project ESMF has
                                 customary institutions; lack of proper handling of compensation; land           included these risks
                                 expansion beyond the limits; unequal pay of workers; SEA/SH through
                                 labor influx; labor exploitation; ROW and land acquisition issues;
                                 boundary and plot conflicts; lack of land rights for vulnerable groups;
                                 removal of trees
                                 Vulnerable groups include women headed households, PWD, Youth,                  This was included in the
                                 landless                                                                        Project SEP
                                 Key challenges in regard to dam safety include a lack of data collection        This challenge is
                                 and analysis.                                                                   acknowledged by the
                                                                                                                 Project
                                 Potential environmental risks in relation to dam rehabilitation include         The Project ESMF has
                                 construction related issues, such as dust; water salinity; and water logging    included these risks

                                 Potential social risks in relation to dam rehabilitation include SEA/SH         The Project ESMF has
                                 through worker influx; and conflicts around water                               included these risks

                                 Regulations should be adjusted to match current technical standards             The Project will address
                                                                                                                 legislation
Tigray region                    Key challenges in regards to irrigation include absence of conservation         These challenges are
                                 work around watersheds; shortage of budget for O&M; lack of community           acknowledged by the
                                 engagement; absence of modern technologies; weak water management;              Project
                                 social conflict in irrigation water utilization; poor site selection, design,
                                 quality construction; compensation issues.
                        Potential environmental risks associated with Project activities are:         The Project ESMF has
                        degradation of water and soil resources; sedimentation load in the            included these risks
                        infrastructure; overflooding; poor quarry site management; and poor cart
                        away system during construction; change of flow of river direction;
                        problem of gully rehabilitation round irrigation infrastructure; water
                        logging and high infiltration in tertiary canals, if they are not lined,
                        especially in black cotton soil.

                        Construction-related risks include: water, soil and air pollution; water
                        logging; deforestation; soil erosion; invasive weeds; dust.

                        Environmental risks in relation to dam rehabilitation include: formation of
                        stagnant water; water logging; deforestation; soil erosion; water salinity
                        Social risks associated with the Project activities include: absence of       The Project ESMF has
                        proper consultations; property loss and displacement; dissatisfaction with    included these risks
                        compensation; lack of women’s empowerment as man take the
                        compensation in the household; disturbance of local culture; community
                        disappointments over delays

                        Construction-related social risks include: Conflicts during road access;
                        camp establishment, construction materials; SEA/SH through labor influx;
                        spread of vector-borne diseases; labor exploitation; violation of cultural
                        values of the community; lack of considerations of farmers knowledge;
                        inequality in labor pay; loss of land and crops; conflict through lack of
                        awareness and inappropriate compensation
                        The main vulnerable groups are female headed households, breastfeeding        These have been
                        women, youth, landless, elderly, minority groups                              included in the Project
                                                                                                      SEP
Afar Region   AFIILDB   Key challenges in irrigation include collection of fees for water use;        These challenges are
                        financial constraints for capacity building of IWUAs; costly maintenance;     acknowledged by the
                        lack of sense of ownership; lack of monitoring                                Project
                        Key environmental risks associated with the Project activities include:       The Project ESMF has
                        degradation of water and soil resources; water logging and soil salinity      included these risks
                        due to poor irrigation water management; stagnant water formation in
                        the quarry site and spread of malaria.

                        Construction- related risks include water, soil, and air, pollution; water
                        logging; salination; deforestation; formation of stagnant water.
                                      Social risks associated with the Project activities include: Displacement     The Project ESMF has
                                      and other land losses; dissatisfaction with compensation; domestic            included these risks
                                      violence, because men in household takes compensation money;
                                      disturbance of local culture

                                      Construction-related risks include road access challenges; impacts on
                                      cultural items; consultation gaps, especially on compensation issues;
                                      SEA/SH through labor influx
                                      Key dam safety issues include lack of technical expertise; lack of recorded   The Project has taken
                                      data on dam safety; water management problems                                 note of these issues.
South Ethiopia   BILLs                Current challenges in irrigation management:                                  The Project has taken
Region                                                                                                              note of these issues
                                      include a lack of quality in construction; lack of punctual maintenance;
                                      lack of capacity of IWUAs; lack of community engagement; institutional
                                      integration problem; M&E gaps; etc..
                 South Ethiopia       Water shortages that lead to conflicts; lack of awareness of schemes
                 Region Bureau of     management
                 Agriculture (BOAS)
                 Environmental        No use of PPE; lack of pest management preparation; use of costly Diesel
                 Protection Agency    pumps; water quality problems; budget constraints for watershed studies;
                 (EPA)
                 Bureau of Land       Land acquisition without compensation
                 Administration
                 (BoLA)
                 BILLs& Bureau of     Environmental risks associated with the Project activities include:           Risks have been included
                 Water and Energy     degradation of water and soil resources; water logging and soil salinity      in the Project ESMF
                 (BoWE)               due to poor irrigation water management practice.
                 EPA                  Over-abstraction from rivers and reservoirs
                                      Water-borne diseases
                 BILLs                Social risks associated with the Project include:
                                      Spread of malaria through stagnant water; Involuntary displacement and
                                      other property losses; Dissatisfaction with compensation; gender-based
                                      discrimination
                                      During construction: access road problems; impacts on cemeteries and
                                      religious institutions; consultation gaps; compensation payments
                 EPA and BoWE         NO proper use of PPE; water-borne diseases
During construction activities: risks of SEA/SH; labor exploitation and
abuse; unfair wages for women
Annex 16: List of Regional SSI Rehabilitation & Modernization Proposal and Selected New Projects
The following Table shows the selected regional SSI rehabilitation and modernization sites.

Table 24 SSI rehabilitation and modernization sites

  Regional SSI Rehabilitation & Modernization Projects-
                 Final Selection Proposal

                                                      Location
    S/N             Name of schemes

                                                Basin
 AFAR REGION
     1        Mego                              Awash River
     2        Gurmda                            Awash River
     3        Sibmlyta                          Aware River
   4     Bonta                                  Aware River
   5     Ayrolaf                                Aware River
 AMHARA REGION
   6     Lamua Boshu                                  Tekezie
   7     Durina                                       Tekezie

     8        Mariyam Enatu                           Tekezie

     9        Gureza-1                                Tekezie
     10       Degoska                                 Tekezie
     11       Kinbra                                  Tekezie

     12       Gult Mender                             Tekezie

     13       Shal wuha                               Tekezie
     14       Shimshiha                               Tekezie
     15       Gazo wenz                               Tekezie
     16       Gibiz                                   Tekezie
     17       Shimsha                                 Tekezie
18   Tiru wuha        Tekezie

19   Gibeza           Tekezie

20   Degarob          Tekezie

21   Hamsa gider      Tekezie

22   Chereti          Golina
23   Shetela           Abay
24   Burka         Awash
25   Mukechit          Abay
26   Kobewenz         Tekezie

27   Temenako         Tekezie

28   Serebar          Tekezie
29   Alitu             Abay
30   Kilie            Awash
31   Sholega          Awash
32   Koso             Awash
33   Demelash          Abay

34   Shilash man      Awash

35   Tikur wuha        Abay
36   Zindib            Abay
37   Lifta         Abay
38   Arefa            Tekezie
39   Amzya            Tekezie
40   Chira Wenz       Tekezie
41   Arewa            Awash
42   Agamsa           Awash
43   Serdo wuha       Tekezie
  44     Demoze                          Awash


  45     Muklay                          Abay

  46     Gumara-2                        Abay
  47     Butu                            Awash
                     SUBTOTAL PROPOSED
                          SELECTED
BENISHANGUL
  48    Durbatse                   TBN
  49    Kokeb                      TBN
  50    Upper Sonka                TBN

  51
         Eshen Almetema            TBN
  52
         Silga                     TBN
  53     Fuafuate                  TBN
  54     Libit                     TBN
CENTRAL ETHIOPIA
  55                Megecha              TBN
  56                 Gotam               TBN
  57                 Guder               TBN
  58                 Lenda               TBN
  59                 Furfuro             TBN
  60                   Zikir             TBN
  61                  Begez              TBN
  62                Anzecha              TBN
  63                 Gingita             TBN
  64                Borkosha             TBN
  65                Shafamo              TBN
  66                  Gogiti             TBN
  67                 Lamo                TBN
   68               Tirer          TBN
DIRE DAWA
  69    Koresso                    Awash
  70    Awalee                     Awash
GAMBELLA
  71    BONGA                TBN

  72
         GILO PUCHALA        TBN

  73
         BARO PINYKEW        TBN

  74
         TOLINA TOKALI       TBN
  75     NGOR                TBN
HARARI
  76   Berser                TBN
  77   Sheriff Harawe        TBN
  78   Melka Cheha           TBN
OROMIA
  79   Qunama                TBN
  80     Gudeya              TBN
  81     Hambela             TBN
  82     Haro Dhasi          TBN
  83     Bacara oda Buta     TBN
  84     Duufaa              TBN
         Ahmadnur Dachoo
  85
                             TBN
  86     Hasen Umer          TBN
  87     labu                TBN
  88     Qonor               TBN
  89     Ejersa              TBN
  90      Erer Meda Xaxila   TBN
  91     Welenso             TBN
         Badesa Adibari
  92
                               TBN
  93     Wanja                 TBN
  94     Gambel Tarre          TBN
 95      Wanji Kuruftu         TBN
 96      Beli Malima           TBN
 97      Girisa Golba          TBN
 98      Gobora                TBN
 99      Shosha Conge          TBN
 100     Gibe Lamu             TBN
 101     Shukko                TBN
 102     Sheled                TBN
 103     Gepha                 TBN
 104     Ciri                  TBN
 105     Meri Megari           TBN
 106     Cilalo                TBN
 107     Herawa 01             TBN
 108     Buba SSIP             TBN
 109     Abayi                 TBN
 110     Gela                  TBN
 111     Dodicha I             TBN
 112     Melka Ketaba          Rift Valley
 113     Boolloo               TBN
 114     Meki                  Rift Valley
 115     Tibila                Awash
 116     Asgori (BH=7)         Awash
 117     Tefki (BH=1)          Awash
 118     Awash (BH=2)          Awash
         Sebeta Hawas (BH=6)
 119
                               Awash
  120    Ilu (BH=3)            Awash
SIDAMA
  121             Wamolie        Rift Valley
  122             Jigessa        Rift Valley
  123              Worka         Rift Valley
  124                Galalcha          Genale Dawa
  125                 Galana           Genale Dawa
  126                  Dagia            Rift Valley
  127                 Baturo            Rift Valley
  128                Chancho            Rift Valley
  129                  Chala            Rift Valley
  130                 Racha            Genale Dawa
  131                  Boga             Rift Valley
  132                  Rasa             Rift Valley
  133                  Rewo            Genale Dawa
  134                Gambela            Rift Valley
  135                 Bebaco           Genale Dawa
SOMALI
           Kelafo Irrigation project
  136      (River, Solar Energy)
                                       Wabi Shabele
         South Gode Irrigation
  137    project (River, Electric
         power )                       Wabi Shabele
  138    Guradamole                    Genale Dawa
  139    Dolo Ado                      Genale Dawa
  140    Sagag River,
SOUTH ETHIOPIA
  141    Gato                          TBN
  142    Gera                          TBN
  143    Asa                           TBN
  144    Halo galana                   TBN
SOUTH WEST ETHIOPIA
  145    Kashu                         Baro-Akobo
  146    Bachere                       Omo - Gibe
  147    Geshe                         Omo - Gibe
         Gota                          Omo - Gibe
  148
                                       Basin
  149      Chebero                     Omo - Gibe
  150      Erimich                     Baro-Akobo
  151      Maymay                      Omo - Gibe
 TIGRAY
   152          Sesa                               Tekeze
   153          Degub                              Tekeze
   154          Dora Two                           Denakil
   155          Dora One                           Denakil
   156          Grindeho                           Tekeze
   157          Adikerakro                         Tekeze
   158          Midmar                             Tekeze
   159          Chiemit                            Tekeze
   160          Giba river                         Tekeze
   161          Adefelesti                         Tekeze
   162          Shilanat                           Tekeze
   163          Adi-Kuri                           Tekeze

The following Tables shows the selected sites for new SSIs.

Table 25 Selected sites for new SSIs


       Regional New SSI Projects-Final Selection Proposal


 S/N              Region                       Name of schemes


   1     Afar                          Digdiga
   2     Afar                          Halbi
   3     Afar                          Sibabi
   4     Afar                          Yangudin
   5     Amhara                        Tirari-2
   6     Amhara                        Dina

   7     Amhara                        Tekezi-2
   8     Amhara                        Ayrara-2
   9     Amhara                        Wazla River
10   Amhara             Aluwuha

11   Amhara             Soroka
12   Beshangul Gumuz    Meti SSI
13   Beshangul Gumuz    Bolo SSI
14   Beshangul Gumuz    Buda selga SSI
15   Beshangul Gumuz    Yabus MSI
                        Asas SSIP
     Central Ethiopia
16
17   Central Ethiopia   Warwarsa SSIP
                        Gamuna MSIP
     Central Ethiopia
18
19   Central Ethiopia   Wombile MSIP
20   Dire Dawa                  Hula Hulul
21   Dire Dawa                    Wahil
                        MON SMALL SCALE
     Gambella
22                      IRRIGATION PROJECT


     Gambella
                        ELIA SMALL SCALE
23                      IRRIGATION PROJECT
24   Harari             Abawen Irrigation Scheme
25   Harari             Dwaee Irrigation Scheme
26   Oromia             Oda Buta
27   Oromia             Burka Boreta
28   Oromia             Saphalo
29   Oromia             Ilman Sado
30   Oromia             Bucho
31   Oromia             Sike Melka Arara
32   Oromia             Funale Kosi
33   Oromia             Haro Bate
34   Oromia           Talo

     Oromia           Kersa
35
36   Oromia           Kuri Badessa
37   Oromia           Caljetu
38   Oromia           Tufito
39   Oromia           Saphante
40   Oromia           Bule Dakera
41   Oromia           Burka
42   Oromia           Konitu
43   Sidama           Namicha
44   Sidama           Lolako

45   Sidama           Makibasa one
46   Sidama           Makibasa two
47   Sidama           Qonkana

48   Somali           Lagahida
                      Nagadwayne Irrigation
     Somali
49                    Project
50   South Rthiopia   Mole SSIP

51   South Rthiopia   wajifo

52   South Rthiopia   Abela Gefeta SSIP

53   South Rthiopia   Abota Ulto SSIP
54   South Rthiopia   Ruhante SSIP
55   South Rthiopia   Wallesa SSIP
56   South West       Kichani
57   South West       Masile
58   South West       Dibo
59   South West       Bergi
60   Tigray           Lemlem Chedo DW
61   Tigray   Ajeada Mekoni DW

62   Tigray   Gra Hareb Zinabu DW

63   Tigray   Alisali DW
64   Tigray   Arada arimuja DW
65   Tigray   Wanchalie
66   Tigray   Desta Berhe Assiciotion
67   Tigray   Ganda Chafie DW
68   Tigray   Adi Mengesha DW
