Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2026 | Report No: PIDDC01548




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)        Operation ID                    Operation Name
Cameroon, Central African       P508320                         Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and
Republic, Chad, Congo,                                          Access (CAPP-RIA) - Phase 1
Republic of, Gabon
Region                          Estimated Appraisal Date        Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL             21-Sep-2026                     07-Dec-2026                     Energy & Extractives
AFRICA
Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
Investment Project              Ministère de l'Économie,        Ministry of Water and
Financing (IPF)                 de la Planification et de       Energy, Ministère de
                                l'Aménagement du                l'Acces Universel à l'Eau et
                                territoire, Ministère de        à l'Energie, CAPP
                                L'Economie, des Finances,       Secretariat, Ministre du
                                de la Dette et des              Développement de
                                Participations, Charge de la    I'Energie et des Ressources
                                Lutte Contre La Vie Chère,      Hydrauliques
                                Ministere des Finances, du
                                Budget et du Portefeuille
                                public, Ministere de
                                l'Economie, du Plan et de la
                                Coopération
                                Internationale, CAPP
                                Secretariat

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed PrDO: (i) increase regional electricity trade in Central Africa, and (ii) increase access to electricity in
participating countries.

PrDo indicators
PrDO indicator#1: Electricity traded among countries within the Central Africa region (MWh per year)
PrDO indicator#2: People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections (number)

Phase 1
Proposed PDO: (i) increase access to electricity grid electricity and (ii) establish governance of the regional electricity
market.
PDO indicator #1: People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections (number)
PDO indicator #2: Key governance instruments for the regional market adopted (number)



                                                                                                                          Page 1
      The World Bank
      Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 To be decided
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           To be decided

 SUMMARY
   Total Operation Cost                                                                                     280.50

   Total Financing                                                                                          280.50
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                            280.50
   Financing Gap                                                                                              0.00

 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                            226.50
       IDA Credit                                                                                           113.50
       IDA Grant                                                                                            113.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                            54.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                 The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.      Central Africa faces severe development challenges exacerbated by a complex geopolitical environment. The
region is home to the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) spanning 11 countries and a population of



                                                                                                                   Page 2
        The World Bank
        Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)


over 230 million people in 2023.1 Just over half reside in rural areas and are among the poorest in the world. 2 The region’s
GDP amounted to US$281 billion in 2023, with Angola, Cameroon and the Democratic Republic of Congo representing
more than 70 percent of the economic activity. 3 GDP per capita varies substantially between countries, ranging from
US$193 in Burundi to nearly US$8,000 in Gabon.4 The region is characterized by widespread poverty, structural fragility,
and significant gaps in infrastructure and energy access. Despite being endowed with vast reserves of oil, minerals, forests,
and hydropower potential, many of these countries rank among the poorest globally, with approximately 55 percent of
people in the ECCAS region living below the poverty line.5 Political instability and security concerns in the Central Africa
region impede economic growth, good governance, and high living standards, with conflict, displacement, and weak
institutions compounding vulnerability. Seven countries in ECCAS are classified as having fragile and conflict affected
situations: Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo and São
Tomé and Príncipe.6
2.       In recent years, several ECCAS countries have experienced periods of robust economic growth, particularly those
benefitting from commodity exports and post-conflict recovery. However, this growth has often been volatile and uneven,
heavily influenced by fluctuations in global commodity prices and domestic instability.7 The COVID-19 pandemic and
ongoing climate-related shocks have further highlighted the vulnerability of the region’s economies, many of which remain
highly dependent on oil, mining, and agriculture. Rising temperatures, shifting rainfall patterns, and more frequent floods
and storms threaten livelihoods – especially for rural populations dependent on rain-fed agriculture – and place growing
strain on critical infrastructure, including power generation and transmission assets. Hydropower, a key component of the
regional electricity mix, is increasingly affected by hydrological variability. For example, recent low water levels in Gabon
led to reductions in generation capacity and supply interruptions.8 Additionally, extreme weather events damage power
lines, substations, and access roads, leading to service disruptions and higher maintenance costs. At the same time, high
population growth has constrained GDP per capita gains, limiting improvements in living standards. In this context,
strengthening regional integration—particularly through diversified, climate-resilient energy systems and enhanced
regional power transmission— will be critical for unlocking the region’s economic potential and enabling more inclusive
and sustainable growth.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context

 3.      The region faces persistent challenges in achieving reliable and affordable electricity access. Electrification
 rates vary widely across the region, from over 90 percent in Gabon to 12 percent in Chad, and rural areas across the
 region remain significantly underserved.9 At the regional level, nearly 65 percent of the population – about 150 million
 people – lacks access to electricity. Generation is dominated by hydropower in some countries and by thermal sources
 in others, with limited regional integration preventing the efficient sharing of resources. Power utilities in most countries
 are financially constrained, with tariffs set below cost-recovery levels, high technical and commercial losses – often
 exceeding 30 percent – and low collection rates. These challenges reduce the ability of utilities to invest in grid
 maintenance and expansion, contributing to frequent supply disruptions and inadequate service quality. Although the

1 The eleven member countries include Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Equatorial

Guinea, Gabon, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, and Sao Tome and Principe.
2 World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI).
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 World Bank FY26 Classification of Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations.
7 World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI).
8 World Bank Group, Gabon Country Climate and Development Report. 2025.
9 Latest access numbers from 2023. https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators



                                                                                                                                            Page 3
        The World Bank
        Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)


 region possesses abundant renewable energy resources – including solar and vast untapped hydropower – deployment
 remains limited due to financing constraints, weak regulatory frameworks, human capacity challenges, and
 underdeveloped project pipelines. Many CAPP countries also lack updated least-cost power development plans and
 coordinated strategies for rural electrification. Regional initiatives aimed at increasing trade and interconnection remain
 key to improving system efficiency and leveraging untapped renewable resources across the region.
 4.        To promote regional energy integration and address power supply challenges, ECCAS established the Central
 African Power Pool (CAPP) in 2003. CAPP’s mandate is to develop a unified electricity market in Central Africa by
 integrating national power systems and establishing the necessary legal, commercial, and technical frameworks for
 efficient power trade. In 2004, CAPP was designated a “Specialized Agency of ECCAS” with responsibilities that cover
 energy policy implementation, infrastructure planning, and coordination of electricity exchanges among member states.
 As part of broader governance reforms, CAPP was reclassified in 2021 to “Specialized Institution of ECCAS” 10, ensuring
 its alignment with ECCAS administrative requirements and placing it under closer oversight by the ECCAS Commission.11
 Over the years, the CAPP has made notable technical progress. The Electricity Market Code (2009) set out the principles
 for regional electricity trade, followed by the Grid Code (2012), which provided operational rules for interconnected
 systems. The Grid Code is currently being updated to reflect developments in renewable energy and energy storage.
 Looking ahead, CAPP’s 2025–2028 strategic objectives12 focus on enhancing supply security through regional
 integration, expanding access, improving reliability, and reducing operational costs. These goals are supported by
 initiatives in infrastructure development, market design, policy harmonization, financing, and capacity building –
 reflecting a continued regional commitment to sustainable energy and integration.
 5.       To operationalize CAPP’s strategic objectives, a series of coordinated initiatives are currently underway with
 support from the World Bank Group and development partners. The World Bank Group – together with key
 development partners such as the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the African Union Development Agency’s New
 Partnership for Africa’s Development (AUDA-NEPAD) – is supporting the development of a Master Plan for the CAPP,
 aligned with the broader CMP currently under preparation. The Master Plan anticipates that electricity demand
 increases from 43TWh in 2021 to 134TWh in 2040, and peak demand increases from 6.8GW to 27GW over the same
 period13. Regional integration, led by CAPP under the strategic guidance of ECCAS and in close consultation with the
 Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC), will be essential to meeting these growing energy needs.
 However, this can only be achieved through strengthened institutional capacity within CAPP, enabling it to plan,
 implement, and operate cross-border infrastructure and establish a robust regional power trading framework. The first
 cross-border interconnector in the CAPP region, linking Cameroon and Chad, is currently under implementation with
 financing from the World Bank, AfDB, Islamic Development Bank, and the European Union (Cameroon – Chad Power
 Interconnection Project; P168185). The CAPP Master Plan is expected to be finalized in Quarter 2 of 2026.
 Complementing these efforts and with facilitation from the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP)
 Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) (TF0CO442), the World Bank also supported the preparation of CAPP’s Strategic Business
 Plan for 2025–2028, which was endorsed by ECCAS Ministers of Energy in October 2024. With support from Electrifying
 Africa (TF0C2325) and ESMAP (TF0CO442), the World Bank is currently supporting an assessment of the feasibility of
 medium-voltage (MV) cross-border interconnection points between Cameroon and CAR, Cameroon and Gabon, as well
 as Cameroon and the Republic of Congo, with completion expected by June 2026.
 6.     Regional power integration offers substantial economic and reliability benefits for the CAPP region. Results
 from the preliminary modeling conducted by the Energy Global Unit within the World Bank indicate that regional

10 Decision No 13/CEEAC/CCEG/XIX/21 dated July 30, 2021, of the 19 th Ordinary Session of ECCAS Heads of State and Government
11 Decision No 8/CEEAC/CCEG/XIX/21 dated July 30, 2021, of the 19th Ordinary Session of ECCAS Heads of State and Government
12 2025 – 2028 CAPP Strategic Business Plan approved by the ECCAS Ministers in charge of energy in October 2024
13 African Continental Power System Master Plan: Final Report, Integrated Continental Demand Forecasts Scenario Analysis, April 6, 2023



                                                                                                                                          Page 4
        The World Bank
        Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)


 transmission integration could reduce total system costs by about US$5 billion, equivalent to roughly 12 percent of the
 net present system cost. Integration would also enhance system reliability, lower fuel costs, and reduce dependence on
 external electricity trade by allowing the region to better utilize its hydropower resources. Overall, the regional
 integration scenario achieves an average system cost of US$42/MWh, compared with US$54/MWh in the non-
 integration case, underscoring the strong economic rationale for advancing cross-border transmission investments.
 7.       In response to the ongoing challenges facing Central Africa’s electricity sector, the CAPP-RIA MPA will adopt
 a comprehensive and forward-thinking approach to develop a fully integrated regional power market. The approach
 will be grounded in the key lessons learned from the West Africa Regional Electricity Market Program (WA-REMP) MPA
 (505173), such as the need for strong sequencing and robust foundational institutional arrangements ahead of Day
 Ahead Market (DAM) launch, and the importance of addressing payment discipline, least-cost planning, and
 system-stability requirements. It will prioritize actions that reduce operational and market risks, promote cross-border
 cooperation, and create favorable conditions for private sector engagement, particularly in transmission line
 development. By aligning regional and national efforts, leveraging partnerships, and mobilizing climate and private
 financing, the MPA aims to help participating countries move from fragmented investments toward a coordinated
 strategy for transition and increased energy access. The program will focus on expanding access to electricity through
 medium and low voltage network extensions, particularly in communities located along planned high voltage (HV)
 corridors and near national borders to enhance the social acceptability of regional interconnections, strengthen cross-
 border cooperation, and ensure local populations directly benefit from regional investments. Prioritizing access in these
 areas also enables countries to capture economies of scale from shared transmission infrastructure. The MPA will
 consider the potential for connecting industries and other productive users located along these corridors to stimulate
 demand, support local economic development and job creation through enhanced productive use of electricity, and
 reinforce the long-term viability of regional interconnections.
 8.     The design of the CAPP-RIA MPA, which is based on a three-pillar structure—institutional strengthening,
 expanded access, and regional integration—will create a coordinated platform to address market barriers, aggregate
 investments, and ensure that the benefits of interconnection and power trade reach communities across Cameroon,
 the Central African Republic, Gabon, and the Republic of Congo.14


 Relationship to CPF

9.       The proposed MPA aligns closely with the strategic priorities outlined in the Country Partnership Frameworks
(CPFs) of the five participating countries. In Cameroon (FY25-29, 190963-CM), the MPA supports Objective 3: Increasing
Access to Renewable Energy, by strengthening national and cross-border transmission networks, scaling up access, and
promoting regional power trade through the Central African Power Pool. In the Central African Republic (FY21-25, 150618-
CF), it aligns with Objective 1.5: Build Resilient Infrastructure, by improving electricity access and enabling renewable
energy expansion critical to connectivity and service delivery. In Gabon (FY23-27, 174105-GA), the MPA directly supports
Objective 2: Increased Access to Basic Services, by supporting electricity access expansion and regional interconnections
that will enhance reliability and support diversification in the non-oil economy. In the Republic of Congo (FY20-24, 126962-
CG), the MPA contributes to Objective 1.5: Improved Infrastructure for Growth and Inclusion, under the strategic focus on
strengthening economic management, through technical assistance and regional planning aligned with Congo’s vision of
the sector as a growth driver. Through these targeted interventions, the MPA reinforces national priorities while advancing
regional integration in Central Africa.


14 Expressions of Interest were received from all five countries: Central African Republic (January 9, 2025), Cameroon (January 15, 2025), Republic of

Congo (April 11, 2025), and Gabon (October 21, 2025).

                                                                                                                                                 Page 5
          The World Bank
          Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)


10.     The CAPP-RIA MPA is strategically designed to leverage public sector investments in regional transmission and
distribution infrastructure as a catalyst for private capital mobilization. By focusing on HV interconnection projects,
reinforcement of HV transmission networks, rehabilitation and extension of distribution grids, and cross-border MV
interconnections, the program aims to address critical market barriers and create an enabling environment for private
sector participation in the Central African power sector. While generation investments are not financed at this stage, the
program’s investments in grid infrastructure will lay the foundation for future private sector-led generation projects by
improving system reliability, expanding market access, and reducing operational risks. The phased approach will support
the development of transparent commercial frameworks, harmonized regulatory standards, and regional market
arrangements, thereby enhancing investor confidence and facilitating blended financing solutions. Close collaboration with
IFC, MIGA, and other development partners will be pursued to mobilize private investment, particularly in subsequent
phases, and to maximize the impact of public resources in advancing sustainable, inclusive electricity access across the
region with associated benefits for local supply chains, service providers, and employment.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 11.       The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to (i) increase access to electricity in participating countries and
 (ii) increase regional electricity trade in Central Africa.


  Key Results (From PCN)
12.      The proposed MPA will contribute to the creation and operationalization of a regional electricity market by
supporting CAPP and the national utilities to put in place the core rules, systems, and infrastructure needed for cross-
border trade. It will expand access by financing distribution systems that include medium and low voltage investments as
well as cross-border infrastructure involving the participating countries. It will also strengthen the institutional capacity of
CAPP and participating national utilities by providing targeted technical assistance and capacity building to improve
planning, operational readiness, and the ability to manage regional power flows and market arrangements. Together, these
efforts will promote regional cooperation, improve sector performance and enable more people to benefit from reliable
and affordable electricity.
13.       The following indicators will measure progress toward the PrDO:
      •   PrDO Indicator 1: People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections (CRI, number)
      •   PrDO Indicator 2: Electricity traded among countries within the Central Africa region (MWh per year)


 D. Concept Description

14.      The MPA provides a long-term framework to deepen regional electricity integration, expand access, and
strengthen the institutions needed for a functional regional power market. Its three pillars focus on (1) building the
institutional, technical, and regulatory capacity of CAPP and member utilities to operate a sustainable regional market, (2)
expanding reliable, affordable electricity access through distribution improvements and MV interconnections, and (3)
advancing priority cross-border interconnections and reinforcing national grids to enable greater regional power trade.
15.      The first phase of the CAPP-RIA MPA supports the development of a regional electricity market in Central Africa,
focusing on Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, and the Republic of Congo. It lays the technical, institutional,
and infrastructure foundations for regional integration by strengthening the institutional capacity of the CAPP Secretariat
and national utilities, advancing the governance and market frameworks for cross-border power trade, and financing
priority transmission and distribution investments to expand reliable and affordable electricity access.



                                                                                                                           Page 6
      The World Bank
      Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)


16.   This first phase includes two (2) main components:
      i. Component 1: Preparatory Studies and Institutional Capacity Building to Support Regional Integration (US$61
         million equivalent). This component establishes the technical, commercial, and institutional foundations
         required to operationalize a regional electricity market and prepare future investments under subsequent
         phases of the MPA, and has two subcomponents:
            •   Subcomponent 1.1: Preparatory Studies and Regional Market Frameworks (US$24.8 million
                equivalent). This subcomponent finances the analytical and regulatory groundwork necessary for
                regional power integration and for the preparation of next-in-line high-voltage interconnection
                investments. It supports the development of pre-investment studies for the HV Cameroon–Central
                African Republic and Gabon–Republic of Congo interconnections, including feasibility studies,
                environmental and social assessments, and technical designs. A high-level assessment will also be
                conducted on the viability of interconnecting the CAPP and the West African Power Pool (WAPP). The
                subcomponent also supports the preparation of the commercial framework required to govern the
                functioning of the regional electricity market.

            •   Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional Strengthening of the CAPP Secretariat and Member Utilities (US$36.2
                million equivalent). This subcomponent reinforces the institutional, human, and operational capacities
                of the CAPP Secretariat and national counterparts to ensure effective coordination and future operation
                of the regional electricity market. It also supports the preparation of the Market Coordination Center
                and strengthens CAPP’s internal systems and those of member utilities by supporting the deployment
                of a regional monitoring and evaluation mechanism, the harmonization of network planning tools,
                strengthening of cybersecurity and IT infrastructure, and the preparation of a comprehensive capacity-
                building strategy. This subcomponent also includes targeted training and embedded implementation
                support to help CAPP and national agencies manage the technical, fiduciary, safeguards, and planning
                requirements of the MPA. Finally, this subcomponent promotes gender and social inclusion within CAPP
                and its member utilities.

      ii. Component 2: Priority Investments in on-grid access (US$219.5 million equivalent). This component finances
          priority investments that expand reliable electricity access in participating countries, allowing immediate
          progress toward the Mission 300 targets and each country’s National Energy Compact, and strengthening the
          regional MV backbone required for future power exchanges. This component has the two following
          subcomponents:
            •   Subcomponent 2.1: On-grid Access Expansion and Distribution Strengthening (US$200 million
                equivalent). This subcomponent finances on-grid access projects and distribution-system reinforcement
                in Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, and the Republic of Congo. Activities include network
                densification, rehabilitation of MV-LV networks, construction of new MV–LV feeders, and the rollout of
                household and enterprise connections in priority urban, peri-urban, and border areas. By 2030, about
                2.655 million people are expected to benefit from new electricity access in the five participating
                countries through this MPA.

            •   Subcomponent 2.2: Medium-Voltage Cross-Border Interconnections (US$19.5 million equivalent). This
                subcomponent supports the development and construction of priority MV cross-border interconnection
                projects between Cameroon–CAR, Cameroon–Gabon, and Cameroon–Republic of Congo.



                                                                                                                   Page 7
      The World Bank
      Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                     No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                               No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
  Momodou A K Njie
  Senior Energy Specialist

  Anna Aghababyan
  Senior Operations Officer

  Monyl Toga
  Senior Energy Specialist

  Yang Liu
  Senior Energy Economist

  Daniel Camos Daurella
  Senior Energy Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient




                                                                                          Page 8
     The World Bank
     Central African Power Pool Regional Interconnection and Access (P508320)


 Ministère de l'Économie, de la Planification et de l'Aménagement du territoire

 Ministère de L'Economie, des Finances, de la Dette et des Participations, Charge de la Lutte Contre La Vie Chère

 Ministere des Finances, du Budget et du Portefeuille public

 Ministere de l'Economie, du Plan et de la Coopération Internationale

 CAPP Secretariat

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Water and Energy

 Ministère de l'Acces Universel à l'Eau et à l'Energie

 CAPP Secretariat

 Ministre du Développement de I'Energie et des Ressources Hydrauliques

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL

                                          Momodou A K Njie, Anna Aghababyan, Monyl Toga, Yang Liu, Daniel Camos
Task Team Leader(s):
                                          Daurella

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                 Jie Tang                                21-Jan-2026

Country Director:                         Marina Wes                              12-Feb-2026




                                                                                                                    Page 9
