Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 04/09/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04178




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 11, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508124                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       WISE MPA                    2025

                     Operation Name            Armenia: Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Armenia                   Armenia                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                        ASIA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                      Republic of Armenia      Ministry of Territorial Administration   14-Apr-2025                 13-Jun-2025
                                               and Infrastructure

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     02-Apr-2025               174,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide improved access to efficient and financially sustainable irrigation
                     and safely managed rural water supply services in selected areas of Armenia.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Program is aimed at providing improved access to provide improved access to efficient and financially
                     sustainable irrigation and safely managed rural water supply services in selected areas of Armenia through a partnership
                     involving the Government of Armenia (GoA), the World Bank (WB), Agence Francaise de Development (AFD) and other
                     development partners. Recognizing that the goals of this program cannot be addressed through a single operation, it
                     will be operationalized through a Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) to facilitate sustainable transformation.
                     The phases are progressive, and each phase maintains a similar structure and builds towards the achievement of the
                     overall program development objective. The structure of the MPA is uninterrupted to ensure that the Program's

                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     activities continue without a gap in the implementation of the key activities. The MPA includes (i) a six-year Phase 1
                     (2025-2031) with focused investments in enhancing the institutional capacity of critical water sector entities, revision to
                     the methodology and structure of irrigation and WSS tariffs, completing core water sector strategies and irrigation
                     master plan, finalizing all infrastructure investment feasibility and design stage documents for all proposed investments
                     in irrigation and rural WSS, civil works to modernize five irrigation schemes, and construction/rehabilitation of supply
                     infrastructure in selected settlements for rural WSS on a pilot basis using performance-based conditions (PBCs); and (ii)
                     a six-year Phase 2 (2029-2035) to scale-up and expand infrastructure investments in all remaining irrigation schemes
                     and priority settlements for rural WSS with a focus on operational and financial efficiency, and climate adaptation. The
                     second phase will place a strong emphasis on institutionalization and widespread uptake of the policies, plans,
                     strategies, and tools developed under the previous phase. The Phase 1 program, using the Investment Project Financing
                     (IPF) lending instrument with PBCs, aims to enhance climate-resilient access, efficiency, and financial sustainability of
                     irrigation and rural WSS in selected areas of Armenia. It will focus on four components: (i) Component 1 – Water Sector
                     Reform and Institutional Strengthening with PBCs: This component will focus on strengthening national water resources
                     policy and planning through development of a comprehensive national water strategy, a ten-year national irrigation
                     strategy, a WSS national strategy, an irrigation master plan, and legal and regulatory reform. It will furthermore improve
                     irrigation sector management and service delivery through a review of tariffs and subsidies, transformation of the
                     Water Supply Agency (WSA) into an efficient and customer-oriented irrigation service provider, strengthening of the
                     Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure (MTAI) and the Water Committee (WC), and establishing a
                     Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center (IWAAC) for water and climate monitoring. (ii) Component 2 – Rural
                     Water Supply and Sanitation Enhancement: This component will first focus on institutional strengthening, capacity
                     building, and investment planning of rural WSS services through development of rural WSS sector policies, a roadmap,




Public Disclosure
                     tariff reform, and strengthening management capacities at the national and local levels. Furthermore, it will support
                     investment planning, including the preparation of feasibility studies for priority rural WSS investments for both MPA
                     phases. Lastly, it will support the construction of WSS infrastructure in selected underserved settlements, which will
                     include construction of the water network, including household connections, and any necessary water treatment
                     infrastructure. In phase 1, these investments are expected to be in Ararat, Tavush, Kotayk, Aragatsotn, or Vayots Dzor,
                     based on technical, economic, socio-political, and institutional considerations (iii) Component 3 – Modernizing Irrigation
                     Infrastructure & System Management: This component will focus on financing rehabilitation and modernization of
                     selected irrigation systems at main, secondary, and tertiary canal levels. Activities include rehabilitation and
                     modernization of headworks, critical sections of main canals, and secondary and tertiary network levels currently
                     managed jointly by WSA at the large main canal and reservoirs level and by Water User Associations (WUAs) at the
                     secondary and tertiary distributary level. It will further focus on rehabilitating some critical infrastructure under the
                     responsibility of the WSA to ensure continuous provision of irrigation water to WUAs in priority command areas. (iv)
                     Component 4 – Project Management: This component will support project implementation, including procurement and
                     financial management (FM) related to implementation of civil works, compliance with agreed environmental and social
                     management measures, and project monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This component will finance staff costs;
                     coordination of the project-financed activities with other ongoing International Financial Institution (IFI) projects in the
                     water sector; and design, implementation, and reporting of baseline and project completion surveys.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Agriculture is a vital sector in Armenia, employing about 30 percent of the workforce, primarily in rural areas. However,
                     productivity depends heavily on irrigation, which is constrained by aging infrastructure, poor management, and water

                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     scarcity. Water security has worsened due to groundwater depletion in the Ararat Artesian Basin, declining availability,
                     climate-driven variability, and emerging water quality issues. Rising irrigation demand, driven by longer growing
                     seasons, higher crop water needs, and extended droughts, further intensifies these challenges. Most irrigation
                     infrastructure, built during the Soviet era, is outdated and inefficient. Limited night storage, poor connectivity, and
                     inadequate water control lead to significant operational losses from headworks to tertiary networks. As a result,
                     Armenia’s irrigation efficiency is just 25 percent, far below the 70-85 percent efficiency of modern systems, with nearly
                     half of the water lost during distribution.

                     The Program has shortlisted nine irrigation schemes for potential financing, with five schemes to be selected for
                     implementation under Phase 1 of the MPA. These schemes are located across the Kotayk, Tavush, Aragatsotn, and Lori
                     marzes as well as Yerevan, with canals flowing through agricultural zones to support farmland irrigation. Additionally, it
                     will invest in the construction of a water supply network, including household connections infrastructure within rural
                     settlements in Ararat, Tavush, Kotayk, Aragatsotn, or Vayots Dzor marzes. Some sections of these infrastructure
                     schemes may pass near or within protective zones of modified, natural or critical habitat areas or buffers zones. Given
                     the hydrological connectivity of the selected regions, some schemes may also be situated near environmentally
                     sensitive areas of Ramsar sites such as Khor Virap Marshes (Ararat Marz) and Lake Sevan (Gegharkunik Marz, bordering
                     Kotayk Marz). There are no protected areas in the selected schemes for constructing regulating small reservoirs. None
                     of the activities will be implemented in conflict affected/disputed territories.

                     The Program targets rural settlements currently unserved by any WSS schemes. While Veolia Djur, a subsidiary of
                     Veolia, manages WSS services across most of Armenia, approximately 650,000 people (around 22 percent of the




Public Disclosure
                     population) across 579 rural settlements remain uncovered. These communities rely on aging small-scale networks,
                     springs, groundwater sources, or community-managed systems with minimal oversight. Rural sanitation remains
                     underdeveloped, with most households using pit latrines and only a few settlements connected to partially functioning
                     wastewater treatment plants.

                     Surface and groundwater water quality is deteriorating, with assessments indicating that 29 percent of surface water
                     and 7 percent of groundwater bodies are 'at risk,' primarily due to untreated municipal wastewater, agricultural runoff,
                     mining pollution, agricultural runoff, and landfill contamination in many River Basin Management Areas. Emerging
                     water quality problems threaten agriculture, with 32 percent of identified surface water bodies classified as ‘at risk’ or
                     ‘possibly at risk,’ posing potential risks to crop growth and productivity.

                     In terms of vulnerability and population characteristics, the target marzes vary significantly. Kotayk is a centrally located
                     marz with one of the highest population densities outside Yerevan, particularly in urbanized areas such as Hrazdan,
                     Abovyan, and Charentsavan. It has a mixed urban-rural demographic, with a strong reliance on both industry and
                     agriculture, providing relatively diverse economic opportunities. In contrast, Lori, Tavush, and Aragatsotn are
                     predominantly rural, with a high dependence on agriculture, livestock, and forestry as primary sources of livelihood.
                     These marzes experience higher levels of poverty compared to other regions, with limited economic diversification and
                     fewer employment opportunities outside the agricultural sector. Climate variability, particularly droughts and water
                     scarcity, further exacerbates economic vulnerabilities in these areas. Meanwhile, Yerevan and its surrounding areas are
                     highly urbanized, with a mix of residential, commercial, and industrial land use. Although the overall poverty rate is
                     lower in Yerevan compared to rural regions, the city is marked by high economic disparity, with vulnerable populations
                     concentrated in peri-urban areas.


                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)




                     Overall, rural communities in the target irrigation areas primarily rely on small-scale farming for both food security and
                     income, with limited alternative employment opportunities exacerbating poverty and social inequities. These regions
                     have a high proportion of vulnerable populations, including low-income households, elderly individuals, women-headed
                     households, ethnic minorities, and individuals with disabilities, many of whom face greater barriers to accessing water
                     services and participating in community decision-making. The majority of landowners within the irrigation schemes are
                     smallholders with land plots of less than 1 hectare, among whom 7,414 (or 23.5 percent) are women. Any civil works
                     affecting land or access to land use must be carefully assessed, as they could significantly impact livelihoods. The
                     necessary level of irrigation modernization and WSS investments will be determined during the feasibility and detailed
                     design phase, with environmental and social (E&S) impacts carefully considered.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The MTAI in collaboration with the WC with Interim project coordination team (PCT) under the WC will be responsible
                     for implementation of the project activities. A longer-term project management structure will be established by
                     government while development of strategies will be carried out under the leadership of the Deputy Prime Minister’s
                     office and executed by the MTAI and the WC. Since the PCT will be a new established unit, the institutional capacity on
                     E&S management is expected to be limited. Neither the WC nor the PCT have experience implementing the WB
                     Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and environmental and social standards (ESSs), implying that substantial
                     efforts for capacity building will be needed. This also extends to E&S risk and impact screening, the development of E&S
                     instruments and risk management, including monitoring and supervision of occupational health and safety (OHS) and
                     community health and safety aspects, stakeholder engagement (SE), and grievance management, all of which will




Public Disclosure
                     require training and capacity-building.

                      The role of the WUAs is expected to be critical to deliver social outcomes during implementation including community
                     engagement and mobilization and ensuring measures to promote equitable access to water services. However, their
                     capacity in general is also limited, particularly following the earlier merger which expands their geographical catchment
                     areas. WUAs have lacked training in water planning, monitoring, and support since 2015, despite their expanding
                     mandates. In Kotayk, the association manages 18,755 hectares and serves 20,733 members. Further, these associations
                     struggle to operate sustainably due to limited financing, primarily caused by outdated irrigation service fees.
                     Additionally, low salaries have hindered talent rejuvenation, making it difficult to attract and retain skilled professionals.

                     In anticipation of these capacity constraints, the project is required to hire one environmental specialist and one social
                     specialist, with expertise in E&S risk management, SE, grievance management, land acquisition, and occupational and
                     community health and safety (HS). Future needs for additional experts and personnel shall be assessed as the project is
                     being implemented as well as in view of emerging risks on the ground. Further, the PCT shall establish a clear
                     coordination arrangement between the E&S and the technical teams to ensure incorporation of risk management in the
                     design measures and shall organize thematic capacity building on E&S management to relevant personnel involved in
                     project. These requirements are established in the project's Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial



                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental risk is assessed as substantial due to the risks and impacts associated with Components 1, 2, and
                     3. Key risks and impacts include: (i) enhancing and expanding rural WSSs, to improve rural quality of life, which could
                     increase nutrient and pollutant concentrations at discharge points, negatively affecting surface and groundwater
                     quality in natural aquifers; (ii) increased water uptake from surface or groundwater sources, which may cause
                     environmental impacts, including competition for water use, resulting in moderate to substantial long-term
                     consequences on ecosystem balance, depending on the source and volume of water extracted. (iii) medium-scale
                     rehabilitation and construction activities, including the construction of small-scale reservoirs under Components 3
                     may generate construction waste, asbestos-containing materials (ACMs), and organic waste (e.g., from vegetation
                     clearing in existing WSSs and irrigation systems), noise, dust, sedimentation, occupational and health and safety risks
                     for communities due to vehicle and machinery movement. National strategies for water, WSS and irrigation under the
                     Project component 1 may have broad environmental implications in the medium and long term: (i) disruption of
                     water balance and alteration of ecosystems and habitats; (ii) pollution from insufficiently treated wastewater near
                     discharge points; (iii) lack of resilience in the irrigation sector to climate change impacts. The long-term E&S outcomes
                     will depend on how effectively these risks are addressed during the development of the strategies and managed by
                     the preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). The WC lacks prior experience with ESF-
                     triggered projects and must hire dedicated E&S staff to manage E&S aspects. Given the anticipated risks, including
                     institutional capacity constraints and the complexity of managing these challenges, the environmental risk is classified
                     as substantial.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating




Public Disclosure
                     The social risk rating for the project is substantial to reflect the scope of Phase 1 of the MPA. While the project will
                     result in positive social outcomes, there could be residual social impacts due to the quality of project implementation
                     and institutional capacity. Key social aspects to potentially result in adverse impacts include i) poor infrastructure
                     design, implementation, and quality, potentially affecting community health and safety, such as the spread of
                     waterborne diseases; ii) perceived or actual inequitable access to water resources, leading to conflicts and community
                     tensions, particularly if access to water supplies is reduced; iii) lack of inclusive and meaningful stakeholder
                     engagement, leading to the exclusion of vulnerable groups from project benefits. Limited representation of these
                     groups in policymaking and national water sector strategies, as well as their inadequate participation in capacity-
                     building activities; iv) social tensions stemming from perceptions of inequal benefits or the introduction of metered
                     water charges, leading to affordability concerns and reduced access due to tariff increases; and v) impacts on private
                     lands, including land acquisition and restrictions on land use in the context of regulating reservoir construction,
                     irrigation network re-alignment and/or widening as well as pipe laying. The extent of land acquisition cannot be
                     determined at appraisal, as it will depend on the recommendations of the feasibility and detailed design assessments,
                     which will only be available during the project implementation phase. However, the project aims to minimize adverse
                     impacts by prioritizing the use of public land with no conflicting land use, thereby avoiding physical and economic
                     displacement as much as possible. In case resettlement impacts occur those will be properly mitigated and
                     compensated in accordance with the Project Resettlement Framework (RF). For both the irrigation and WSS
                     infrastructure, temporary disruptions in water services and access restrictions on land uses during construction may
                     generate adverse impacts. Labor influx is not anticipated since the project does not involve major scale civil works and
                     require a large workforce. Labor can be sourced locally or, if specific skills are needed, from other regions within the
                     country. Civil works may involve low-skilled migrant workers who could be more exposed to risks of exploitation,
                     discrimination and lack of legal protection. Project Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH)

                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     risks are moderate. Community health and safety risks are associated with potential poor construction site
                     management, increased traffic accidents, air and noise pollution for the construction activities to be carried out
                     within the settlements.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      Civil works will generate construction debris, ACMs, organic waste, dust, and noise, impacting local communities and
                      habitats. Some activities, such as construction of small reservoirs, may require vegetation removal, and could lead to
                      potential sedimentation and downstream impacts, as well as safety-related risks during both construction and
                      operations. Increased water uptake for WSS and irrigation can alter natural water flows, affecting downstream water
                      availability, disrupting habitats, while also resulting in increased water discharge which, if not properly treated, can
                      lead to pollution and water quality degradation. Land acquisition and use restrictions may affect landowners, the
                      majority of whom are smallholder farmers. While improved irrigation and water services are expected to enhance
                      productivity, they could also strain aquifers and increase waterborne disease risks if mismanaged or poorly designed.
                      Inequitable water distribution or reduced access for certain communities could lead to social tensions, while the
                      introduction of metered water charges may create affordability concerns. Temporary service disruptions and
                      restrictions on land use during construction could further impact communities. These risks highlight the need for
                      proactive stakeholder engagement, ensuring affected parties, including vulnerable groups, participate in decision-



Public Disclosure
                      making processes and grievance management to help the project adapt and mitigate potential risks. Adjustments in
                      water tariffs in Armenia may disproportionately affect low-income households. However, such risks are expected to
                      be limited due to Armenia’s well-established social safety nets. According to the Law on Public Service Regulatory
                      Body (2003) or hereafter PSRC, an independent regulatory body, is responsible for setting tariffs and overseeing the
                      public service provision sector in Armenia, including water supply. Minimal tariffs apply to socially disadvantaged
                      groups, encompassing water supply and discharge services. In addition, the Family Benefits Program (FBP), a means-
                      tested cash transfer program that provides targeted support to low-income households, has introduced a mechanism
                      to deliver stipends to vulnerable water consumers in response to rising water tariffs. While the coverage among the
                      poorest quintile is relatively robust (Strengthening Armenia’s Social Safety Net, World Bank, 2023), there could be
                      exclusion errors due to the targeting process. In response, the GoA is currently piloting a new family vulnerability
                      assessment tool to enhance the accuracy and effectiveness of identifying those most in need. This tool aims to
                      provide a more comprehensive understanding of families’ socioeconomic conditions, potentially reshaping eligibility
                      criteria and the allocation of benefits, including subsidized tariffs. Under the project, the distributional impacts of
                      tariff adjustments, along with mitigation measures and strategic engagement, will be analyzed through Strategic
                      Environmental and Social Assessments (SESA). These assessments will inform future policy and regulatory decisions in
                      the water sector, ensuring that social impacts are systematically addressed as part of broader sector reform. As sub-
                      projects will be defined during implementation, an E&S risk management framework will guide mitigation efforts. The
                      project inherits framework instruments from a previously dropped project (P180733), including the ESMF, which will
                      be finalized before appraisal in alignment with ESSs. This includes Technical Assistance (TA) and a Strategic
                      Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for policy reforms and the development of the National Water, National
                      Irrigation and Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) Strategies. Based on the E&S screening, project activities


                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      under Component 2 and 3 that could have significant E&S impacts, such as major canal rehabilitation and the
                      construction of small-scale regulating reservoirs, will require Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)
                      and corresponding Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) to ensure compliance with the ESSs Smaller
                      projects may follow ESMP checklists or codes of practice that will need to be followed by civil work contractors.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      The Project involves a diverse set of key stakeholders at national, regional, and community levels, along with
                      international partners. The MTAI leads implementation, supported by the WC. Other government stakeholders
                      include the Ministries of Economy, Environment, and Health, and Regional Governors’ Offices (Marzpetarans).
                      Affected water management agencies involved in irrigation and rural water supply include WUAs, the WSA, “Jrar”
                      CJSC, and Veolia Jur CJSC. Communities and individuals directly benefiting from the project include farmers and
                      smallholder landowners in targeted irrigation schemes, private sector water users, fisheries, local businesses, directly
                      affected or stand to benefit from the water management decisions, as well as residents of underserved settlements,
                      who will receive improved access to water supply and sanitation services. Other interested groups include civil society
                      organizations (CSOs), community-based organizations, academic and research organizations, media. The WC has
                      prepared a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which provides an initial list of stakeholders categorized as
                      potentially affected parties and other interested parties. The SEP also identifies vulnerable, disadvantaged, or
                      marginalized groups and outlines their specific needs. Vulnerable and marginalized groups include those who may be
                      disproportionately impacted by project activities or face additional challenges in accessing project benefits. These
                      groups include, but are not limited to, women-headed households with no working adults, pensioner-headed
                      households with no support, persons with disabilities, households living below the poverty line, smallholder farmers



Public Disclosure
                      (less than 1 ha), landless farmers, agricultural laborers, ethnic minorities, refugees and migrants, and families with
                      multiple children. Through the engagement process, these lists will be further refined to ensure the inclusion of all
                      relevant affected and interested parties, as well as vulnerable, disadvantaged, or marginalized groups, in relation to
                      the project activities in each irrigation scheme and WSS investment area. The draft SEP provides an approach to the
                      various engagement mechanisms, their tentative timelines, roles and responsibilities for their implementation, and
                      resources allocated for implementing the SEP activities. The approach for SE involves participatory planning,
                      transparent information sharing, capacity-building, and grievance redress mechanisms to ensure that feedback from
                      all levels is incorporated into the site-specific design and implementation, including E&S risk management. The
                      proposed SE activities and methods will be further strengthened during Project implementation, and SEP will be
                      periodically updated to provide a more detailed breakdown of activities and tailored approaches for different
                      stakeholder groups. WC will establish project-level FGRM to complement the ministral level grievance mechanism for
                      project needs. The FGRM will be further sensitized to effectively address SEA/SH related grievances as specified in the
                      Project SEP.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      Armenia’s Labor Code (2004) is aligned with international good practices and International Labor Organizations’ (ILO)
                      standards, covering key areas such as non-discrimination, work hours and overtime limits, compensation for overtime
                      and night work, minimum wage, notice periods, severance pay, and various types of social insurance. The Labor Code
                      mandates that employers and employees enter into written labor contracts, regulates child labor, and prohibits
                      forced labor, SH, and workplace violence. The Project involves direct, contracted and primary supply workers. Project
                      direct workers involve government staff seconded to the project, consultants and experts hired by the MTAI and WC


                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      for the implementation of the project. Contracted workers include those hired by contractors, sub-contractors, and
                      consultant firms for design, implementation and supervision of the project. Primary supply workers include those
                      who on an ongoing basis, provide directly to the project goods and materials essential for the core functions of the
                      project activities. The labor risks associated with the project include OHS concerns, particularly for workers engaged
                      in civil works, such as the rehabilitation of irrigation canals, the rehabilitation and upgrade of sewage and wastewater
                      collection and discharge systems, and the construction of reservoirs. Lesson learned in Armenia is that OHS risks may
                      be substantial even in projects that invest predominantly in the rehabilitation/reconstruction of existing
                      infrastructure and hence, the project will include actions to enhance OHS practices in line with ESS2 and Wold Bank
                      Group (WBG)’s General Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines (EHSG) during project implementation. Key OHS
                      risks include exposure to hazardous tasks, working at heights, loud noise levels, vibration, electrical hazards, poor air
                      quality, and exposure to dangerous materials, poorly organized construction sites, traffic-related risks. For contracted
                      workers, additional concerns involve the unsafe operation of heavy machinery, confined spaces, drowning risks, and
                      unsafe site/structures conditions leading to potential accidents. Migrant workers, particularly low-skilled laborers,
                      may be more susceptible to labor exploitation, including extended working hours, non-payment or delayed payment
                      of wages, lack of proper contracts, and inadequate living conditions. Their limited awareness of labor rights, language
                      barriers, and restricted access to grievance mechanisms further increase their vulnerability. WC has prepared a draft
                      LMP to ensure that all labor activities under the Project are managed in compliance with both Armenian national
                      labor laws and the WB’s ESSs. The document outlines the types of workers involved in the Project, potential labor
                      risks, key labor laws, and measures. It provides guidance on requirements for labor conditions, prevention of child
                      and forced labor, equal opportunity and fair treatment, terms of employment, and the workers' FGRM. The LMP also
                      emphasizes the importance of addressing the needs of vulnerable groups, including women, youth, and




Public Disclosure
                      disadvantaged workers. Additionally, it includes measures to mitigate risks for low-skilled migrant workers, who are
                      expected to be involved in small-scale civil works. Risks for migrant workers will be mitigated through ensuring fair
                      treatment, proper labor protections, and access to workers FGRM. The LMP outlines the roles and responsibilities for
                      managing labor risks, ensuring policy compliance, and overseeing contractors to maintain labor standards throughout
                      the Project. While Armenia’s Labor Code (2004) and its by-laws are generally aligned with ESS2, the project’s initial
                      implementation will be guided by the LMP on labor and working conditions. The Borrower’s framework will be
                      reassessed during implementation once the PIU has sufficient capacity and cooperation with law enforcement
                      agencies, particularly the Health and Labor Inspection Body (HLIB), is fully established and functional. In addition to
                      the existing national grievance management systems, the project will establish a workers’ Feedback and Grievance
                      Redress Mechanism (FGRM), tailored to the diverse characteristics of project workers, including foreign workers, and
                      addressing SEA/SH-related grievances. To prevent and mitigate SEA/SH risks in the workplace, the project will
                      develop an SEA/SH Action Plan at the sub-project level, integrated into site-specific ESMPs and C-ESMPs. Mitigation
                      measures—including mandatory CoC for all workers, a confidential SEA/SH reporting mechanism, and training and
                      awareness sessions—will apply to all project workers, including PCT staff.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The rehabilitation, reconstruction, and modernization of irrigation schemes, along with the construction of rural
                      water supply networks, will generate construction waste, including ACMs from replaced pipes and organic waste
                      from silt and vegetation removal during canal rehabilitation. Other impacts include dust emissions, noise, and
                      vibrations caused by civil works and machinery operation. Waste management and disposal will comply with national
                      regulations, WBG Environment Health and Safety (EHS) guidelines/EU standards on ACMs, as outlined in the ESMF.


                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      The ESMF also includes mitigation measures for emissions, noise, and vibrations, ensuring compliance with national
                      regulations and norms. The construction of regulating reservoirs under subcomponent 3.2 may cause land
                      disturbance, excavation, and earthmoving activities, leading to soil erosion, runoff, and sediment buildup in both the
                      reservoir and downstream water bodies. To mitigate these impacts, the ESMF mitigation plan includes erosion and
                      runoff control measures. During operation, sediment accumulation in reservoirs may reduce storage capacity, disrupt
                      water flow, and degrade water quality, impacting both irrigation efficiency and aquatic ecosystems. Upstream
                      erosion and runoff from surrounding land use can worsen sedimentation over time. These risks will be addressed
                      through reservoir design, operation, and maintenance (O&M) plans. Regular monitoring of sediment levels and water
                      quality will be incorporated into the monitoring plan for the operation stage in the site-specific ESMPs. The Program
                      will invest in water sanitation infrastructure to reduce infection risks and enhance public health, while residual risks
                      are expected due to an increase in untreated wastewater discharges will be addressed through site-specific ESIAs and
                      tailored design solutions. The expansion of irrigation may increase agricultural activities, raising the risk of soil and
                      water pollution from agrochemical misuse. This will be addressed through capacity building and training programs for
                      communities and farmers on sustainable agricultural practices. Furthermore, higher groundwater abstraction,
                      exacerbated by climate change, may contribute to water resource depletion. These risks will be addressed under
                      Component 1 and strategies development, conducting SESA and ESIA studies. The Program will prioritize transitioning
                      from pumped to gravity-fed systems, where feasible, to reduce energy consumption and minimize GHG emissions.
                      While rehabilitation efforts will focus on modernizing existing systems, feasibility and design studies will explore
                      water control and delivery structures that maintain stable canal water levels regardless of flow variations.
                      Furthermore, climate adaptation and hazard resilience principles will be embedded into investment selection and
                      technical design to enhance long-term sustainability.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      Irrigation and WSS systems are typically located in or near settlements, posing risks during rehabilitation,
                      reconstruction, or extension works. Activities like construction vehicle movement, excavation, and temporary
                      material storage can lead to accidents involving local residents. Construction activities are expected to also increase
                      noise, vibration and dust potentially disrupting the daily lives of local communities and small to medium-sized
                      businesses, where those activities are to be carried out within the settlements. To mitigate these risks, site-specific
                      ESMPs will include measures such as traffic management, dust control through area watering, prohibiting engine
                      idling, and agreeing on contractors' working hours with affected communities. For small-scale (expected to range
                      from 0.2 to 0.6 million cubic meters) regulating reservoirs, dam safety requirements and necessary plans will be
                      assessed through E&S screening and assessment procedure in line with ESS4, considering the local contexts and
                      proposed design solutions, including structural complexity and their locations (i.e., zone of high seismicity). These
                      requirements will be incorporated into the Terms of Reference (ToRs) for feasibility studies, detailed designs, site-
                      specific ESIAs, and ESMPs. Site-specific ESIAs will assess community health and safety risks related to WSS services,
                      including inadequate treatment of drinking water or non-compliant wastewater discharges. Based on these
                      assessments, appropriate measures will be integrated into the design and/or respective ESMPs for sub-projects.
                      These measures are designed to ensure compliance with regulatory standards and enhance residents' well-being,
                      integrating them into the project’s design and continuous monitoring. To prevent and mitigate SEA/SH risks affecting
                      communities due to project activities, the project will implement a CoC for all workers, a SEA/SH-sensitive grievance
                      mechanism, and awareness-raising initiatives for both project workers and host communities. Additionally, a referral
                      pathway will be established with local service providers for each sub-project, as required under the SEA/SH Action


                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      Plan in the ESMPs. Security risks of the Project are low. Those risks will be assessed prior to engaging security
                      personnel and mitigation measures will be put in place to safeguard project workers, sites, assets, and activities.
                      Assessment and risk management related to security are detailed in the Project ESMF and will be specified in site-
                      specific ESMPs.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      Phase 1 includes brownfield rehabilitation and greenfield activities, such as small-scale regulating reservoirs. The
                      project will prioritize public land with no conflicting use, but some impacts on private land or informal structures may
                      occur, particularly for linear infrastructure like canal rehabilitation. Those activities include rehabilitation and
                      modernization of main, secondary, and tertiary irrigation canals (e.g., Lower Hrazdan, Arzni-Shamiram, Kotayk, Lori,
                      and Debetavan canals), land use changes due to conversion from pumped to gravity irrigation systems, construction
                      of new structures such as headworks, sedimentation basins, distribution pipelines, extension of water networks and
                      construction of new water treatment infrastructure. Alternative engineering solutions will be explored to minimize
                      physical and economic displacement. Underground water pipelines will operate under servitude contracts, avoiding
                      acquisition. Construction may cause temporary water disruptions, crop damage, or restricted access. Land may be
                      needed for retrofitting irrigation infrastructure, given the project's focus on rehabilitation. Acquisition modalities may
                      include willing buyer-seller agreements or easements. All temporary and permanent impacts will be subject to
                      mitigation and compensation. WC prepared a draft RF which establishes principles and procedures to be used for
                      preparing resettlement plans (RPs) when project activities require land acquisition or result in economic or physical
                      displacement. The RF aims to avoid or minimize displacement impacts and ensure compliance with national
                      legislation and WB’s ESSs. RF outlines key steps for resettlement planning, including inventories, SE, grievance



Public Disclosure
                      mechanisms, compensation strategies, and monitoring processes. The framework also highlights the inclusion of
                      vulnerable groups and promotes fair compensation and livelihood restoration for those affected by Project activities.
                      The RF serves as a guideline for future resettlement planning and ensures proper handling of potential resettlement
                      impacts․ Site-specific RPs will be prepared in line with the RF once project footprint is defined through individual
                      investments.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The physical activities under subcomponents 2.2 and 3.1 involve civil works for rural WSS network construction and
                      irrigation scheme upgrades, rehabilitation, and modernization, including construction of new reservoirs. These
                      activities may include land clearing, vegetation removal, and the establishment of temporary work bases. These
                      activities could pose environmental risks, particularly where pipelines and other infrastructure may pass near or
                      within protected areas or their buffer zones. Water abstraction for irrigation or supply could deplete natural water
                      sources, impact aquatic ecosystems, and threaten biodiversity, especially in areas hydrologically connected to Ramsar
                      sites. Furthermore, improper waste disposal, inadequate storage of construction materials, and irresponsible
                      wastewater discharge could lead to pollution and the degradation of natural habitats. To manage these risks, the
                      ESMF incorporates a set of assessment and mitigation procedures. The E&S screening process will guide the project in
                      conducting species surveys to prevent impacts on critical habitats and establishes exclusion criteria for new
                      construction within or near protected areas or Ramsar sites. Biodiversity risks will be integrated into site-specific
                      ESMPs, and a stand-alone Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) will be prepared if significant risks or adverse impacts
                      are identified. While much of the rehabilitation work will focus on existing irrigation structures, any new structures


                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                      and schemes will be selected based on feasibility studies. Potential impacts related to water abstraction and
                      ecosystem disturbances will be assessed through ESIAs and mitigated through technical design, ensuring that all new
                      construction aligns with Good International Industry Practice (GIIP). Further mitigation measures will be detailed in
                      SESAs, which will outline sustainable resource management practices and ensure compliance with ESS6 and national
                      regulations.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples, who meet the definition of this standard, in
                      Armenia.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant

                      Project activities are not expected to affect any known historical/cultural monuments and intangible cultural
                      heritage. However, if any irrigation or WSS schemes affect cultural, historical or archaeological sites or assets, the E&S
                      screening process will identify these impacts, and a Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) will be developed
                      and implemented as part of the site-specific ESMP in accordance with ESMF guidelines. There is a possibility of
                      unintentional impact on cultural heritage, particularly in areas where excavation works will take place. Chance finds
                      procedure are developed and included in the ESMF as a precautionary measure, in case artifacts of archaeologic
                      importance are encountered during excavation works. No impacts on intangible cultural heritage are anticipated. No
                      major land acquisition, large scale civil works, physical displacement and/or commercialization of such heritage will




Public Disclosure
                      be included in the project’s scope.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      None of the project activities will involve financial intermediation activities nor establishment of a Financial
                      Intermediary to deliver project investments, as such this standard is not relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                             Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                       No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                  No
                       The Borrower’s framework will not be applied during the initial stage of project implementation due to insufficient
                       capacity within the PCT and the lack of formal cooperation with national authorities on relevant ESSs for managing
                       project-specific E&S risks and impacts. However, the potential use of the Borrower’s framework, either fully or
                       partially, for selected ESSs will be explored once PCT capacity is strengthened and effective cooperation with relevant
                       enforcement agencies is established.




                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                         Page 12 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Agence Française de Développement (AFD) will be a co-financier of the Phase 1 of the MPA Program. AFD will adopt
                       the World Bank’s ESSs and relevant E&S instruments being prepared for the project and hence, common approach
                       will not be applied.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Draft versions of the ESMF, RF, SEP, LMP and ESCP are developed and will be disclosed and consulted prior to appraisal.
                     ESMF, RF, SEP and LMP will be finalized, incorporating stakeholders’ feedback, within three months following
                     effectiveness. The ESCP includes capacity-building initiatives for PCT, organized by the WC with support from the WB.

                     During project implementation, SESA, site-specific impact assessments, including management plans (i.e., ESMPs, RPs)
                     shall be prepared prior to procurement of civil works. Contractor Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-
                     ESMPs) shall be prepared by the respective contractors in line with the site-specific ESMPs and subsequently reviewed
                     and approved by the PCT’s E&S specialists and supervision engineer before the mobilization of works. Environment and
                     social monitoring report shall be prepared for the WB’s review on a quarterly basis, outlining key issues as well as non-
                     compliances with remedial measures.




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Ranu Sinha                              Title:         Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                 RSinha1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Arusyak Alaverdyan                      Job Title:     Sr Agricultural Spec.

                      Email:                 aalaverdyan@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Poolad Karimi                           Job Title:     Senior Irrigation Specialist

                      Email:                 pkarimi@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Armenia: Water And Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (P508124)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                           Ranu Sinha, Arusyak Alaverdyan, Poolad Karimi

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                  Lusine Gevorgyan

                     ADM Social Specialist:                         Fajar Argo Djati




Public Disclosure




                    Apr 11, 2025                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
