Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDPC00154




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                         Punjab Inclusive Cities
Pakistan, Pakistan, Pakistan   SOUTH ASIA                  P508094
                                                                                         Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               21-Apr-2025                 27-Aug-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Local Government and
                               Community Development
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
                               Department, Government
                               of Punjab

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective is to provide inclusive and sustainable WASH services in selected cities of Punjab.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                       900.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          480.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                       460.00
    IPF Component                                                                                               20.00
  Total Financing                                                                                               480.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

FINANCING


                                                                                                                    Page 1
        The World Bank
        Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)



    Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                                   400.00
      World Bank Lending                                                                                                              400.00
    Total Government Contribution                                                                                                       80.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1. Poverty has increased slightly amid recent shocks, despite some economic stabilization. Pakistan made significant
progress towards reducing poverty between 2001 and 2018 with the expansion of off-farm economic opportunities and
increased external remittances. However, this has not fully translated into improved socio-economic conditions: over one-
third of school-age children across Pakistan were found to be out of school; nearly two-thirds of those in school in FY24
were learning deprived; and alarmingly high rates of stunting - 40 percent in FY23 - persist. Critical constraints, including
recurrent fiscal and current account deficits, protectionist trade policies, unproductive agriculture, a difficult business
environment, a heavy state presence in the economy, and a financially unsustainable energy sector, have remained largely
unaddressed, leading to slow and volatile growth. COVID-19, 2022 floods, and economic volatility have worsened poverty,
with an estimated 40.5% (US$3.65/day 2017 PPP) lower-middle income poverty rate in FY24, with an additional 2.6 million
Pakistanis falling below the poverty line from the year before.
2. Pakistan experienced heavy monsoon rains in 2022 leading to catastrophic and unprecedented flooding with
enormous human and economic impacts. Roughly 33 million people were impacted, and many permanently displaced.
More than 13,000 kilometers (km) of roads were destroyed, 2.2 million houses damaged, around 3.8 million hectares of
crops were flooded, and an estimated 1.2 million livestock were killed. Limited access to input and output markets and
temporary disruptions to supply chains subsequently drove up food prices and added to existing price pressures resulting
from reduced agricultural yields and the global rise of food prices. The government’s Post-Disaster Needs Assessment1
estimated that the need for rehabilitation and reconstruction is at US$16.3 billion.
3. Pakistan has made recent progress towards macroeconomic stabilization, but risks remain high and faster
sustained growth will require substantial reform. At the beginning of FY24, Pakistan's economy faced a potential
economic crisis in the face of political uncertainty, global monetary policy tightening, and fiscal and external imbalances,
that led to pressures on domestic prices and foreign reserves. To preserve reserves, measures to manage imports and
capital outflows were introduced, which disrupted local supply chains, economic activity and exacerbated inflationary
pressures. Under the interim government, an IMF Stand-By Arrangement was approved in July 2023. Consequently,
exchange rate flexibility was restored, import controls were relaxed, and steps were taken to contain the fiscal deficit.
Political uncertainty also diminished with the successful conduct of the general elections. Coupled with favorable weather
conditions and easing external conditions, the economy began recovering in FY24. Consequently, growth of real GDP at
factor cost is estimated to have risen to 2.5 percent y-o-y in FY24, after contracting by 0.2 percent in FY23. Downside risks

1 Government of Pakistan. 2022. Pakistan Floods 2022 Post-Disaster Needs Assessment. Ministry of Planning Development & Special Initiatives.



                                                                                                                                               Page 2
        The World Bank
        Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)


remain high, with the outlook predicated on the new IMF-EFF program remaining on track, continued fiscal restraint, and
additional external financing. Heavy banking sector exposure to the sovereign, domestic policy uncertainty, and
geopolitical instability pose significant risks to the outlook. Robust economic recovery over the medium term will require
the steadfast implementation of much broader fiscal and economic reforms.
4. The 2022 Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) highlights Pakistan’s severe climate vulnerability,
ranking it among the top 10 most affected countries. Frequent droughts, floods, heat waves, and risks to coastal cities
like Karachi from sea level rise and erosion increase development challenges and could reduce GDP by 18-20% annually
by 2050.
5. Pakistan also faces an unfinished agenda on human development, which compounds its structural macro fragility
and creates a drag on the economy. The country’s Human Capital Index, is 41, meaning that a child born in Pakistan today
will be 41 percent as productive when she grows up as she could be if she enjoyed complete education and full health.
The stunting rate of children under five remains among the highest in the world at 40 percent. Evidence suggests that the
lack of safely managed water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services is partly responsible for this staggering loss
of human potential.2
Sectoral and Institutional Context of the Program
6. Punjab is the most densely populated province in Pakistan with a large and rapidly growing urban population,
which rose from 23 million in 1998 to 52 million in 2023. While Lahore, with 13 million people is the largest city, Punjab
has 15 cities with populations over 500,000 and 40 cities over 200,000. While these intermediate cities are key drivers of
Punjab’s economy, providing housing, jobs, and services, they remain underdeveloped due to infrastructure gaps and
socioeconomic challenges.
7. Pakistan’s stunting rate remains among the highest in the world and affects even those in the highest income
quintiles.3 Poor Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) infrastructure is a key driver of this issue, as inadequate sanitation
and exposure to contaminated water leads to recurrent infections and poor nutrient absorption in children, both of which
contribute to stunting. While most urban households have access to toilets, there are major gaps in the networked
sewerage services particularly in low-income areas and sewerage networks are poorly managed. There has been little
progress on the safe treatment of wastewater, which has resulted in high concentrations of untreated fecal waste near
human settlements and dangerous levels of bacterial contamination in surface and groundwater. Inadequate solid waste
management (SWM) also contributes to water and air quality degradation, as it is often indiscriminately burnt within
settlements or dumped into rivers, streams, sewers, and drainage networks.
8. Many parts of Punjab are also vulnerable to climate change related risks with high exposure to extreme heat,
flooding, and drought. Extreme heatwaves are expected to occur more frequently in its cities, and changes in precipitation
seasonality, regularity, and extremes also create a higher risk of floods and drought with increased frequency and
intensity. These risks are compounded by high rates of multidimensional poverty and weak coping capacity. Climate-
induced displacement and declining water availability will exacerbate the pressure on WASH services in urban areas.
9. Strengthening revenue performance at the provincial and local levels is critical to delivering core public services
such as drinking water, sanitation, and solid waste management. Urban local governments (ULGs) and utilities are in a
challenging financial position as operating costs for municipal services have surged while tariffs for these services have
not kept pace. ULGs are subsequently highly reliant on taxes — particularly revenues from land and real estate — to
service operating deficits and maintain services. In an increasingly constrained financial space, provincial and local

2 Mansuri, Ghazala et al. 2018. When Water Becomes a Hazard: A Diagnostic Report on The State of Water Supply, Sanitation and Poverty in

Pakistan and Its Impact on Child Stunting. WASH Poverty Diagnostic Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
3 Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2017-18. Islamabad, Pakistan, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: NIPS and ICF. Compiled by World

development Indicators.

                                                                                                                                           Page 3
        The World Bank
        Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)


governments will need to improve revenues significantly to continue to deliver and operate basic services. They will also
need to take measures to enable private sector participation including authorizing regulatory environment, that will
enhance private capital mobilization and enhance sustainability and scalability of services.
 Relationship to CAS/CPF
10. The proposed Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (PICP) is consistent with the World Bank Group (WBG) Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY15–19 for the Islamic Republic of Pakistan discussed by the WBG Board of Executive Directors
on May 1, 2014 (Report No. 84645-PK) and extended to FY20 by the corresponding Performance and Learning Review
dated May 18, 2017 (Report No. 113574). The preparation of the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) was deferred
in FY21 due to the COVID-19 crisis and paused in FY23 due to the 2022 floods. The new CPF is expected to be presented
to the Board in FY25. The FY15–19 CPS objectives remain relevant, and this program contributes to Result Area 4:
"Improving Service Delivery." It will lay out a longer-term engagement focusing on a select set of Pakistan's most daunting
development challenges, including reducing child stunting through investments in safely managed WASH services. The
PICP is consistent with and supports Pakistan's climate change strategies, including the National Water Policy (2018), the
National Climate Change Policy (2021), the National Adaptation Plan (2022), and the Nationally Determined Contribution
(2021), as well as the Pakistan Country Climate and Development Report.
  Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

11. PICP is the second phase in a 10-year Pakistan Urban WASH Services Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA),
consisting of three phases. The first phase of the MPA aims to scale up safely managed WASH services in Karachi, Sindh,
to reach 16 million people. PICP, as Phase 2, intends to target around 20 secondary cities in Punjab to reach 11.5 million
people with safely managed WASH services, including SWM and stormwater drainage. The third phase will continue to
support improved WASH services in Karachi.
12. The PICP supports the government of Punjab’s key priorities by supporting increasing revenues, reducing stunting,
and improving air quality. It builds on the achievements of the earlier initiatives4, including the ongoing Punjab Cities
Program (PCP; US$200 million) which incentivized improved planning, resource management, transparency, and urban
governance. PCP has delivered improved WASH services to 4.75 million citizens, operationalized new municipal e-
governance systems, significantly enhanced own-source revenues in 16 ULGs, and commissioned wastewater treatment
plants in 11 cities, among other investments. PICP will draw from global experience in strengthening urban governance,
financing, institutional and service delivery systems, environment and social management. The PICP will build upon the
robust learning agenda proposed in Phase 1 by enabling learning across provinces on water service provider reforms and
hygiene behavioral change. It will support knowledge sharing, building on lessons from different institutional models in
various contexts, particularly around PPP transactions that will be undertaken in phase 1.
13. The proposed operation will be financed through a hybrid of Program for Results (PforR) and Investment Project
Financing (IPF) instrument. The Government of Punjab (GoPunjab) has considerable experience with the PforR
instrument, which has proven to be effective for managing conditional transfers and for strengthening institutions and
country systems. The PforR modality provides a clear set of incentives to help reorient focus away from inputs and towards
outcomes. The PforR will target improvements in delivery of WASH services, including SWM services. It will be
complemented by an IPF window ($20 million) supporting technical assistance, investment preparation, and institutional
strengthening of implementing agencies.
 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators



4 The Punjab Municipal Services Improvement Project (US$ 50m IPF; 2006-2013), the Punjab Cities Governance Improvement Project (US$ 200m

IPF with DLIs; 2012-2017); and the ongoing Punjab Cities Program (PCP).

                                                                                                                                      Page 4
         The World Bank
         Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)



    Program Development Objective(s)
    14. PICP’s development objective is to provide inclusive and sustainable WASH services in selected cities of Punjab.

    PDO Level Results Indicators
    15. PDO Level Results Indicators are:
       • People provided with WASH services, and the number provided with safely managed services (of which women).
       • People provided with access to sustainable solid waste management including safe disposal (of which women).
       • People provided with improved stormwater drainage systems to reduce flooding risks (of which women).
       • WASH service providers with revenue from tariffs, taxes, and fees increased from baseline.
    D. Program Description

    PforR Program Boundary

16. The GoPunjab is developing an extensive program for sustainable WASH services in Punjab, including the
reorganization of WASH utilities.5 The GoPunjab has already launched the Suthra Punjab (Clean Punjab) program in 2024,
which aims to provide effective end-to-end SWM services, from primary collection to sanitary disposal. Under the
program, service areas of the eight waste management companies (WMCs) have been expanded to the entire division,
with the mandate to collect household and commercial waste from all urban and rural areas in their respective divisions.
A Safai Tax (cleanliness fee, as tariff for SW collection) has also been introduced with the expansion of services to improve
financial sustainability of the program. The GoPunjab recognizes missing sanitary disposal facilities as a risk to the
envisioned outcomes and plans to address this in phases with support from international partners. GoPunjab also aims to
enhance provincial and local revenues to fund critical infrastructure and service delivery. The Revenue Mobilization
Strategy currently under implementation envisages linking all taxes requiring property valuation to a single capital
valuation table, while taking measures in parallel to bring the valuation table closer to market values, and moving to a
progressive taxation approach as opposed to a flat tax. The Provincial Budget 2024-25 has implemented the shift in basis
of UIPT valuation from annual rental value to capital value and announced an increase in stamp duty rate in urban areas
to be effective from FY2026.
17. PICP will support the implementation of GoPunjab’s investment program by: (i) sharpening the focus on critical
results in water, sanitation, and SWM service delivery; (ii) supporting revenue enhancement targets; (iii) providing
incentives to progressively move up the ladder of reforms that tackle core policy and institutional constraints in urban
service delivery; (iv) supporting WASH investments in selected cities under the larger government program and
expenditure framework; (v) strengthening institutions to manage complex environmental and social issues in investments
such as wastewater and solid waste disposal; and (vi) strengthening government systems, building on past experience.
18. The proposed PforR Program (‘P’, the Program; US$ 380 million) will support a subset of the GoPunjab’s program
in participating cities focusing on three result areas: (i) climate resilient infrastructure and service delivery improvements;
(ii) revenue enhancement; and (iii) institutional strengthening. Program funds will be used for works for selected
municipal infrastructure and services under the Government program, including: (i) integrated water supply networks; (ii)
sewerage networks and wastewater treatment facilities; (iii) stormwater drainage networks, nature-based solutions for
flood control, and storage facilities; and (iv) SWM infrastructure for value recovery and sanitary disposal.


5
  A comprehensive WASH sector needs assessment is underway, including pre-feasibility studies of WASH investments for secondary cities. In
parallel, the GoPunjab is also deliberating revisions to existing regulations for WASH sector institutions. The ongoing work will inform the design of
a dedicated WASH sector investment program for secondary cities, which is scheduled to commence in fiscal year 2025-26.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 5
       The World Bank
       Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)


19. Program Result Areas. The Program will support three result areas: (i) Safely managed water services, (ii) Safely
managed sanitation and hygiene services, and (iii) Institutional strengthening and financial sustainability. Around six
Disbursement Linked Indicators will be developed.
20. IPF Component on Technical Assistance and Institutional Strengthening; US$20 million: The IPF Component will
assist GoPunjab to further develop its sector policy, strategy, and programs, strengthen its institutions and systems, and
provide technical support to key provincial departments and urban agencies to deliver on Program targets and Program-
related technical, fiduciary, social and environment management aspects, as well as Annual Independent Verification of
the Program. It will also provide program management funds to the implementing agencies, as well as support an impact
evaluation on poverty and stunting.
 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

21. The current Environmental and Social (E&S) risk for the Program is rated as Substantial. The Program will improve
the quality and coverage of WASH services in selected cities. Given the absence of sanitary municipal waste disposal, PICP
will support the development of one small-scale sanitary landfill site with the objective to demonstrate good practices
and strengthen government’s systems and local capacity. While there are E&S risks associated with the demonstration
landfill site, exclusion criteria will be developed during Program preparation for the selection of the land parcel for waste
disposal, to ensure that the high E&S risk activities are excluded. The criteria for the selection of the site for the
demonstration landfill will include, among other relevant E&S considerations: (1) situated away from densely populated
urban centers, (2) no need for private land acquisition except for ensuring last mile connectivity, (3) no forced evictions in
the past, (4) no history of legal proceedings and demonstrations, (5) no sensitive ecological receptors present, (6) any
hazardous waste, if received, is in insignificant quantities. The selection criteria for the waste management company will
also include a good track record on E&S. The design of the sanitary landfill will be in accordance with good international
industry practice with proper lining, leachate and landfill gas collection, and management systems. Quantitative
thresholds will be established to ensure compliance with the established criteria as already done in PCP, for interventions
sensitive from an E&S perspective. A DLI will be developed to ensure implementation of E&S considerations. Experience
gained and lessons learnt form the demonstration landfill will help GoPunjab in replicating it across the province.
22. E&S management under the Program will be based on the existing legal, regulatory, and institutional system in
Pakistan and the Punjab province and E&S core principles of the World Bank. The LG&CDD and PMDFC have successfully
implemented water supply, sewerage including wastewater treatment, and drainage investments with several
intermediate city governments under PCP. There will be no new land acquisition or forced evictions under the Program.
However, private acquisition of small land parcels may be needed to ensure last mile connectivity of sub-projects covering
the land needed for access roads, water and sewerage connectivity and other related uses. SOPs developed under PCP on
land and resettlement will be updated and used for addressing such issues. Inclusion of low-income, marginalized, and
vulnerable groups will be ensured, with stakeholder consultations throughout the life of the project. The Program will
make efforts to enable their access to jobs, livelihood opportunities, and public services in order to mitigate potential
adverse social impacts. Any locations which have been subjected to Anti-Encroachment Drives (AEDs) will be excluded
from Program financing.
23. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) building on PCP’s ESSA will be conducted by the Task
Team and disclosed, which will include stakeholder consultations. Program ESSA (building on the PCP ESSA) will assess
E&S risks, analyze country systems, and propose measures to fill gaps between country E&S systems and Core Principles
of PforR for the waste recovery facility and the demonstration landfill. While experienced WMCs are present in Punjab,
they lack experience in landfill development and operation. Any investment proposals under the Program will be prepared
through the IPF window. IPF funds will be used for technical feasibility, engineering design, detailed execution plans

                                                                                                                         Page 6
       The World Bank
       Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)


(covering construction, operations, and closure phases) and preparation of environmental and social impact assessments
(ESIAs), which will be reviewed and publicly disclosed before investment appraisal and procurement for activities under
the PforR window. An independent assessment of waste disposal infrastructure development and operations to ensure
compliance with ESIAs and Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) guidelines for waste management facilities will be a
mandatory requirement as part of the PAP.
24. The ESIAs or Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will address the environmental issues related to
the design, construction, and operationalization of the proposed facilities including proper siting and containment/ design
measures, OHS, solid and liquid waste management, gas emissions, and leachate generation. Social issues due to lack of
meaningful engagement, exclusion of vulnerable and marginalized groups (including waste pickers) will be covered in the
related instruments. The ESIAs/ESMPs will also include an assessment of potential Sexual Exploitation and Abuse or Sexual
Harassment (SEA/SH) risks. For local communities in the vicinity of the demonstration landfill site, a careful assessment of
risks and impacts pertaining to community health and safety and any potential livelihood impacts will also be undertaken
and specific instruments prepared accordingly.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component


25. The E&S risk rating for the IPF Window is Substantial due to the engineering design and ESIAs of potential waste
treatment and disposal investments, including the demonstration landfill, which are considered substantial-risk
investments. Other activities will likely have moderate residual risks. The Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) will
apply to activities funded by the IPF Windows. Existing grievance redress systems of the main implementing agencies will
be strengthened. E&S analysis and risk management measures, including stakeholder engagement and consultations, will
be incorporated in the Terms of Reference of key TA activities.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Amena Raja
   Senior Urban Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Islamic Republic of Pakistan



                                                                                                                        Page 7
    The World Bank
    Punjab Inclusive Cities Program(P508094)


Implementing Agencies
 Local Government and Community Development Department, Government of Punjab
 Nabeel Ahmed Awan
 Chairman, Planning and Development Board
 chairman@pndpunjab.gov.pk

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                               Page 8
