Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/18/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04678




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                 Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508202                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        BRAAC                        2026

                     Operation Name            Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                    LATIN AMERICA AND            Agriculture and Food
                                                                                         CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Banco do Brasil           Banco do Brasil                           16-Jun-2025                  29-Aug-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     16-Dec-2024               1,484,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Expand access to finance for bioeconomy, forest restoration, and climate-smart agriculture, and enhance economic and
                     climate resilience for targeted beneficiaries in the Amazon and Cerrado biomes.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Project is a is a financial intermediary project that seeks to enhance the availability of financial resources
                     for sustainable agricultural and bioeconomy and the restoration of degraded forests and pasturelands, while
                     simultaneously advancing the inclusion, economic stability, and climate resilience of the targeted beneficiaries.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings


                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     The project will support Banco do Brasil (BB) in financing bioeconomy initiatives, sustainable agricultural practices, and
                     the restoration of degraded forests/pasturelands in the Amazon and Cerrado biomes. It will provide funding to private
                     family farms, small businesses, and cooperatives, including those led by forest dwellers, traditional and indigenous
                     peoples.

                     The Amazon biome covers an area of 420 million hectares, accounting for over 40% of Brazil's territory. It is
                     characterized by humid tropical forests, an extensive hydrographic network, and immense biodiversity. In 2021, its
                     population was estimated at 28.6 million people (5.6 inhabitants per km²). According to the UNDP, in 2023, the Human
                     Development Index (HDI) of the states in the Northern Region was below the Brazilian average (0.754), ranging between
                     0.687 in Maranhão and 0.740 in Amapá.

                     The Cerrado biome spans 203 million hectares in the central region, representing 24% of Brazil's territory.
                     Approximately 25 million people live in the region, with low population density in rural areas. Its flat lands, regular rains,
                     and tropical climate have made it a hub for agricultural growth.

                     These biomes are crucial for biodiversity conservation and agricultural significance. They play a pivotal role in Brazil's
                     climate strategy as 62% of the country's greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions come from agriculture, land use, and forestry.
                     In the Cerrado, high fertilizer consumption exacerbates environmental issues like water pollution and soil
                     contamination.

                     In both biomes, family farmers, forest-dwellers, traditional communities, and indigenous peoples face increased risks




Public Disclosure
                     from extreme weather events. They will benefit the most from the project's activities, as bioeconomy, forest
                     restoration, low-carbon agriculture, and the recovery of degraded pastures offer sustainable options to promote
                     resilient, sustainable growth in these regions.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     BB is a Financial Intermediary that operates commercially, with just over half of its total shares controlled by the Federal
                     Government. BB’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) was recently assessed as part of the
                     preparation for the Brazil Climate Finance Project (P178888) and deemed adequate to manage the substantial E&S risks
                     posed by this early operation. Key highlights of BB’s ESMS are:

                     • The ESMS complies with the increasingly stringent regulations set by the Central Bank and the National Monetary
                     Council (CNM). In line with CNM Resolution 4,945/2021, BB updated its Social, Environmental, and Climate
                     Responsibility Policy (endorsed by its Board of Directors in 2022) and its Specific Policy for Management of Risk and
                     Capital to enhance the management of social, environmental, and climate (ESC) risks.

                     • BB incorporates ESC conditions into credit contracts, conducts periodic compliance monitoring, and non-compliance
                     may lead to the early maturity of the operation.

                     • BB has also established Sustainability Guidelines for Credit in certain sectors (such as Agribusiness and Irrigated
                     Agriculture). These guidelines require environmental compliance, proof of mitigation/compensation measures for socio-
                     environmental impacts, maintenance of communication channels with surrounding communities, and prohibit granting



                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                         Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     credit to clients financing activities on indigenous lands, engaging in forced labor, sexual exploitation of minors, child
                     labor, intentional environmental damage, or crimes related to racial or gender discrimination.

                     • BB’s organizational structure includes the Risk Management Unit under the Vice-Presidency of Internal Controls and
                     Management Risks, responsible for corporate management of social, environmental, and climate risk, and the ESG Unit
                     under the Vice-Presidency of Business, Government, and Corporate Sustainability, responsible for the specific
                     management of ESC risks.

                     BB’s ESMS will be reassessed during preparation.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Moderate
                     The environmental risk of the project is Moderate. Overall environmental positive impacts are expected as outcomes
                     of the Project, such as boosting of sustainable human development, the reduction of deforestation, restoration of
                     degraded pastures and reduction of GHG emissions. There are no civil works envisaged under the projetct, and key
                     physical interventions are mostly linked to Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices, land management, forest
                     preservation and restoration. Although the Amazon and Cerrado biomes include a vast amount of environmental
                     protected areas, conservation units, and internationally recognized as high biodiversity value area (KBA),



Public Disclosure
                     interventions will target the generation of positive environmental outcomes and will most likely be located in already
                     modified habitats, such as pastures and degraded lands. Their potential environmental risks and impacts are not likely
                     to be significant and do not have a high potential for harming the environment, nor are envisaged to result in the
                     conversion of natural habitats. The environmental risks and impacts are expected to be predictable, temporary
                     and/or reversible; low in magnitude and site-specific; of low probability of serious adverse effects to the environment
                     and able to be mitigated in a predictable manner, with well-known control and mitigation measures. The
                     interventions could include waste and wastewater generation, handling of chemicals and pesticides, and disturbances
                     to local fauna, although not significant. The use of integrated pest management (IPM) or integrated vector
                     management (IVM) approaches will be further assessed during preparation, as well as the potential risk of accidental
                     introduction of alien, or non-native, species of flora and fauna. The project incorporates in its design measures that
                     minimize or mitigate any risks associated with the conversion of natural forests and encourage the protection and
                     conservation of natural forests, biodiversity and ecosystem services.
                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating of the project is Moderate. By financing locally-led initiatives and technical assistance and
                     capacity building to develop the bioeconomy value chain, forest and land restauration and sustainable, low-carbon
                     agriculture, Components 1 and 3 are expected to render huge benefits for the livelihood and well-being of family
                     farmers, forest dwellers, traditional communities and indigenous peoples in the Amazon and Cerrado, increase their
                     earnings, improve their food security, reduce threats to their territories and livelihoods that they face due to the
                     expansion of the agricultural frontier, and lead to protection and conservation of the distinct habitats and ancestral
                     territories they are collectively attached to. Component 2 is expected to provide the same beneficiary groups with


                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     access to an additional revenue stream, facilitating the adoption of the new practices. The main social concerns
                     associated with the project refer to: a) Occupational health and safety risks that project workers providing technical
                     assistance may face in remotely located and hard to supervise areas ridden by endemic diseases. b) The risk that
                     incidents of SEA/SH and cultural conflicts may eventually occur due to close/without supervision interactions
                     between project workers and vulnerable and culturally distinct local communities (including Indigenous Peoples). c)
                     Three context-related challenges: i) the lack of access of many intended beneficiaries to financing institutions and
                     their risk aversion to make debts and invest in unknown practices and technologies; ii) the roles children traditionally
                     play in bioeconomy value chains; and ii) local population’s lack of understanding about carbon markets and potential
                     resistance due to recent harmful experiences with carbon cowboys. These risks will be further assessed during
                     preparation. They can be mitigated through communication/awareness raising measures and enforcement of
                     behavioral standards.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      BB’s ESMS complies with the regulations of the Central Bank and the National Monetary Council. It has clear
                      procedures to: a) screen, review and categorize subprojects per their potential E&S risks and impacts; b) screen
                      subprojects against Exclusion/Restriction/Alert Lists that takes into consideration the type of financing instrument,
                      the subproject type, the economic sector, the geographical area, and the borrower’s track record; c) monitor



Public Disclosure
                      subproject implementation and E&S performance as per the nature and magnitude of its E&S risks; and d) ensure the
                      subproject is implemented to meet national law and contractual requirements. BB assesses their subprojects’ E&S
                      risks at the sector level, the company level and the activities specific characteristics, under the responsibility of the
                      Risk Management Department. The screening and assessment of ESG risks are made by a specialized team which is
                      independent and segregated from the commercial area, aiming to ensure an unbiased anaysis.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      Following the country’s legislation, BB discloses in its website information on the elements of its ESMS, maintains
                      external communication channels to respond to public enquiries and concerns in a timely manner and operates a
                      grievance mechanism as part of its ESMS. Information disclosure and stakeholder engagement are pivotal for raising
                      the interest of potential sub-borrowers on the financing line and reach the project development objectives. BB will
                      develop a culturally appropriate communication/outreach strategy as part of the project implementation. During
                      project preparation, the task team will further assess a) the elements of BB’s External Ombudsperson Office in terms
                      of its accessibility for the target population and b) BB’s requirements to sub-borrowers in matters related with the
                      maintenance of engagement channels with the neighboring communities.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      Following the robust Brazilian legislation on labor relationships, working conditions and OHS, BB provides for a safe
                      an healthy working environment – including appropriate labor management procedures, non-discrimination and
                      equal opportunity principles, and the maintenance of an internal grievance mechanism. However, some project


                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      workers may be exposed to OHS risks as they will be working in areas remotely located and often ridden by endemic
                      diseases. SEA/SH incidents are also a concern as some activities will be conducted in hard to supervise areas and
                      among people who are at the lowest poverty quartile of the country. Given the contextual risk related to the
                      participation of children in the harvesting of some bioeconomy products, it is worth emphasizing that BB vetoes the
                      granting of financing to customers who exploit child labor or forced labor. The Project must support governmental
                      efforts for the erradication of child labor.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The Project proposes to facilitate access to credit and innovative financing instruments and leverage private finance
                      to scale-up impact in support of Brazil’s net-zero target, including in agriculture and land-based sectors. Physical
                      interventions will be associated with forest restoration, bioeconomy value chains, and restoration of degraded
                      pastures through the implementation of CSA practices. The key environmental impacts of the eligible subprojects are
                      expected to be small-scale, restricted to the projects’ footprint and include waste and effluent generation, soil
                      carryover, chemicals and pesticides management. BB’s ESMS has specific provisions/restrictions for financing
                      activities involving the use of agrochemicals and pesticides. GHG emissions are expected to be reduced as a direct
                      outcome of the project. Water availability is not an issue in the region and, in light of the project’s design, water
                      usage is indeed expected to be optimized in the benefited properties.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The project is expected to benefit some vulnerable communities, reducing adverse impacts on ecosystem services




Public Disclosure
                      that are present in the without project scenario and improving their living conditions. It is also expected to convert
                      agricultural practices that are heavily reliant on pesticides into low-carbon and sustainable ones, which give
                      preference to integrated pest or vector management (IPM and IVM) approaches. Its activities will neither expose
                      communities to hazardous materials or emergency events, nor rely on new, under construction or existing dams.
                      They are not expected to require the retention of security personnel and temporary induced influx of labor will not be
                      significant, reducing the risk of increased community exposure to communicable diseases and SEA/SH incidents.
                      During preparation, the capacity of BB’s ESMS to screen, identify and manage the impact of subprojects in local
                      communities will be further assessed.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant because BB will make small size loans for on farm land restoration and
                      sustainable agricultural practices to private borrowers who – following the country legislation – do not hold powers
                      either to acquire land rights through exprepriation or other compulsory procedures, or through negotiated
                      settlements in which failure to reach settlement would result in expropriation or other compulsory procedures.
                      Therefore, no adverse impacts related with involuntary resettlement or restrictions in land use and access to natural
                      resources use are envisaged under the Project.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The eligible subprojects might pose risks to the biodiversity as the anticipated activities involve the implementation of
                      agricultural practices, reforestation and restoration of degraded pastures. The financing of bioeconomy value chains


                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      could entail the management of living natural resources and thus encompass risks associated with the introduction of
                      invasive alien species, disturbances of local fauna, and affectation of ecosystem services. By design, the Project will
                      not generate the conversion of natural forests and, indeed will encourage the protection and conservation of natural
                      forests and biodiversity. BB’s ESMS has clear provisions that require that eligible subprojects are located on land that
                      is already converted, modified habitats or legally allowed under Brazilian Forest Code. Among other directives, it does
                      not finance agribusinesses in areas embargoed by IBAMA, and the proof of env. and landholding legality is a key
                      condition to agribusiness financing in Legal Amazon.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      A large number of Indigenous Peoples and Indigenous Lands are located in the territory of the Brazilian Amazon and
                      Cerrado biomes. BB vetoes the granting of credit to non-indigenous peoples that aim to carry out activities on
                      indigenous lands. However, the project may grant financing to sustainable agricultural practices and bioeconomy
                      productive chains demanded by collective organizations ruled by indigenous peoples themselves. No adverse risks
                      and impacts on Indigenous Peoples are envisaged because BB will be required to undertake meaningful consultation,
                      in a culturally appropriate and gender and inter-generationally inclusive manner before granting the loans. During
                      project preparation, BB’s E&S screening procedures will be assessed to verify their capacity to screen out subprojects
                      proposed by non-indigenous borrowers that overlap with Indigenous Lands.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      Subprojects financed by BB with the loan proceeds are not expected to have adverse impacts on tangible cultural
                      heritage. However, bioeconomy value chains may have a material impact on intangible cultural heritage and require
                      measures to promote the fair and equitable sharing of benefits as a pre-condition for granting the financing for
                      subprojects involving the commercial use of intangible cultural heritage (such as traditional knowledge). The Brazilian
                      legislation is robust with regards to the commercial use of cultural heritage and traditional knowledge, which will be
                      further assessed during preparation.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                Relevant

                      This is a financial intermediary project with the second largest bank in Brazil. BB has in place and maintains an ESMS
                      to identify, assess, manage, and monitor the environmental and social risks and impacts of its subprojects on an
                      ongoing basis, which – in an initial assessment – is considered to be commensurate with the nature and magnitude of
                      the E&S risks and impacts of the subprojects that will be financed under the project. BB also provides for a safe an
                      healthy working environment – including appropriate labor management procedures – and maintains procedures for
                      external communications on E&S matters and for responding to public enquires in a timely manner. This ESMS
                      includes an E&S policy endorsed by BB’s senior management that is in line with the requirements of ESS9 and is
                      managed by well-staffed organizational units. BB’s ESMS will be further assessed during preparation as part of the
                      Bank due diligence.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                      In Whole
                       This is a Financial Intermediary operation. As such, it must rely on the FI ESMS as far as it allows that achievement of
                       outcomes that are materially consistent with the objectives and requirements of ESS 9. As part of the due diligence,
                       the task team will re-assess BB’s ESMS – which has been recently considered as adequate to manage the E&S risks of a
                       Substantial risk operation (P178888) – and propose additional material measures that may be needed to improve any
                       of its elements. These material measures will be incorporated in the Project’s Environmental and Social Commitment
                       Plan (ESCP).


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              TBD
                       Component 2 will be financed by a grant from FFO/PROGREEN/German Government. The World Bank's ESF will apply
                       to the whole operation.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?



Public Disclosure
                     During project operation, BB will allow the Bank team to have access to all relevant information on its existing
                     Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) – most of which is available at its website. As part of its due
                     diligence, the task team will (re)assess BB’s ESMS taking into consideration the objectives and requirements of ESS9,
                     ESS2 and any other relevant Environmental and Social Standard of the World Bank Environmental and Social
                     Framework for Investment Project Financing. If deemed necessary, the Bank will request the borrower to prepare and
                     disclose on its website the summary of each of the elements of its ESMS by Appraisal.

                     Upon completion of the assessment of BB’s ESMS, the task team will propose material measures aimed at enhancing
                     BB’s ESMS (if any) and ensure proper reporting of relevant environmental and social aspects of subprojects, incidents
                     and accidents associated with the Project, and concerns and complaints related with the environmental and social
                     performance of the Project to the Bank. These material measures will be agreed upon with BB and included in the
                     Project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which will be publicly disclosed.

                     During project implementation:

                     •        BB must immediately communicate to the Bank on any relevant change in its ESMS (and the country’s
                     regulatory framework) that may adversely affect its capacity to manage the environmental and social risks of the
                     subprojects as well as the measures taken to review and adjust its ESMS in a manner acceptable to the Bank. BB must
                     also communicate to the Bank about all relevant environmental and social incidents and accidents related with the
                     Project in a timely manner and provide information on the root causes of such incidents and accidents and on the
                     measures taken to avoid their reoccurrence.


                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)




                     •       The task team will carry out: a) a prior review of the E&S assessment of (i) the first five subprojects conducted
                     by BB’s environmental and social team and (ii) all subprojects proposed by Indigenous Peoples; and b) carry out
                     biannual implementation support missions (including field visits to a sample of subprojects).


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Werner L. Kornexl                        Title:         Senior Natural Resources
                                                                                                      Management Specialist

                      Email:                  wkornexl@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Marie Caroline Paviot                    Job Title:     Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  mpaviot@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Gabriel J D Sensenbrenner                Job Title:     Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  sensenbrennerg@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                    Werner L. Kornexl, Marie Caroline Paviot, Gabriel J D Sensenbrenner

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:           Eric Shayer

                     ADM Social Specialist:                  Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa




                    Dec 20, 2024                                                                                                       Page 9 of 9
