Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                                Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                          Date Prepared/Updated: 10/15/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05238




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 20, 2025                                                                                   Page 1 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508364                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         CRISP                        2026

                     Operation Name            Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries              Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Ethiopia                  Ethiopia                                   EASTERN AND                  Water
                                                                                          SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                   Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     The Federal               Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands        02-Feb-2026                  24-Apr-2026
                     Democratic Republic
                     of Ethiopia

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     25-Sep-2025               350,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve access to resilient irrigation services in selected areas in Ethiopia.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The CRISP project aims to improve access to resilient irrigation services in selected areas of Ethiopia. The project will
                     strengthen the performance, reliability, and climate resilience of irrigation systems by rehabilitating and modernizing
                     key large- and medium-scale schemes, upgrading irrigation infrastructure down to on-farm systems, and expanding
                     small-scale irrigation in vulnerable and food-insecure areas. It will introduce climate-smart and energy-efficient
                     technologies to enhance water-use efficiency and sustainability, and pilot innovative approaches such as irrigation
                     service fee systems, private service provision, water allocation and monitoring mechanisms, and salinity management
                     practices. The project will further support agricultural production and value chain development by improving farmers’

                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                     access to inputs, mechanization, and markets, and by strengthening agri-business linkages to increase productivity and
                     incomes. It will promote inclusive and participatory management models, empower water user associations and female
                     farmers, and foster private sector engagement in irrigation services, financing, and agricultural commercialization. In
                     addition, the project will establish digital tools for national irrigation information and asset management, enhance dam
                     safety and environmental and social risk management, and build institutional and technical capacity at federal and
                     regional levels to sustain climate-resilient irrigation development.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project is a nationwide operation in Ethiopia focused on irrigation landscapes. Activities span federally managed
                     large- and medium-scale irrigation schemes and regionally implemented small-scale irrigation (SSI) schemes, alongside
                     dam safety and small water storage works, and sector-wide digital and quality systems (NIIS and Quality Assurance) led
                     by the Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLs). The project will operate across diverse agro-ecological zones and in a
                     context with varying levels of fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV), including regions such as Amhara, Oromia,
                     Benishangul-Gumuz, Afar, Somali, and Tigray, where access constraints may affect stakeholder engagement,
                     supervision, and security management for field operations.

                     Ethiopia has a considerable geographical diversity and the country’s topography is highly varied, featuring rugged
                     mountains, plateaus, deep gorges, river valleys, and vast lowlands. The climate is primarily tropical though it varies with
                     altitude. The country has adequate average annual rainfall, 12 major river basins, several major rivers, wetlands, and
                     lakes, and significant groundwater resources. The country has a number of major ecosystems and agro-ecological zones,



Public Disclosure
                     supporting a rich diversity of flora and fauna. Ethiopia has several protected areas, including national and regional parks,
                     wildlife sanctuaries/reserves, controlled hunting areas, and national priority forests. The main environmental challenges
                     of the country include land degradation, deforestation, water pollution, and climate vulnerability.
                     The social context is characterized by dispersed rural communities dominated by smallholder farmers, Irrigation Water
                     Users Associations (IWUAs), and local private actors. Historically Underserved Peoples, including pastoral and agro-
                     pastoral groups, are present in lowland and emerging regions (Afar, Somali, Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambella, parts of
                     Oromia and former SNNP), requiring culturally appropriate engagement.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Borrower comprises mainly Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLs) at federal level with regional irrigation
                     bureaus and collaborating agencies (MoWE for dams/storage; MoA for value chains). The MILLs was established in
                     2021 to lead irrigation development in Ethiopia. Previously, the Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Energy (MoWIE)
                     oversaw irrigation development, while the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) managed small-scale irrigation. As a newly
                     established ministry, MILLs requires significant ESRM capacity building to lead and manage irrigation effectively.
                     Recognizing these needs, the project will dedicate resources under Component 5 to strengthen ESRM capabilities, with
                     details to be finalized during project preparation. So far, MILLs is already implementing parts of Projects which are
                     engaged in irrigation sector operations and coordination platforms, such as the Horn of Africa-Groundwater for
                     Resilience Project (HoA-GW4RP - P174867) and Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project, Phase II (LLRP II - P180076),
                     which can be leveraged for CRISP. Both these projects are implemented under the ESF, and MILLs have already engaged
                     E&S staffing to support the Projects. The E&S performance rating of these projects is currently Moderately Satisfactory.
                     The dedicated ESF implementation capacity at MILLs will need to be formalized and resourced at federal and regional
                     levels. At a federal level, MILLs have an EHS unit composed of 4 Environmental, 5 social exprts 3 OHS who are

                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                     supporting the Project preparation and planned to have a dedicated PIU which will be staffed by environmental, Social
                     and Occupational Health and Safety and GBV Experts. In addition, the MILLs organizational arrangement, and
                     implementation capacity at a regional level will be assessed in detail as part of the Project preparation, and the findings
                     will be reflected and agreed upon in the Project ESCP. So far, the Borrower showed a strong willingness and
                     coordination efforts.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     This rating reflects the expected adverse inherent risks associated with the Project’s activities, including potential
                     downstream impacts of TA activities and limitations in institutional capacity, while also acknowledging the positive
                     contributions anticipated under components 3 and 5. Key potential environmental risks include those related to
                     water resource, ecosystem impacts, pollution, and dam safety. The activities could lead to altered hydrological
                     regimes, affecting downstream water availability and potentially impacting aquatic ecosystems. Increased water
                     extraction for irrigation purposes may exacerbate water scarcity issues, particularly in already water-stressed regions.
                     Further construction of new SSIs carries Labor and OHS related risks, risks of habitat loss, soil erosion, and
                     sedimentation of water bodies if not properly managed. Furthermore, the use of agrochemicals associated with
                     intensified irrigated agriculture could result in water and soil pollution, affecting both human and ecological health. In
                     addition, the Project might contribute to impacts associated with salinity, dam safety and pose risks to local



Public Disclosure
                     ecosystems and water resources if activities involving large dam involved rehabilitation, and small dams’ construction
                     if not carefully planned and implemented. The planned TAs, such as preparation of pipeline investment projects and
                     development of a National Irrigation Program (NIP), may result in downstream EHS risks and impacts. Many of the
                     anticipated impacts are potentially reversible with appropriate mitigation measures. Detailed environmental and
                     social assessments will be conducted to further define and confirm these risks, assess their potential impacts, and
                     develop appropriate mitigation measures. The ESMF is under development. Once their feasibility is confirmed, site-
                     specific ESIA/ESMPs will be prepared and implemented for subprojects as per the ESMF. ToR SESA has also been
                     proposed and being considered as part of the NIP strategy.
                                                                                                                                       Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project’s social risk is driven by: (i) potential land acquisition and restrictions on land use for canal rehabilitation,
                     storages, and ancillary works that could lead to temporary or permanent economic displacement (loss of
                     crops/assets, access disruptions) and grievances if procedures are inconsistently applied across regions (ESS5); (ii)
                     risks of exclusion and elite capture, with women, youth, persons with disabilities, IDPs, and SubSaharan African
                     Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities at heightened risk of being left out of benefits or decision-
                     making, including possible inequities in access to water permits or irrigation service fees (iii) increased abstraction can
                     reduce water availability for downstream users, pastoralists, and ecosystems, potentially leading to conflict and
                     disputes iv) labor and working conditions risks for direct and contracted workers, including OHS, fair terms, and
                     access to a worker GRM, with uneven contractor compliance in dispersed/rural settings (v) SEA/SH risks linked to
                     labor presence and remote sites, requiring survivorcentered GM pathways and contractor Codes of Conduct; (vi)
                     community health and safety risks from construction interfaces and traffic near settlements, as well as social tension


                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                           Page 4 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                     around works scheduling that may interrupt irrigation during critical periods; and (vii) security and access constraints
                     in FCVaffected areas that can impede consultations, supervision, timely incident reporting, and service continuity,
                     thereby elevating residual risk. To address these social risks, the project will develop and implement ESMF, including
                     RF, SEA/SH Action Plan, and LMP.These documents will be prepared, publicly consulted on, and disclosed before the
                     project becomes effective, in alignment with the ESCP. The project will also put in place specific measures for
                     resettlement issues according to a detailed site-level resettlement action plans. A SEP will be prepared before project
                     appraisal.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      The three prioritized irrigation schemes under comp.1 ,Gode, Gidabo, and Ada’a Becho will have an ESIA, for which
                      the TORs are under preparation. For activities under comp. 2 involving multiple new and rehabilitation of small-scale
                      irrigation as well as other components, a framework approach will be used and an ESMF including SEA/SH, RF and
                      LMP and standalone SEP will be prepared, consulted, and disclosed prior to appraisal; then proportionate, site
                      specific ESMPs/ESIAs will be prepared, cleared, and disclosed before commencement of civil works. A SESA will be
                      prepared for the TA activities and is planned to be part of the national irrigation program. Before Appraisal, the
                      Project ESCP will be prepared and summarize the material measures and actions required to address the identified
                      risks and impacts. Further, the ES performance will be monitored and reported as detailed in the ESCP and



Public Disclosure
                      ESIA/ESMP. In addition, SRAMP will be prepared to address security related issues.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      The project’s nationwide scope and the diversity of affected communities—including smallholder farmers,
                      pastoralists, women, youth, persons with disabilities, and historically underserved groups—there is a substantial risk
                      that some stakeholders may be excluded from meaningful participation, consultation, and access to project benefits.
                      To mitigate these risks, the project will prepare and implement a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that
                      systematically identifies all relevant stakeholders, ensures their views are incorporated into project design and
                      implementation, and provides timely, accessible, and understandable information throughout the project lifecycle.
                      The SEP will include differentiated measures to enable the effective participation of vulnerable and disadvantaged
                      groups, and establish a robust, accessible grievance mechanism to address concerns and complaints, including those
                      related to gender-based violence and social inclusion.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      Based on the project’s activities and interventions, potential labor risks includes inadequate working conditions for
                      laborers engaged in construction and rehabilitation of irrigation facilities; child labor; OHS risks to workers and risks of
                      SEA/SH, particularly where there is significant workers-community interaction. The Borrower will prepare, consult,
                      disclose, and implement Labor Management Procedures (LMP) as part of the ESMF, covering all worker categories
                      (direct, contracted, primary supply, and if applicable community workers). Contractors will prepare Contractor C-
                      ESMPs Plans consistent with ESS2 the Project LMP. The LMP will prohibit child/forced labor; ensure fair terms, non


                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                          Page 5 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                      discrimination/equal opportunity; set robust OHS measures aligned with WBG EHS Guidelines; and establish a worker
                      GM (SEA/SH sensitive). Contractors will prepare Contractor C-ESMPs Plans consistent with ESS2 the Project LMP.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      Project activities will result in resources utilization and pollution risks including risks from utilization of water for
                      irrigation, raw materials, and energy during construction & operation periods; and improper handling of construction
                      waste, chemicals, and machinery can be hazardous and may contaminate local water sources and soils, posing risks to
                      drinking water and agricultural productivity, and application of agro-chemicals during construction & operation
                      periods. It might also increase water stress and the risk of conflict where resource are scarce, fragile, or institutionally
                      weak settings, and are amplified poor governance. The ESMF will include measures to manage these risks including
                      WMP, IPMF. Further, the ESIAs/ESMPs will incorporate measures to address resources utilization & pollution risks
                      and may include preparation of water use plan. TAs may also result in downstream risks. The SESA will consider
                      downstream risk from implementation of the NIP.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      Component 1 & 2 activities will result in community health & safety risks including traffic & road safety risks include
                      injury or death to community members, livestock disturbance, and disruption of daily life; improper handling of
                      construction waste, chemicals, and machinery can contaminate local water sources and soils, posing risks to drinking
                      water and agricultural productivity; community exposure to communicable diseases; SEA/SH risks; security risk and
                      risk from Poorly rehabilitated/improved dam structure and reservoirs can fail, causing flooding, property damage,




Public Disclosure
                      and loss of life downstream, water shortages often create inherent conflicts, open canals, reservoirs, and water
                      storage facilities present risks of drowning, particularly for children and animals. The ESMF will consider measures to
                      manage these risks. SEA/SH action plan will be prepared as part of the ESMF. A security management plan will also be
                      prepared.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      Project Components 1 , 2 and 3 focus on the rehabilitation and extension of existing irrigation schemes, dams and
                      reservioures which may require the temporary or permanent acquisition of small plots of land, result in economic
                      displacement, and impose restrictions on land use. While significant physical displacement is not anticipated, it
                      cannot be entirely ruled out, particularly in densely populated or intensively farmed or in areas where abandoned
                      irregation system converted in to farmland.The project may also involve restrictions on land use or access to
                      resources in areas around new or improved water storage facilities including small dams. Potential affected assets
                      could include land, structures, crops, and access to water resources.The project Resettlement Framework (RF) is
                      being prepared as part of the ESMF, setting out the principles and procedures for land acquisition, compensation, and
                      livelihood restoration and the site specific RAP will be prepared as per the RF guidance.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      Component 1 & 2 activities may result in risks to biodiversity including vegetation clearing for expansion of irrigation
                      lands, construction of canals & distribution system, & storage facilities; introduction of invasive species; destruction
                      of critical & natural habitats ultimately resulting in impacts on terrestrial biodiversity. Project infrastructure may


                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                          Page 6 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                      affect protected or key biodiversity areas. Construction/ rehabilitation can disrupt wildlife movement, fragment
                      habitats, and reduce biodiversity, indirectly affecting community health and ecosystem services; Unsustainable water
                      use & pollution from agro-chemicals may pose risk to aquatic biodiversity. The ESMF will include measures for
                      management of biodiversity risks. Further, site-specific instruments (ESIAs/ESMPs) will incorporate measures to
                      manage biodiversity risks. If critical habitats are affected, BMPs may be prepared as part of ESIAs/ESMPs. The SESA
                      will consider downstream risks from the TA activities.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The project will be implemented nationwide, including in regions such as Afar, Somali, Gambella, Benishangul Gumuz,
                      and pastoralist/agro-pastoralist areas of Oromia and SNNP, where HUTLCs meeting the criteria of ESS7 are present.
                      Specific risks include the potential for social exclusion, disruption of customary land use, and insufficient recognition
                      of traditional governance and water rights. The project is not expected to cause relocation of HUTLC but should the
                      scope of the activities change, FPIC will be applied. As part of the ESIA/ESMP a social assessment for HUTCL will be
                      carried out in areas where HUTCL are present and the plans will also include dedicated chapters/annexes functioning
                      as a HUTCL plan. The SEP will further ensure that grievance mechanisms are accessible and responsive to these
                      communities, and that their participation in project benefits and decision-making is actively promoted in accordance
                      with ESS7 requirements.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The project activities are not expected to be situated within or near known cultural heritage sites. The construction,
                      rehabilitation and extension work under the Project , which may involve earth-moving activities, pose a risk of
                      encountering, disturbing, or inadvertently damaging cultural heritage assets. To mitigate these risks, the ESMF will
                      include robust screening procedures to exclude subprojects with potential adverse impacts on cultural heritage, and a
                      Chance-Finds Procedure will be established and implemented. Meaningful consultation with local communities and
                      relevant authorities will be undertaken to ensure the protection and preservation of both tangible and intangible
                      cultural heritage, in accordance with ESS8 requirements.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 TBD

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       No applicable.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                Yes

                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                       The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and Agence Française de Développement (AFD) have
                       confirmed their commitment to Joint Co-financing the project. Both IFAD and AFD have agreed to follow Bank’s E&S
                       policies and standards.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     TThe following ES instruments will be prepared prior to project appraisal:

                     1.      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     2.      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     3.      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including a Resettlement Framework, Labor
                     Management Procedures (LMP), a Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Action Plan, a Waste
                     Management Plan, and an Integrated Pest Management Framework
                     4.      Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for priority large- and medium-scale irrigation schemes,
                     namely Ada’a Becho, Gidabo, and Gode schemes including Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Plans, Community
                     Health and Safety (CHS) Plans, Water Use Plan, and other associated plans where required.

                     The following ES instruments will be prepared during project implementation:




Public Disclosure
                     1.       Security Risk Assessment and management plan will be prepared not later than 3 months after Project
                     effectiveness.
                     2.       Site-specific ES instruments such as ESIAs and ESMPs (and associated plans) as well as RPs for project activities,
                     including small-scale irrigation schemes based on the ESMF
                     3.       Site-specific ES instruments for TAs involving feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for investment
                     projects
                     4.       Dam safety measures by qualified engineers or dam safety plans by panel of experts for relevant dams and
                     water storage structures
                     5.       ES requirements in Terms of References (ToRs) for other TAs
                     6.       Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the national irrigation program and
                     policies/regulations on irrigation water management.
                     7.       Institutional ESRM Capacity Assessment for component 3 development




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:        Si Gou                                 Title:          Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                      Specialist



                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation For Sustainable Production (crisp) (P508364)



                      Email:                   sgou@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:             Ximing Zhang                           Job Title:      Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                   xzhang4@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:             Hayalsew Yilma                         Job Title:      Senior Irrigation Specialist

                      Email:                   hyilma@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                      Si Gou, Ximing Zhang, Hayalsew Yilma




Public Disclosure
                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                             Selam Tarkeghn Neda

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                    Aynalem Getachew Gashaw




                    Oct 20, 2025                                                                                                     Page 9 of 9
