Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04949




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 29, 2025                                                                                                Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508034                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       STAR-WASH-1                  2026

                     Operation Name            Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services
                                               Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                 SOUTH ASIA                   Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Islamic Republic of       Goverment of Sindh                       09-Feb-2026                  26-Jan-2026
                     Pakistan

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     24-Apr-2025               450,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The STAR-WASH-1 Project Development Objective is to increase access to safely managed water supply, sanitation, and
                     hygiene services in selected rural areas of the Sindh Province.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The operation will use the Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA). Accelerating and scaling up access to rural WASH
                     in Pakistan requires a significant change in sector governance and hefty investments, necessitating a programmatic,
                     long-term approach. Traditional, retail-based approaches to projects, typically focused on asset creation, have failed to
                     deliver sustainable rural WASH solutions at scale. A system change -comprising policy and institutional reform, a
                     professionalized and efficient service delivery model, and a significant focus on behavioral change- is essential to close
                     the WASH access gap in rural Pakistan and to leverage scarce fiscal resources to crowd in multilateral development


                    May 29, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)



                     banks (MDBs), the private sector, and other partners. An MPA's long-term and sequential nature makes it the most
                     suitable instrument to deliver systems change incrementally and sustainably. The MPA is comprised of four mutually
                     reinforcing pillars: (a) sector governance, (b) access to water supply services, (c) access to sanitation, and (d) behavioral
                     change for strengthened hygiene. Subsequent phases of the MPA will customize the theory of change (ToC) based on
                     their needs, priorities, available resources, and capabilities, provided these are aligned with the PrDO. The MPA
                     comprises four overlapping phases. Its total estimated envelope is US$2.55 billion, of which US$1.4 billion is financed
                     through IDA/IBRD funds and US$900 million from counterpart funding and co-financing from other development
                     partners. The implementation timeframe will be from FY26 to FY35, coinciding with the CPF’s timeframe. It
                     encompasses the Sindh, KP, and Punjab provinces, with the potential to add the Balochistan Province based on client
                     demand. STAR-WASH-1 will finance activities and investments that will contribute to reducing stunting prevalence in
                     Sindh rural areas by addressing structural bottlenecks for service delivery, including technical, governance, and financial
                     aspects. As such, the Project is expected to finance the extension of water supply schemes, latrines, and transport,
                     treatment, and disposal of fecal sludge and wastewater. The investment will be supported by comprehensive behavioral
                     change campaigns to improve hygiene practices related to water storage and treatment, handwashing, menstrual
                     hygiene management, safe disposal of child feces, and solid and animal waste management. The inventions will occur at
                     the household level and in public places (healthcare facilities and schools, among others). Under the STAR-WASH-1
                     Project, WASH investments will be complemented by support to strengthen the sector's institutional and financial
                     architecture for a major change to the existing arrangements. STAR-WASH 1 will be co-financed by the ADB under the
                     new co-financing framework, where the Bank will be the lead agency for preparation and implementation. ADB is
                     expected to mobilize US$100 million.




Public Disclosure
                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                        STAR-WASH-1 will be implemented in rural areas of Sindh province. The Project will provide water supply, sanitation,
                     and hygiene services in the rural areas of Sindh.
                     The rural water supply is challenged by the difficulty of finding good-quality drinking water resources. Groundwater
                     salinity is a persistent issue, especially in areas served by non-perennial canals. Water can be classified based on salinity
                     ranges: usable (<1,500 mg/l), marginal (1,500–3,000 mg/l), and brackish (>3,000 mg/l). 80 percent of the province is
                     underlain by saline to highly saline groundwater, In many of the districts of Sindh, groundwater is found with raised
                     values of arsenic above WHO limits in addition to other pollutant sources like cadmium, chromium, and lead, and high
                     nitrates in some of the regions. These lenses are precarious and dependent on canal water management. The situation
                     is further worsened by the province’s vulnerability to natural disasters and climate change impacts such as droughts,
                     floods, and heatwaves. Besides displacing millions of people, the 2022 floods also destroyed key rural infrastructure,
                     including water supply-related infrastructure.
                     Sindh has significant levels of rural poverty, with about 37 percent of the rural population living below the poverty line,
                     which is higher than the national average. Agriculture is a significant part of Sindh's economy, contributing 24 percent of
                     the provincial GDP and providing 70 percent of employment. Livestock and aquaculture are also crucial for rural
                     livelihoods, particularly for women and those lacking clear land tenure rights. About 30 to 35 percent of the population
                     lives below the poverty line, with the poor deriving 56 percent of their income from agriculture. Despite the importance
                     of livestock and aquaculture, the prevalence of undernourishment and stunting in children under five is high, exceeding
                     national averages.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                    May 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)



                     STAR-WASH-1 will be implemented by the Sindh Rural WASH Service Company (SRSC. The Government of Sindh (GoS)
                     has initiated the process of establishing the SRSC, which is expected to be established during 2025. The SRSC will be a
                     not-for-profit Company incorporated with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan, registered as a
                     dedicated, professionalized, and customer-oriented WASH service provider for Sindh rural areas. The SRSC will prepare
                     and implement the STAR-WASH-1, and will be responsible for environmental, social , and grievance redress
                     management. The GoS will hire the key personnel required for the Company's operationalization and preparation of the
                     STAR-WASH-1 Project once the company is registered. In terms of E&S personnel, immediately after the SRSC
                     registration and before appraisal (October 2025), the GoS plans to hire an Environment Specialist and a Social
                     Development Specialist, as part of the Project Management Unit (PMU) core team. This team will provide support in the
                     preparation of E&S instruments for STAR-WASH-1. Once the Project is approved by the The World Bank (expected in
                     January 2026) PMU team is expected to continue in their positions, subject to satisfactory performance. Considering the
                     fact that this will be an entirely new PMU to be established for the implementation of the Project, its capacity is
                     expected to be low and will require extensive capacity-building support during the preparation and implementation of
                     the Project.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     Environmental risk is substantial at concept stage. The Project will reduce the risks of: (a) consuming contaminated



Public Disclosure
                     water, (b) over-exploitation of groundwater by supporting the development of surface water schemes, and (c)
                     groundwater contamination. Water schemes developed or rehabilitated under the STAR-WASH will have adequate
                     treatment facilities for heavy metals, chemicals, and bacteriological contaminants. The schemes will rely on surface
                     water, mainly from the canals, given the high levels of groundwater contamination. Finally, on-site sanitation
                     facilities, fecal sludge management, and wastewater (when needed and economically viable) will reduce the potential
                     contamination from leaching toilets and inadequate disposal and treatment of sludge/wastewater. Despite these
                     benefits, several E&S risks - primarily associated with water supply and sanitation infrastructure - require adequate
                     mitigation measures. Household pipe water connections are likely to increase the volumes of wastewater. Improperly
                     constructed household latrines and water systems can contaminate groundwater, deplete water sources, pollute soil
                     and surface water and increase disease risks. Environmental impacts related with construction include: construction
                     debris, noise and air pollution, health and safety issues. These environmental risks are minor to moderate and
                     localized in nature, but these may exacerbate in case of design failure of sanitation services, inadequate operations
                     and maintenance, and if the Project does not effectively integrate community engagement, behavior change and
                     communication strategies into Project design. Envisaged operational risks from handling of wastewater and sludge
                     pertain to infection prevention and control, and disease vectors emanating from potentially stagnant wastewater
                     ponds and FSTPs. These risks are substantial due to hazardous nature of wastewater and sludge. The lack of capacity
                     to manage E&S risks at the counterpart side add to these risks.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risk rating is Substantial at this stage. The Project is expected to benefit 1.3 million people with safely managed
                     water supply and sanitation services, and strengthened hygiene practices. Social risks related to the Project are


                    May 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)



                     mainly associated with social conflicts over water distribution among communities, voluntary land donation protocol
                     for minor land parcels required for schemes and risk of access of services for vulnerable groups particularly ethnic
                     groups and minorities. The nature of schemes is such that small land parcels for constructing the water supply or
                     sanitation infrastructure at the village level will be required. The Project will prioritize this land requirement to be
                     fulfilled through government owned land or communal lands (Shamilat). Where needed, Voluntary Land Donation
                     procedure will be adopted as in similar Projects across Pakistan, as an exception. There will be no large scale land
                     acquisition and resettlement under the Project. Risk of encountering squatters/encroachers at government and / or
                     communal lands is substantial. Use of land parcels with Anti-encroachment legacy will not be allowed under the
                     Project. Risks related to social exclusion of communities in historically marginalized districts with low socioeconomic
                     indicators are substantial. Sindh is home to a significant religious and ethnic minorities population, and many such
                     communities reside in poor and remote rural areas. There is a possibility that these and other vulnerable and
                     marginalized communities including persons with different abilities will not be able to access Project interventions
                     and improved water supply and sanitation services. Social risks related to the O&M and long term sustainability of the
                     WASH infrastructure also exist. Also, water is a contentious issue across Sindh, often being the cause of social conflict
                     within communities, tribes and ethnicities. The Project will need to adhere to the norms and practices in water
                     distribution and allocation.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant


Public Disclosure
                      Since the exact scope of work and location of the subProject activity is not known at this stage, an Environmental and
                      Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed and disclosed. ESMF will include general E&S code of
                      practices or similar management tools to mitigate risks for the village level waster supply and sanitation schemes.
                      Site-specific Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMPs) will be prepared for each subProject intervention,
                      including FSTPs as per guidance of the ESMF requirement. A Resettlement Planning Framework (RPF) will be
                      developed as part of the ESMF. It will contain procedures and documentation requirements for land use and
                      Voluntary Land Donation. Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) will be prepared at the time of appraisal
                      to document the E&S management actions, timelines and responsibilities along with capacity building measures to be
                      undertaken. To respond to the security risks where applicable, a Security Management Plan will be prepared.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant. Under ESS10, the government implementing agency is required to prepare a detailed Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP), which will identify stakeholders, outline mechanisms for consultations with different
                      stakeholder groups (including women and vulnerable communities), identify stakeholders’ specific needs relating to
                      information sharing and disclosure; assign roles and responsibilities for its implementation; and, outline the structure
                      for the Project level grievance redress mechanism. The draft SEP will be prepared as part of the Project appraisal
                      package and will be updated as required during Project preparation and disclosed in accordance with ESS10.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant



                    May 29, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)



                      ESS2 is relevant. At the concept stage, it is anticipated that the Project will involve: (i) direct workers working for the
                      PMU/SRCS Company, (ii) contracted workers, which may include supervision consultants, contractors and sub-
                      contractors; and (iii) primary supply workers. The use of community labor will be assessed during preparation,
                      including for the construction of on-site sanitation facilities. The main labor risks are those of occupational health and
                      safety (OHS) for workers, child labor, and associated community health and safety risks, and the capacity of the
                      implementing agency to manage and mitigate these risks. No labor influx is anticipated as most of the labor will be
                      hired from local communities. To address and mitigate the associated risks, the implementing agency will, as part of
                      the ESMF, prepare written labor management procedures (LMP). Site-specific ESMPs will have OHS plans for project
                      activities as well as for FSTP's operations.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant. STAR-WASH-1 involves water supply and sanitation schemes construction. It is expected that air
                      pollution in the form of dust and noise, sludge, construction waste -including solid waste (packaging material, organic
                      waste, debris)- and wastewater will be generated by the Project’s activities. The construction activities and demand
                      for construction materials may also increase the burden on the local quarries in the area. The E&S assessment of
                      wastewater and fecal sludge treatment operations will be done during preparation of ESMF and during preparation of
                      site-specific instruments. The mitigation measures will be proposed in the ESMF, including Screening
                      Checklists/ESMPs to deal with the construction impacts as per principles of the mitigation hierarchy.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 is relevant considering potential community health and safety risks, as most of the interventions are planned in
                      rural environments and at the household level. The potential risks related to community health and safety may
                      include inadequate drinking water quality, exposure to air pollution from dust and noise, traffic, and road safety
                      during transportation of construction materials/equipment; and disease vector potential from wastewater and sludge
                      management during Project operation. The Community Health and Safety Plan will be prepared as part of the ESMF
                      to address these risks. Specific safety measures will also be included in the site-specific ESMPs of the FSTPs. GBV, SEA,
                      and SH risks will be mitigated by implementing a Project-level GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan to be prepared and approved
                      during STAR-WASH-1 implementation. Universal access will be ensured in the design of the WASH facilities.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      At the concept stage, no large-scale land acquisition is envisaged. ESS5 is relevant due to the potential of voluntary
                      land donation (VLD) and the removal of informal occupants. Small land parcels will be required for the construction of
                      water supply and sanitation infrastructure. To fulfill these requirements, the Project will prioritize the use of
                      government-owned lands or communal lands where available. VLD will be used where government or communal
                      lands are not available, and prior approval will be sought from the The World Bank E&S team before administering
                      the VLD. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed as part of the ESMF containing relevant
                      procedures and documentation requirements, including the criteria for accepting donations and the process for
                      ensuring voluntariness. The Framework will be consulted and publicly disclosed on the client's website. Resettlement
                      Action Plans (RAPs), if required, will be subsequently developed and implemented.




                    May 29, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)



                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                      Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is not relevant to the project. The project is unlikely to have any impact on natural habitats, biodiversity
                      and living natural resources since the proposed activities will be carried out in areas that are already built /
                      transformed.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not relevant, as no indigenous people as defined by ESS7 exist in the province.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                           Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS8 is not currently relevant. The project activities do not involve large excavation and are not expected to impact
                      the cultural resources. However, chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF as precautionary measure.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      No Financial Intermediary is involved in the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



Public Disclosure
                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No
                       Not Applicable


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 Yes
                       Asian Development Bank (ADB) will co-finance the Project (estimated US$100 million). In this case, ADB will follow the
                       World Bank ESF, and the Bank will lead in conducting the required E&S due diligence and assessments during Project
                       preparation. ADB may conduct joint supervision missions during Project implementation. The agreement on joint
                       areas of reliance and responsibility will be recorded in the ESCP and legal agreement.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The project will prepare and disclose following documents by Appraisal.
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


                    May 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sindh Transformational Accelerated Rural Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Services Project (P508034)



                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     Draft Environment and Social Framework (ESMF) and draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) covering aspects of
                     ESS1, ESS2, ESS3,, ESS4


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Carolina Dominguez Torres            Title:         Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                  Specialist

                     Email:                   cdominguez1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                            Carolina Dominguez Torres

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                   Sana Ahmed

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                          Babar Naseem Khan




                    May 29, 2025                                                                                                 Page 8 of 8
