Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDPA00231




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                  Operation Name
                               MID EAST,NORTH                                           Punjab Inclusive Cities
Pakistan                                                  P508094
                               AFRICA,AFG,PAK                                           Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               29-Sep-2025                04-Dec-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Local Government and
                               Community Development
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
                               Department, Government
                               of Punjab

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective is to provide safely managed water, sanitation and basic hygiene services and to
improve the institutional and financial performance of selected urban local governments in Punjab

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                 3,400.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         780.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                      755.00
    IPF Component                                                                                              25.00
  Total Financing                                                                                              780.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

FINANCING

                                                                                                                   Page 1
       The World Bank
       Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                              400.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                          400.00
   Total Government Contribution                                                                                 324.00

   Total Non-World Bank Group Financing                                                                            56.00
     Private Capital and Commercial Financing Amount                                                              56.00
       of which Private Capital                                                                                   56.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




This Program Information Document replaces an earlier version published on August 21, 2025 which had an error
regarding the application of a legal operational policy.

 B. Introduction and Context
1. This document covers Phase 2 of the Pakistan Urban Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Services Program,
approved by the World Bank’s Executive Directors on December 12, 2024, with the first phase Second Karachi Water and
Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2), (P171422; Report No PAD3707). Phase 2, the Punjab Inclusive Cities
Program (PICP), is aligned with the Government of Punjab’s new ‘Punjab Development Program’ and the ‘Suthra Punjab’
Programs. It contributes to the Pakistan Country Partnership Framework (CPF) outcome of reduced child stunting by
providing improved access to safely managed water, sanitation and hygiene services to 6.2 million beneficiaries in Punjab.

  Country Context

2. Amid an economic crisis at the start of fiscal year (FY) 2024, Pakistan undertook decisive measures to prevent a
sovereign default, including sharp fiscal consolidation, exchange rate adjustment, and monetary tightening. An IMF-
SBA arrangement helped to bridge financing gaps and restore confidence. Adjustment has been successful, with inflation
now falling, the exchange rate stabilizing, and foreign exchange reserves at more comfortable levels, allowing for the
easing of import controls. However, fiscal consolidation measures and tight monetary conditions continue to weigh on
economic activity, with growth expected to reach only 2.7 percent in FY25. Pakistan’s must now sustain stabilization
efforts while accelerating growth to reduce poverty from current high levels (around 25.6 percent using the national
poverty line). This will require reforms to make the tax system more effective and equitable, enhance the efficiency of
public spending, reduce the large role of the state in the economy, lower trade barriers, improve the business
environment, and improve basic services to address human capital deficits. Reform efforts are underway in these areas,
but remain at early stages of implementation. The outlook is predicated on the IMF Extended Fund Facility program
remaining on track, continued fiscal restraint, and continued external financing inflows. Significant downside risks arise



                                                                                                                      Page 2
          The World Bank
          Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


from heavy banking sector exposure to sovereign debt, geopolitical factors, and high exposure to the impacts of climate
change and other natural disasters.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

3. Punjab is Pakistan’s most densely populated province; the urban population of the province surged from 23 million
in 1998 (31%) to 52 million in 2023 (41%), resulting in a rapidly expanding urban landscape.1 In addition to Lahore, its
largest city, Punjab has 15 cities with over 500,000 residents, and 40 with over 200,000. While Punjab is the most
economically developed province in the country, there are considerable variations in household welfare and deprivation.
A recent World Bank analysis finds that wealthier districts in Punjab often have larger absolute numbers of poor people
than poorer regions, despite lower poverty rates.2 There are stark disparities within districts and in cities; low-income and
informal settlements suffer due to poor planning and limited access to services.

4. Safely managed WASH services are central to public health and quality of life, and are necessary to address
Pakistan’s high rates of stunting which affect even those in the highest income quintiles.3 While the average rates of
stunting in Punjab, at 31.5 percent, are lower than the rest of the country, the province still accounts for the highest share
of stunted children in the country due to its large population. Stunting outcomes also vary by region, with poorer child
health outcomes in the south (47.4 percent in Rajanpur as opposed to 22 percent in Rawalpindi). While most urban
households have access to improved water sources and toilets, over half lack access to safely managed water and
sanitation. Districts with the poorest water and sanitation services (WSS) register the highest child stunting rates, trapping
families, especially mothers and daughters, in a cycle of poor health. There are major gaps in the networked sewerage
services, particularly in low-income areas, and sewerage networks are poorly managed; open-air sewers are common.
There has been little progress on the safe treatment of wastewater, which has resulted in concentrations of untreated
fecal waste near human settlements and bacterial contamination of surface and groundwater. Major gaps in the water
distribution network result in a heavy reliance on hand and mechanized pumps, which are often contaminated with fecal
matter and other pollutants. The GoPunjab has embarked on a series of initiatives to improve urban service delivery
outcomes, including the upcoming ‘Punjab Development Program’ (PDP) which aims to increase access to water,
sewerage, drainage, and to build sidewalks in Punjab’s urban areas. A comprehensive WSS needs assessment has been
undertaken between November 2024 and March 2025 to assess existing sewerage networks, wastewater treatment
facilities, water supply and stormwater drainage in small to medium sized cities.

5. Low performance of solid waste management (SWM), specifically poor collection and absence of modern disposal
capacity, has substantial environmental and public health impacts, including stunting. Prior to Suthra Punjab, collection
rates for municipal solid waste in urban areas were only 39 percent4, significantly below the global average of 71 percent
in lower middle-income countries .5 In the absence of modern disposal facilities, waste, when collected, is disposed of in
uncontrolled dumpsites, burnt within settlements or dumped into waterways, sewerage and drainage networks, directly

1
    Pakistan National Population and Housing Censuses 1998, 2017, and 2023.
2 “Pakistan Poverty, Equity, and Resilience Assessment: Spatial Disparities in Living Standards”. The World Bank, 2024.
3 Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2017-18. Islamabad, Pakistan, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: NIPS and ICF.
4 Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, 2021. Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement Survey. Islamabad, Pakistan: Government of Pakistan

Statistics Division, Pakistan Bureau of Statistics
5
  Kaza, Silpa, Lisa C. Yao, Perinaz Bhada-Tata, and Frank Van Woerden. 2018. “What a Waste 2.0: A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to
2050.” Urban Development. World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                                                                                                              Page 3
          The World Bank
          Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


contributing to flooding, and surface water contamination and air pollution. Emissions from dumpsites account for a large
portion of urban methane emissions, while dumpsite fires are a major cause of atmospheric contamination, with 11
percent of ambient PM2.5 concentrations in Punjab being attributable to the waste sector.6 The government’s new flagship
program, Suthra Punjab (Clean Punjab), was launched in 2024 to improve solid waste management in all urban and rural
areas of Punjab, demonstrating political commitment to improving waste management in the country’s largest province.
To achieve this service improvement, the program expands the mandate of ten urban waste management companies
(WMCs) to collect household and commercial waste from both urban and rural areas in their respective districts. A robust
cost recovery strategy was devised, based on a progressive ramp up of user charges recovery rate, in accordance with the
tariff structure approved in May 2024. The program has developed operational Key Performance Indicators at the WMC
and Provincial levels supported by a Waste Information System. Nonetheless, some gaps remain in sector planning and
oversight, waste diversion, and sanitary disposal of waste.

6. Much of the province is vulnerable to climate change events such as flooding and drought. Changes in precipitation
seasonality, regularity, and extremes create a higher risk of floods and drought with increased frequency and intensity.
These risks are compounded by high rates of multidimensional poverty and weak coping capacity. Punjab in particular
faces multiple, overlapping climate and environmental threats: it has the largest settlement area exposed to fluvial
flooding (163 km2) and pluvial flooding (129 km2) in Pakistan, while in the central and eastern regions over 700,000
residents are exposed to dangerous heatwaves with routinely high temperatures.

7. Revenue performance in Punjab has shown improvement, however key public services remain inadequately
funded. Provincial development transfers to Urban Local Governments (ULGs) have been curtailed significantly since 2019,
leaving ULGs highly reliant on revenue from taxes to meet operating deficits and maintain services. Tariffs have also not
kept pace with surging operating costs for municipal services (with increasing expenditures on payroll, pensions, and
energy). The operating cost ratio (OCR) for most secondary cities providing WSS services is under 5 percent, indicating a
lack of financial sustainability and planning. Given these fiscal constraints, ULGs will need to improve revenues significantly
to deliver and operate basic services and seek increased private sector participation in service delivery to ensure
sustainability.

Relationship to CPF

8. The PICP is well aligned with the CPF for the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Report no. CPF0000037) discussed by the
World Bank Board of Executive Directors on January 14, 2025. The PICP will contribute to the CPF outcome of reduced
child stunting (Outcome 1) by improving access to safe water, sanitation, and solid waste management services for urban
populations at risk. It aims to complement similar World Bank interventions in Punjab, including the Punjab Rural
Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P169071) and the Punjab Family Planning Program (P178410). The PICP
adopts a One World Bank Approach by supporting increased private sector participation in the WSS sector in Punjab in
collaboration with the International Financing Corporation. Program design is aligned with other development partners,
including the Asian Development Bank which is supporting WSS investments in two cities in Punjab.

Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument


6
    “Towards Clean Air for Punjab”. Advisory Report. World Bank. June 2024

                                                                                                                          Page 4
       The World Bank
       Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


9. The proposed operation will be financed through a Program for Results (PforR) with an Investment Project Financing
(IPF) component. The Government of Punjab (GoPunjab) has considerable experience with the PforR instrument which
has proven, in the case of the Punjab Cities Program (PCP; US$200 million), to be an effective mechanism for managing
conditional transfers and for strengthening institutions and country systems. The PforR instrument will provide a clear set
of incentives to help orient focus towards critical infrastructure, institutional and revenue outcomes, and will be
complemented by an IPF window for targeted institutional strengthening, capacity development and independent
verification of results

10. PICP is part of a 10-year Urban WASH Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) that has three overlapping phases
with a total estimated envelope of US$2.18 billion, including US$840 million from IBRD and the International
Development Association (IDA) and US$1.34 billion expected from other development partners and the private sector.
The MPA program targets urban areas in Sindh and Punjab. Phase 1 will scale up safely managed WASH services in Karachi
to reach 16 million people through investments in bulk water augmentation, water treatment and distribution,
wastewater treatment, sewer network rehabilitation, and institutional strengthening. Phase 2 (PICP) intends to target 15
secondary cities in Punjab to reach 4.2 million people with safely managed WASH services, and 2 million people through
improved SWM. Phase 3 is envisioned to scale up phase 1 investments in Karachi.

  C. Proposed Program Scope

 Program Development Objective (PDO)

 11. The Program Development Objective is to provide safely managed water, sanitation and basic hygiene services and
 to improve the financial performance of selected urban local governments in Punjab

  PDO Indicators:

 12.    The Program will measure progress toward the PDO via the following proposed indicators

  • People provided with safely managed water, sanitation and hygiene services (Number)
  • People provided with safely managed solid waste management services (Number)
  • Increased revenues in Program ULGs from taxes, fees, and tariffs compared to base year (Percentage)
  • ULGs with institutional performance indicator score above 60 points out of 100 (Number)

Program Description

PforR Program Boundary

13. The PDP and Suthra Punjab form the basis of the government program (‘p’, the program) for this PforR. The
proposed PICP PforR (‘P’, the Program) will support selected activities of GoPb’s program where World Bank would add
the most value. Under the Punjab Development Program, the Program supports improved WSS outcomes, including better
revenue performance, institutional sustainability, and private sector participation in selected cities. Under the Suthra
Punjab the Program will support the second phase of the ongoing Suthra Punjab program, with the goal of improving



                                                                                                                       Page 5
          The World Bank
          Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


overall Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV), enhancing program definition, and supporting environmental and
financial sustainability.

14. The Program will finance results in two areas:

       a. Safely managed water, sanitation, drainage and basic hygiene services: Interventions under this results area will
          incentivize participating ULGs to provide safely managed water, sanitation and drainage services to their residents.
          This results area will also support performance improvements under the Suthra Punjab Program, with a focus on
          environmental and financial sustainability.
       b. Institutional Strengthening and Financial Sustainability. Interventions under this results area will support the
          strengthening of ULG systems for improved management of WSS, increased private sector participation, increased
          revenues from tariffs, taxes and fees.

15. The program will include a technical assistance (TA) component (US$25 million IDA) to support capacity-building,
feasibility studies, system improvements, upgrading of an integrated management information system and geographic
information system (MIS & GIS) by the Excise, Taxation and Narcotics Control Department (ET&NCD).

    D. Environmental and Social Effects

16. The Program delivers significant Environmental and Social (E&S) benefits. These include improved quality and
coverage of WASH services and waste management in selected cities, which will reduce pollution and enhance public
health. However, E&S risks and impacts of the Program are significant. Key environmental risks include loss or conversion
of natural habitats due to infrastructure development, standard construction related impacts (e.g., generation of dust and
noise, construction and general waste) and operational risks such as mismanagement of sewerage systems, wastewater
treatment plants, and sanitary landfills, potentially leading to soil/water contamination. Changes in land use for WASH
and landfill infrastructure could further strain local ecosystems. No land acquisition will be undertaken for the sanitary
landfill site and wastewater treatment plants. For other WASH subprojects, the use of state land will be preferred,
however, there might be a need to acquire land for some of these sub-projects and for last mile connectivity (access
roads, water and sewerage connectivity and other such uses for WASH). Further anticipated social impacts are: involuntary
resettlement, disproportionate adverse impacts, impacts on vulnerable communities, occupational and community health
and safety, labor influx, impacts on livelihoods of waste pickers currently operating on the dumping site to be upgraded
to a landfill, and financial impacts on low-income individuals, especially their capacity to afford connection fees or service
costs and social conflicts.

17. The Program design includes measures to address E&S risks. Given the absence of sanitary municipal waste disposal,
PICP will support the greenfield development of one modern disposal site, plus two years of operation post-commissioning
to strengthen government’s systems and local capacity. While there are E&S risks associated with the landfill site,
exclusion criteria have been developed7 during Program preparation for the selection of the land parcel for waste disposal,
to ensure that high E&S risk activities are excluded. The criteria for the pilot site selection includes, among other relevant
E&S considerations:
    • Site situated away from densely populated urban centers,
    • No need for private land acquisition except for ensuring last mile connectivity,
    • No forced evictions in the recent past,

7
    As have been developed under the Morocco Municipal Solid Waste Management Program, P178768

                                                                                                                          Page 6
        The World Bank
        Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


    •   No history of legal proceedings and demonstrations,
    •   No sensitive ecological receptors present,
    •   Any hazardous waste, if received, is in insignificant quantities (less than 5 percent of the total waste).
    •   The selection criteria for the waste management company also includes a good track record on E&S. The design
        of the sanitary landfill will be in accordance with Good International Industrial Practice (GIIP) with proper lining,
        leachate and landfill gas collection, and management systems.

18. E&S management under the Program will be based on the existing legal, regulatory, and institutional system in
Pakistan and the Punjab province along with the E&S Core Principles of the World Bank. The Local Government and
Community Development Department (LG&CDD) and Punjab Municipal Development Fund Company (PMDFC) have
successfully implemented water supply, sewerage including wastewater treatment, and drainage investments with several
intermediate city governments under a previous World Bank financed operation. Strict safeguards for habitat protection,
pollution control, and sustainable land use will be ensured. While most of the projects will be implemented on state land,
however, private acquisition of land parcels may be needed for a few projects which will be the least preferred option.
Land may also be required to ensure last mile connectivity of sub-projects covering the land needed for access roads,
water and sewerage connectivity and other related uses. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) on land and resettlement
will be updated and used for addressing such issues. Inclusion of low-income, marginalized, and vulnerable groups will be
ensured, strategies will be designed to mitigate any impact on livelihood of informal waste pickers, assessment of financial
impacts on disadvantaged and vulnerable groups due to increased user fees and taxes will be assessed, and stakeholder
consultations conducted throughout the life of the project. The Program will make efforts to enable their access to jobs,
livelihood opportunities, and public services in order to mitigate potential adverse social impacts. Any locations which
have been subjected to Anti-Encroachment Drives (AEDs) since November 04, 2024 will be excluded from Program
financing.

19. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank supported PforR
operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the existing program grievance
mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly
reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint
to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines
whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the
Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints
through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the
Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit https://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                         Page 7
       The World Bank
       Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component


20. The Environmental Risk Rating for the TA of the Program is assessed as Substantial during appraisal, despite the TA
not financing any civil works directly. The Program is expected to generate substantial environmental and social benefits.
Environmentally, it will indirectly contribute to improved solid waste management through the design and planning of
sanitary landfills, which are expected to reduce open dumping and burning, thereby lowering air, water and soil pollution.
Downstream upgradation of sewerage and drainage systems will help prevent contamination of water bodies, reduce
flooding, and lessen the public health burden of waterborne diseases. Enhanced water and wastewater systems are
expected to improve the quality and reliability of service delivery while supporting climate adaptation goals through more
efficient resource use and pollution prevention. Environmental screening and risk assessment embedded in the TA process
will ensure biodiversity conservation and the avoidance of ecologically sensitive areas.

21. The indirect and collective environmental implications of the TA outputs are Substantial. Feasibility and engineering
studies will need to incorporate environmental and climate considerations. Inadequate integration of waste minimization,
recycling, and resource efficiency principles may lead to greater volumes of unmanaged waste and inefficient use of urban
land. Climate risks such as flooding, extreme rainfall events, and heatwaves must be considered in WASH and SWM system
designs to ensure long-term sustainability and resilience. The Program will develop and apply environmental screening
criteria and risk mitigation guidelines. The Program will prepare and implement the Environmental and Social Compliance
Framework (ESCF) by updating the Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) originally prepared under Punjab Cities
Program (PCP), to guide the integration of environmental considerations in all studies. TA outputs will include screening
of climate and disaster risks, with recommendations for incorporating nature-based solutions, green infrastructure, and
circular economy principles in WASH and SWM systems. Institutional strengthening under the program will include
training for Program implementing entities in environmental management, regulatory compliance, and climate resilience
planning. Adequate stakeholder engagement guided by a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will enable early
identification of site-specific environmental concerns. A Grievance Mechanism (GM) will allow communities to register
and resolve environment-related complaints in a timely and transparent manner.

22. The Social Risk Rating is Substantial. The TA component has the potential to deliver considerable social benefits,
including support for climate-resilient urban infrastructure, improved governance, revenue enhancement, and equitable
access to essential services. These upstream activities can positively influence the design and implementation of future
urban investments, particularly benefiting vulnerable and marginalized communities, and strengthening overall urban
resilience in participating cities. The TA may also generate downstream social risks. Planning and design activities may
eventually lead to physical infrastructure development that involves land acquisition, resulting in loss of land-based assets
or displacement, affecting livelihoods. Risks to informal waste workers are particularly relevant in relation to the planned
sanitary landfill in Jhang, where they may face exclusion or loss of income if not meaningfully engaged or integrated into
formal systems. Tariff and cost recovery studies will not directly implement pricing reforms, but may shape future policies
and pricing structures that impact the affordability and accessibility of WASH and SWM services. To mitigate these risks,
the SEP will outline mechanisms to engage relevant stakeholders, including project-affected parties, civil society, and
vulnerable populations (e.g., religious minorities, informal settlers, transgender persons). Stakeholders will be consulted

                                                                                                                         Page 8
       The World Bank
       Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


meaningfully and early in the development of policies, engineering designs, feasibility studies, and tariff
recommendations.

23. Particular attention will be paid to gender and social inclusion, ensuring that Program interventions do not
marginalize or exclude underserved groups. The GM (building on an exisiting GM) will ensure transparency, accessibility,
and responsiveness, and incorporate specific protocols for addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual
Harassment (SEA/SH) risks. While digitization and monitoring tools developed under the TA could improve transparency
and service oversight, they must be inclusive and user-friendly, especially for groups with limited digital literacy or access.
Capacity-building activities will also account for health-related risks. In alignment with the World Bank Environmental and
Social Framework (ESF), TA outputs will embed social risk assessments and mitigation measures. The program will aim to
ensure that all policy guidance, infrastructure recommendations, and pricing frameworks developed through the TA are
not only technically sound and financially sustainable, but also socially inclusive, equitable, and responsive to the diverse
needs of communities.


E. Financing

                                           Program Financing (Template)

                               Source                                 Amount (US$, Millions)             % of Total

      International Development Association (IDA)                                       400.00                      51.28%

        IDA Credit                                                                      400.00                      51.28%

      Counterpart Funding                                                               324.00                      41.53%

        Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                       324.00                      41.53%

      Commercial Financing                                                                56.00                       7.18%

        Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                 56.00                       7.18%

                      Total Program Financing                                           780.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank




                                                                                                                          Page 9
     The World Bank
     Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)


 Amena Raja
 Senior Urban Specialist

 Carlo Alberto Amadei
 Water Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Islamic Republic of Pakistan

 Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Implementing Agencies
 Local Government and Community Development Department, Government of Punjab

 Local Government and Community Development Department, Government of Punjab

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Amena Raja, Carlo Alberto Amadei

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Abedalrazq F. Khalil               04-Jun-2025

Country Director:                       Gailius J. Draugelis               01-Oct-2025




                                                                                         Page 10
