Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    The World Bank
                                                                    Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                 Project Information Document (PID)
                                                                    Systems(P508001)




Public DisclosurePublic
                  Authorized         Public Disclosure Authorized




                        Disclosure copy
                                                                                   Project Information Document/
                                                                                  Identification/Concept Stage (PID)

                                                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Jan-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01116




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                    Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)



                         BASIC INFORMATION

                         A. Basic Project Data


                         Operation Name                                          Operation Short Name
                         Strengthening Climate and Water Information
                                                                                 CWIMS
                         Management Systems
                         Operation ID                                            Financing Instrument
                         P508001                                                 Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                         Beneficiary country/countries                           Region
                         Yemen, Republic of                                      Yemen, Republic of
                         Environmental and Social Risk Classification




Public Disclosure copy
                         Low
                         Date PID Prepared                                       Estimated Date of Approval
                         17-Sep-2024                                             14-May-2025
                         Borrower(s)                                             Implementing Agency
                         Food and Agriculture Organization FAO                   Urban Water - Project Management Unit


                         PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
                         SUMMARY

                           Total Operation Cost                                                                                     4.78

                           Total Financing                                                                                          4.78

                           Financing Gap                                                                                            0.00


                         DETAILS
                          Non-World Bank Group Financing
                            Trust Funds                                                                                             4.78
                               Special Financing                                                                                    4.78


                         B. Introduction & Context
                         Country Context
                         Yemen has long been the poorest country in the Middle East and North Africa and has for many years been
                         experiencing one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises. Socioeconomic conditions in Yemen have deteriorated

                                                                                                                                      Page 1
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                              Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)


                         sharply over the past decade, due to declining remittances, trade disruptions, severe fuel supply shortages, and reduced
                         humanitarian operations amidst the ongoing crisis. The economy has been devastated by the protracted conflict that
                         started in early 2015, leading to severe food insecurity and destroying critical infrastructure. The impact of armed
                         conflict has been exacerbated by multiple shocks both due to economic shocks and climate hazards. This includes rising
                         prices, drought, floods, the COVID-19 pandemic, a cholera epidemic, a locust invasion, and the escalation of conflict in
                         the Red Sea in 2024. About 80 percent of Yemeni households are in need of humanitarian assistance (World Bank 2023),
                         with roughly half (15.3 million people) requiring emergency support to access clean water and meet basic sanitation
                         needs (OCHA 2022).
                         Living conditions in Yemen are dire, especially for the many people displaced by conflict. Today, 17.6 million people
                         face acute food insecurity (around half of the population), and over 18.2 million people rely on humanitarian assistance
                         (OCHA, 2023). Approximately 74 percent of the population was below the national poverty line in 2022. The latest
                         Humanitarian            Response Plan for Yemen suggests           that an estimated 4.5 million          people, 14 percent
                         of the population, are internally displaced people (IDPs). A World Bank phone surveys conducted in 2022 and 2023 in
                         21 governorates estimated that 25 percent of households were displaced. Over 89 percent of IDPs have no source of
                         income. They are surviving on less than USD 40 per month, which is insufficient to cover household expenses. Public
                         revenues are under immense stress, as the country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita has shrunk by 54 percent




Public Disclosure copy
                         between 2015 and 2023. The fiscal revenues of the Internationally Recognized Government (IRG), including grants,
                         declined by over 30 percent in 2023 (World Bank, 2024).
                         The conflict has fragmented the country along largely historical lines. While it is generally recognized that there are
                         four major conflicts over political control between national, subnational, and international forces, there are two major
                         conflicting parties. These are the Houthi movement based in Sana’a, and the Internationally Recognized Government
                         of Yemen (IRG) based in Aden. The IRG shares power with the Southern Transitional Council (STC), with other actors
                         including the IRG-aligned Joint Resistance Forces and the Hadramawt Elite Forces. This has resulted in a complex mosaic
                         of territorial controls, the boundaries of which are constantly shifting but which largely reflect the division of the country
                         prior to unification in 1990 (International Crisis Group 2022). The Houthi control an estimated one-third of the territory,
                         which is home to about two- thirds of the population and includes the mountainous areas with the highest rainfall and
                         upper reaches of the main water management areas.
                         The conflict has resulted in fragmented institutions and new governance arrangements. These new governance
                         arrangements are often fused with informal practices and traditional norms. As a result of this, national institutions
                         have been weakened and parallel institutions have emerged in both Sana’a and Aden, with limited oversight of
                         decentralized entities. Public sector salaries have been sporadic, undermining the ability of institutions to deliver
                         services, such as water, health care, and education. The humanitarian sector has become a de facto service provider,
                         often overshadowing state institutions, creating parallel systems, and frequently bypassing national institutions,
                         eroding their legitimacy and capacity. Despite these challenges and limited resources, however, some local authorities
                         and institutions have taken on greater roles in service delivery, particularly in southern and eastern Yemen.
                         Some institutions established with World Bank support prior to the conflict, such as the Urban Water Project
                         Management Unit (UW-PMU), the Social Fund for Development (SFD) and the Public Works Project
                         (PWP), have proven more resilient and effective in delivering services and infrastructure. After a decade of
                         humanitarian assistance there is a need to shift support towards development-focused programs that
                         strengthen institutional capacity and resilience, with geographically discrete           initiatives offering the most viable
                         pathway to rebuilding governance in the short term.
                         Climate change is compounding persistent development challenges related to water scarcity and the impacts of the
                         conflict. Yemen is the most vulnerable country in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region to the impacts of
                         climate change and is ranked 27th globally. It is also the least prepared country in MENA to manage the impacts
                         associated with climate change. Global climate models forecast a future for Yemen which is characterized by warmer


                                                                                                                                                    Page 2
                              The World Bank
                              Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                            Project Information Document (PID)
                              Systems(P508001)


                         temperatures and higher annual average precipitation, with more frequent, intense rainfall events resulting in flash
                         floods and longer dry periods. These changes could be an asset to the country if accompanied by targeted investments
                         to make optimum use of the increased resources. Under optimistic scenarios, a projected average annual GDP growth
                         of 1.5 percent by 2040 is possible. However, in the absence of appropriate investments, these climate shocks can further
                         debilitate the weakened economy with annual GDP projected to decline by an of 3.9 percent by 2040 under more
                         pessimistic scenarios and limited investments. These losses are primarily driven by reductions in crop production and
                         fisheries, limitations on labor productivity, and the deterioration of health and connectivity infrastructure.

                         Sectoral and Institutional Context
                         ctedWater has long been a critical constraint to Yemen’s social and economic development, with competition for
                         limited resources often fueling local conflicts. Yemen is one of only four countries facing low per capita income and
                         experiencing absolute water scarcity, with water security issues stemming from the complex interplay between
                         development, conflict, and climate change. Before the conflict, 70 to 80 percent of rural disputes were linked to water
                         (UNDP 2023; Heffez, Adams 2013). According to the Ministry of the Interior (Small Arms Survey 2010), at least 4,000
                         people were killed annually in violent land and water conflicts. High population growth rates are worsening the




Public Disclosure copy
                         situation, with per capita water availability decreasing by about 60 percent since 1990, equivalent to 65 cubic meters
                         per person in 2020. Access to improved drinking water has declined by up to 50 percent, and service delivery has
                         become even more unreliable since the onset of the conflict, forcing people to rely on costly and often unsafe
                         alternatives like private water trucks. Water utilities have largely halted operations due to infrastructure damage, fuel
                         shortages, electrical outages, and staff unpaid for over five years. Additionally, the number of sewage system failures
                         has risen, contributing to the cholera crisis, which has led to millions of suspected cases and thousands of deaths since
                         2016.
                         Yemen’s water development and management were historically local affairs and water governance continues to be
                         characterized by strong decentralization. Significant investments were made in building the capacity of the institutional
                         framework of the water sector following unification. These investments have provided a strong foundation for
                         addressing many of the country’s development challenges associated with water scarcity, but the capacity of the
                         institutional framework has deteriorated significantly since 2015 due to the conflict. This has resulted in fragmented
                         governance, weakened service delivery, and increased reliance on humanitarian aid. Under the IRG, the Ministry of
                         Water and Environment (MWE) oversees the National Water Resources Authority (NWRA) which is responsible for
                         water resource management, urban water services through Local Water and Sanitation Corporations (LWSCs) and
                         autonomous utilities, while the General Authority for Rural Water Supply Projects (GARWSP) manages rural water
                         supply through local branches. The Environment Protection Authority (EPA) under MWE continues to handle water
                         pollution control, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MAI) is responsible for irrigation and watershed
                         management. In areas controlled by the Houthis, the governance of the water sector has been restructured, with the
                         NWRA under the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MAI), while urban and rural water supply and sanitation
                         institutions have been transferred to the Ministry of Electricity and Energy and environmental sector placed under the
                         Ministry of Health.
                         A series of Project Management Units (PMUs) established in the 1980s and 1990s have taken a stronger role in
                         administering external financing and implementing investments. Created in response to low rates of implementation
                         and disbursement prior to the conflict, these PMUs have had a lasting impact on how the sector continues to operate
                         and channel external financing. Many of these were established with World Bank support and have continued to play
                         a critical role in implementing internationally financed projects through the United Nations and other implementing
                         agencies. For example, the UW-PMU, PWP, and SFD all play pivotal roles in mitigating the country’s critical
                         infrastructure and service delivery challenges. The UW-PMU coordinates donor- funded programs aimed at improving


                                                                                                                                               Page 3
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                           Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)


                         access to safe drinking water and building resilience against water scarcity, while the PWP emphasizes labor-intensive
                         infrastructure development, creating short-term employment opportunities while constructing essential community
                         assets, including water infrastructure, and the SFD operates as a versatile development and humanitarian agency,
                         integrates community-based approaches to empower local actors, strengthen resilience, and deliver services in
                         marginalized and rural areas. Therefore, these institutions contribute significantly to Yemen's recovery and
                         development efforts despite the ongoing conflict and have emerged as pockets of resilience, offering potential entry
                         points for long-term capacity building and institutional recovery.
                         Ensuring adequate data and information is critical for optimizing decision making and building resilience in the water
                         sector under Yemen’s uncertain and resource constrained future. Hydro-meteorological data and services are
                         recognized as key building blocks to support actions that (1) safeguard life and property during by extreme weather and
                         climate events; (2) build better resilience to the consequences of natural disasters; (3) enable more effective
                         management of scare water resources ; and (4) underpin responsible climate action. Ensuring the provisioning and use
                         of adequate information are therefore central to effective planning and decision making in the water sector, including
                         the development basin and sub-basin management plans, infrastructure development, regulatory compliance,
                         managing risks and uncertainties, guiding operations, evaluating and encouraging innovation, and making rapid and
                         effective decisions during droughts, floods, or crisis events. Before the conflict, efforts were initiated to establish a




Public Disclosure copy
                         National Water Resources Management Information System (NWRMIS). However more than 70 percent of the hydro-
                         meteorological stations (out of an original 193) are either not operational, destroyed or stolen (FAO 2017) and there is
                         no functional hydrometeorological monitoring network to provide the detailed information on the quantity and quality
                         of water to inform decision making. The network is challenged by the conflict, the absence of operational funds needed
                         for periodic maintenance and calibration, a lack of qualified personnel, and coordination between relevant institutions.
                         Therefore, addressing these challenges and ensuring the provisioning and use of adequate information are central to
                         effective decision making, basin and sub-basin management plans, infrastructure development, regulatory compliance,
                         managing risks and uncertainties, guiding operations, evaluating, and encouraging innovation, and making rapid and
                         effective decisions during droughts, floods, or crisis events.
                         A Series of Projects (SoP) is proposed to address the complex, long term challenges of the water sector in
                         Yemen. These will be structured around the principles of the World Bank Group Strategy for Fragile, Conflict and
                         Violence affected states that emphasizes the importance of engaging early, staying engaged and continuously adapting.
                         It                     also                    recommends                       prioritizing                  institutions
                         and policies for development, and the promotion of transparency and accountability. This requires medium-term
                         approaches that build trust through continuity and retain the flexibility to react to rapidly shifting socioeconomic and
                         political constellations, as well as close coordination and alignment with other development partners. The Series of
                         Project framework provides flexibility to adapt to changing circumstances and emerging needs, ensuring relevance and
                         effectiveness. Projects of the series will be designed to complement and reinforce each other, foster long-term
                         sustainability by addressing root causes and building resilience and promotes collaboration and coordination among
                         stakeholders, maximizing impact and avoiding duplication of efforts.
                         The first project of the SoP is this Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF). This SOP-1, financed through the Yemen Fund
                         and an expected implementation period of two years, will provide the foundation for developing a comprehensive
                         Climate and Water Information Management System to inform investments relating to urban water security in Aden
                         and the food security nexus in Wadi Hajer. The second and third projects proposed in the SoP would build on early
                         lessons learned from the implementation of the SOP-1 in the pilot basins. Investments included in the SOP series will
                         follow an area-based approach, gradually scaling-up interventions into additional water basins which will be selected
                         based on the overall enabling environment conditions and technical criteria. The proposed second project in the series,
                         the Yemen Improved Water Management and Irrigation for Sustainability and Efficiency Project (Yemen I- WISE,
                         P505506), is subject to confirmation of IDA availability but planned for delivery in Q1 FY26. The subsequent project in


                                                                                                                                                Page 4
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                             Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)


                         the series will continue to follow the area-based approach for scale-up and will build on lessons from the first and
                         second projects in the series. The timeline for the subsequent projects are subject to IDA availability and a conducive
                         operating environment.
                         The Aden-Tuban and Wadi Hajer basins have been selected as priorities because of the reach and impact of the
                         distinct water security challenges they face:
                             • The Aden-Tuban Basin is one of the largest and most water scarce areas of Yemen, with total area of 7360 Km2
                                  and consists of seven sub-basins. The Aden-Tuban basin faces major water resource challenges, driven by
                                  climate change, overuse, and unsustainable management. The basin is experiencing extreme water stress, with
                                  water demand greatly exceeding available supply. Key issues include declining rainfall, groundwater depletion
                                  of about one meter per year, sea water intrusion, and soil degradation. Droughts have dried streams, while
                                  extreme weather events heighten flood risks. The traditional irrigation systems cause high water losses. Within
                                  the basin, Aden is grappling with a severe water shortage. Water tables are declining, wells are running dry and
                                  groundwater is becoming increasingly salinized due to seawater intrusion. Despite attempts to secure new
                                  freshwater supplies, these efforts have largely proved unsuccessful. The inability of Aden Local Corporation to
                                  supply water to Aden city is affected by conflict, as well as low water tariffs and collection rates (12 percent),
                                  non-revenue water, and inefficiencies in the distribution network. The private sector has filled the water supply




Public Disclosure copy
                                  gap, but there are continued quality concerns and high costs which are related to the additional cost of the
                                  desalination of the brackish water abstracted from the existing wells. Coupled with limited sanitation coverage
                                  and treatment of wastewater, these conditions have the potential to impose long term impacts on human
                                  health and capital development.
                             • Wadi Hajer is the only wadi in Yemen with a perennial flow and situated in the Governates of Hadramout and
                                  part of Shabwa at 540 to 545 km east of Aden. The groundwater table is deep in the upper catchment, except
                                  near the wadi bed. The Wadi is 150 km long with a catchment area of about 9,160 km2, and an annual runoff
                                  to the sea of about 470 million cubic meters (MCM). The groundwater occurrence is sporadic which is largely
                                  explained by the area’s large elevation differences, causing a high hypsometric position and deep erosion of
                                  the carbonate rocks. Agriculture in Wadi Hajer relies heavily on spate irrigation, one of the oldest forms of
                                  irrigation in arid and semi- arid lands. Despite this, local crop production covering only 25 percent of crop-based
                                  food needs. The key challenges and development needs in Wadi Hajer include protecting and managing water
                                  resources, addressing the impact of flash floods, exploring storage options, including dams, weirs, and diversion
                                  structures to channel water. Additionally, improving irrigation canals and agricultural infrastructure is crucial.
                                  Improving food security will also need the provision of agricultural inputs, machinery, and irrigation tools,
                                  establishment of greenhouses, packaging factories, and food manufacturing facilities, including those needed
                                  to improve honey production. All these will need training programs on agricultural technologies and honey bee
                                  breeding with demonstration fields for crop production.



                         Relationship to CPF
                         The proposed project is aligned with the Yemen Country Engagement Note (CEN) 2022-2023 (Report No 169022-YE),
                         the World Bank’s Fragility, Conflict, and Violence(FCV) Strategy 2020-2025, and the IDA 20 and 21 programs.
                         The FCV Strategy emphasizes the importance of preserving institutional capacity and human capital, which are essential
                         for Yemen’s future recovery. This includes safeguarding scarce water resources, vital for human development. It also
                         ensures access to energy for clean drinking water, safe schools, and healthcare services. The project also strengthens
                         the link between water and agriculture, fostering ministerial-level coordination in line with the CEN’s focus on
                         integrated sector approaches, particularly connecting water and food security. Furthermore, the project will generate


                                                                                                                                                  Page 5
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                             Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)


                         critical data to support the Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) agenda outlined in the CEN, which will guide the World
                         Bank's future operational engagement in Yemen.



                         C. Development Objective
                         Development Objective
                         The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is strengthening the data and information systems for climate
                         resilient decision making in selected water basins.
                         Key Results
                         PDO indicator 1: Climate and Water Information Management System developed and operational
                         PDO indicator 2: Decision support system operationalized in at least two basins.
                         PDO indicator 3: Mechanism for inter-institutional coordination in place in two basins.




Public Disclosure copy
                         D. Preliminary Description
                         Activities/Components
                         This first      project in the proposed SOP will provide      the data and information needed              to inform climate
                         resilient decision making and address the longer-term challenges facing the water scarcity and food security in
                         Yemen. This project is to be financed through a small US$4.78m Recipient Executed grant provided through the Yemen
                         Multi-Donor Trust Fund. The proposed project has three, mutually reinforcing components, as described below:
                         Component 1: Developing a Climate and Water Information Management System (CWIMS) (USD 2 million). This
                         component will finance the development and operationalization of a comprehensive, scalable, information system to
                         manage hydrological and meteorological data with a focus on climate hazard risks. The activities under this component
                         will include the following:
                         (i) Data recovery, capture and curation. This sub-component will finance an inventory of existing data and information
                         relating to climate and water in Yemen. This will include document and data recovery, collecting and digitalization of
                         available records and building a consolidated database as well as links to existing initiatives, such as the FAO dashboard,
                         the HR Wallingford groundwater information system, the Yemen Water Sector Coordination Group, and others. A
                         review of the data sharing and dissemination policies and agreements will be conducted. Additionally, the status of
                         existing hydro-meteorological monitoring stations will be reviewed and a plan for a comprehensive monitoring system
                         and assessment of capacity will be carried out building on previous studies.
                         (ii) Design and Development of the Climate and Water Information Management System. The CWIMS will be designed
                         and developed with the capacity to cover all the basins in Yemen. This would include protocols and procedures for
                         identification, systematization and sharing of data from existing databases by relevant decentralized institutions. Data
                         integration and interoperability among stakeholders will be achieved by developing standardized data formats,
                         protocols, and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) within a unified data framework or software. The updated
                         CWIMS architecture will include plans for investments in new observation stations, data collection, management,
                         processing, quality assurance, sharing mechanism, and technical requirements. These plans will be informed by
                         considerations around financial sustainability and scaled according to the resources available for CAPEX but also
                         sustained operation and maintenance.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 6
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                            Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)


                         (iii) Capacity Building. The CWIMS will be operationalized with specific capacity building of all the decentralized
                         branches and offices of the relevant institutions, which include but are not limited to MWE, MAI, NWRA, the Civil
                         Aviation and Meteorological Authority (CAMA), RSC, and water research centers. The operationalization would include
                         development of cloud-based data repository, web-based visualization tool, and decision support system which will be
                         deployed in pilot basins as part of Component 2. This should allow decentralized institutions to share and have access
                         to all existing water resources databases that have been produced over the years, as well as up-to-date data that is
                         being collected under existing infrastructure.
                         Component 2: Climate Resilient Decision Making (USD 2.2 million). This component will pilot the development and
                         application of specific decision support tools in two basins, the Aden-Tuban basin and the Wadi Hajer basin. The CWIMS
                         will be used to facilitate a consultative process of decision making around key investments for these two basins. This
                         process will systematize the existing data from the targeted two basins that is being held and produced by different
                         relevant institutions under a cloud-based data repository with a web-interface and be used to provide inputs for policy
                         using integrated data tools and outputs. Based on the available data in the repository, a Decision Support System (DSS)
                         at basin level will be developed with the objective to provide stakeholders such as policymakers, water managers,
                         environmental agencies, and local communities with analytical, data-driven insights to make informed and effective
                         decisions about the management of water resources. These insights will focus on the following:




Public Disclosure copy
                         (i) Supporting Investment Planning in Water Supply and Sanitation in the Aden-Tuban Basin. The decision support
                         system would look at facilitating a consultative process among a wide range of stakeholders to quantify, among others:
                         (i) the different water supply options, including projections of long-term demand and climate implications; (ii)
                         infrastructure needs in wastewater management; (iii) identification of measures and investments at the level of the
                         Local Water Corporation for more efficient water supply and sanitation services, (iv) identification of climate hazard
                         risks and impacts on WSS infrastructure, and (v) identification of capacity building needs for key stakeholders.
                         (ii) Supporting Investment Planning in Improving Watershed Management and Irrigation Services in the Wadi Hajer
                         Basin. The decision support system would facilitate a data informed consultative process among a wide range of
                         stakeholders to, among others: (i) prepare a basin management plan, including water resources governance and
                         management arrangements; (ii) identification of key water resources management infrastructure investments, (iii)
                         identification of irrigation efficiency and agricultural production opportunities, and (iv) identification of capacity
                         building needs for key stakeholders.
                         (iii) Capacity Building for basin level of institutions. Strengthening the capacity of basin-level institutions involved in
                         data sharing, data management, and the maintenance and use of CWIMS and DSS is essential for their sustainability.
                         This includes equipping them to produce robust decision-support outputs and to continuously refine these processes.
                         Key interventions would include: (i) practical training on software and DSS usage, raw field data entry, data verification,
                         and data management in accordance with data sharing rules and regulations; (ii) study tours to learn from international
                         best practices in developing water information systems; (iii) coordination workshops across relevant institutions to
                         facilitate smoother data sharing; (iv) technical support for creating end-user products; (v) acquisition of the necessary
                         hardware and software.
                         Component 3: Project management and coordination (USD 0.58 million). This component will finance direct and
                         indirect costs for project implementation and coordination. These costs include project management staff and
                         personnel, office rent, and travel costs, including vehicles. Additionally, the component will cover project monitoring
                         costs (Third Party Monitoring - TPM) and the cost of audits.




                         Environmental and Social Standards Relevance


                                                                                                                                                 Page 7
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management                           Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)



                          E. Relevant Standards
                          ESS Standards                                                                       Relevance
                          ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                                              Relevant
                          Impacts
                          ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
                          ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 TBD
                          ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Not Currently Relevant
                          ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Not Currently Relevant
                          ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Not Currently Relevant
                          ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                                              Not Currently Relevant
                          Resources




Public Disclosure copy
                          ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                                              Not Currently Relevant
                          Traditional Local Communities
                          ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Not Currently Relevant
                          ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant


                          Legal Operational Policies
                          Safeguard Policies                                      Triggered?               Explanation (Optional)

                          Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No

                          Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                       No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                          The potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the project are expected to be low, based on the nature of
                          the activities outlined under the project components. Social risks may include the capture of project benefits by well-
                          connected beneficiaries, a lack of awareness and training among targeted institutions regarding the use of digital
                          equipment and cloud systems, and insufficient awareness about potential Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual
                          Harassment (SEA/SH) issues, along with reluctance among project workers to sign the Code of Conduct. All social risks
                          can be mitigated and incorporated into the agreed instruments prior to commencement.

                         Contact Point

                         World Bank
                         Naif Mohammed Abu-Lohom
                         Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

                                                                                                                                              Page 8
                               The World Bank
                               Strengthening Climate and Water Information Management   Project Information Document (PID)
                               Systems(P508001)


                         Chris Philip Fischer
                         Chris Philip Fischer
                         Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta
                         Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta
                         Borrower/Recipient :

                         Food and Agriculture Organization FAO

                         Hussein Gadain

                         Country Representative

                         Hussein.gadain@fao.org




Public Disclosure copy
                         Implementing Agency :

                         Urban Water - Project Management Unit

                         Arzaq Aqrabi

                         General Manger

                         Arzaq.aqrabi@gmail.com




                         For more information, contact:
                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                                                                     Page 9
