Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 08/06/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04410




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 06, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508698                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)    SRWSS Phase 2               2026

                     Operation Name            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Tanzania                  Tanzania                                 EASTERN AND                 Other
                                                                                        SOUTHERN AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Water (Mainland), Ministry   04-Aug-2025                 25-Sep-2025
                                               of Water, Energy and Mines (Zanzibar)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     29-Jul-2025               322,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The program development objective is to increase and sustain access to at least basic water supply, sanitation and
                     hygiene services in all rural districts.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Tanzania Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (SRWSSP2) aims to increase and
                     sustain access to basic water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services across rural districts within the United Republic
                     of Tanzania (URT). Building on Phase I, the program addresses persistent WASH service gaps, institutional weaknesses,
                     and climate-related water stress. It will use a hybrid Program-for-Results (PforR) and Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                     approach to enhance governance, incentivize performance, and mobilize private capital through the following three
                     results areas: (i) Increased access and sustainability of at least basic WASH services, (ii) Policy, Institutions and
                     Regulation for strengthened service delivery, and (iii) Maximizing finance for development. The PforR component will

                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     target only the mainland of the URT with access to WASH services while the IPF component will provide support to both
                     mainland and Zanzibar. On Tanzania mainline, the IPF will; (i) support strengthening capacity for sustainable water
                     resource management through aquifer mapping, resource planning, dams inventory, and development of digital
                     systems for groundwater and dams monitoring, enhance technical; (ii) enhance backstopping and regulatory
                     frameworks for rural water services delivery; (iii) support sanitation behavior change campaigns, and strengthening the
                     national sanitation management system, (iv) development of guidelines for inclusive private sector participation in the
                     sector and (v) fund project implementation support. In Zanzibar, the IPF support will include the following scope which
                     are strategically proposed to feed into a future proposed standalone operation: (i)Technical Assistance to undertake a
                     detailed baseline survey to establish an accurate status of access to WASH services in Zanzibar, (ii) Undertake Water
                     Sector HR capacity assessment, development of a capacity injection program and setting up of Zanzibar Water Institute,
                     (iii) Finalize the development of a FSM and wastewater management strategy and undertake Detailed Designs, and
                     preparation of Tender documents for priority sanitation management infrastructures, (iv) Consultancy to support
                     MOWEM and RAND WATER Zanzibar to undertake designs and Preparation of tender documents for priority Rural
                     water schemes in Pemba, and (iv) hiring Long-term technical advisors for the ministry of water to support re-
                     organization/institutional reforms, capacity building, and delivery. The operation is aligned with and is part of the AFE
                     Regional WASH MPA, and is expected to yield significant health, economic, and environmental benefits while addressing
                     fiduciary, environmental, and social risks through targeted mitigation measures.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The SRWSSP Phase 2, and its IPF component, will be implemented in 25 regions across the mainland Tanzania. The IPF



Public Disclosure
                     component will also provide technical assistance to Zanzibar. Tanzania experiences a variety of climatic conditions.
                     Mean annual temperatures are influenced by altitude, ranging from 21°C in high mountain areas to 29°C at sea level.
                     Ensuring adequate water resources for competing needs requires attention, as renewable freshwater resources (per
                     capita) have been cut roughly in half over the last 25 years and are becoming increasingly variable due to climate
                     change. The rural water supply and sanitation sector faced legacy challenges related to service coverage. Environmental
                     factors such as drinking water quality, poor sanitation, and hygienic practices significantly contribute to poor nutritional
                     status and health conditions. Tanzania regularly suffers from cholera linked to poor Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
                     (WASH) conditions, including an ongoing outbreak since 1 January 2024 affecting 23 regions, with 6,143 cases and 100
                     deaths. This follows a previous outbreak in 2015 . Since the establishment of RUWASA in 2019; a 23-fold increase in the
                     number of functional rural water points was achieved with more than 7.91 million people verified to have gained access
                     to improved water supply under the SRWSSP; there was a significant increase in rural household sanitation access, with
                     10.1 million people gaining access to improved sanitation facilities as of June 2024. As of December 2023, WASH access
                     in primary schools and health care facilities improved with 1,902 health care facilities (out of 6,888 total public health
                     care facilities in the country) and 1,387 primary schools (out of 11,485 total primary schools in the country) provided
                     with improved sanitation and hand washing facilities, through the SRWSSP. In Zanzibar, both in Inguja and Pemba main
                     islands, the main water source is groundwater resources which is fully recharged from the rainfall that is relatively high
                     (1200-1900 mm/year), with no stock of fossil water. There are a large number of unregulated boreholes in Zanzibar
                     which aggravates the saltwater intrusion that the island is suffering from. The sanitation sector in Zanzibar lacks behind
                     with only sewerage coverage in Stone Town. Unregulated sanitation, such as illegal discharge of fecal sludge, is one of
                     the important environmental pressures in Zanzibar.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     The main implementing agency for the Program will be RUWASA along with Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of
                     Education Science and Technology (MoEST) which will lead the DLIs related to WASH services in healthcare facilities and
                     schools respectively. RUWASA was established by the SRWSSP in 2019. Since its establishment, RUWASA has been
                     responsible for implementing the SRWSSP requirements including the environmental and social measures per the PAP
                     and the ESSA recommendations. The E&S performance of the SRWSSP has been maintained as satisfactory and
                     moderately satisfactory. All requirements of the national system (preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs, registration at OSHA
                     etc.) have been met. The main challenge facing environmental and social management of the Program is the limited
                     capacity of RUWASA to manage works contracts and ensuring that requirement E&S measures are being effectively
                     implemented on ground. The Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) that has been prepared for the PforR
                     seeks to address such challenges and included recommendations to effectively enhance the E&S capacity of RUWASA
                     and other IAs through providing E&S contract management training and enhance the E&S staffing in different regions.
                     Ministry of Water (MoW) will be implementing the IPF component in the mainland in collaboration with Basin Water
                     Boards. The Water Basin Boards vary in their capacity, some of them have participated in implementing some of the
                     World Bank projects, such as the Ruvu-Wami Water Board, and have experience in complying with the Bank’s
                     environmental and social requirements. However, the majority do not have such track record and will need some
                     capacity building in specific ESF requirements associated to their correspondent activities.
                     In Zanzibar , the Water Development of the Ministry of Water, Energy and Mines (MoWEM) will lead implementation of
                     TA activities under the IPF component. MoWEM has reasonable E&S capacity but mainly on the energy sector, as it is
                     currently implementing the ZESTA project in a satisfactory manner. However, the capacity of the Water Department
                     under MoWEM is relatively weak and the TA is mainly designed to build their capacity for improving the sector. Three
                     months ago, MoWEM signed an operation lease contract with RAND Water (a South African water utility) to operate the




Public Disclosure
                     water supply assets in Zanzibar. RAND took over the operation role from Zanzibar Water Authority (ZAWA). RAND has
                     an environmental and social policy including committments for protecting biodiversity, restoration/rehabilitation of
                     natural resources, water quality, occupational health and safety, accounting for GHG emissions, control of invasive
                     species, and welfare of their empolyees and their career development. RAND works in different areas of South Africa
                     and has a track record in the above E&S aspects but and their E&S capacity has not been tested in the Zanzibar context.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The IPF component in the mainland will include mostly technical assistance and capacity building activities but will
                     also include some minor works that may be associated with some risks and impacts such as drilling some testing
                     boreholes and installing Hydromet stations. Those works would be associated with some short-term and temporary
                     localized environmental risks including: (i) health and safety risks to workers especially related to the traffic safety and
                     risk of being struck by moving machines; (ii) limited air emissions and noise from drilling machinery and
                     transportation; and (iii) limited construction waste management. In Zanzibar, the TA will include: TA to undertake a
                     detailed baseline survey to establish an accurate status of access to WASH services in Zanzibar, a Water Sector HR
                     capacity assessment, development of a capacity injection program and setting up of Zanzibar Water Institute, finalize
                     the development of a Fecal Sludge Management (FSM) and wastewater management strategy, undertake detailed


                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     designs and preparation of tender documents for priority sanitation management infrastructures, consultancy to
                     support MOWEM and RAND WATER Zanzibar to undertake designs and Preparation of tender documents for priority
                     rural water schemes in Pemba and long-term technical advisors seconded to MoWEM to support
                     reorganization/institutional reforms, capacity building, and delivery. The direct environmental risks of most of the
                     above TA components are limited and minor , except for the development of detailed design and tender documents
                     for sanitation infrastructure and water schemes, which will be associated with the following downstream risks during
                     the implementation and operation of said schemes (but it should be noted that such implementation and operation is
                     not funded under this IPF): (i) pollution from effluent of sanitation facilities on the receiving water; (ii) land and
                     groundwater contamination from fecal sludge or sewage treatment sludge; and (viii) overextraction of groundwater
                     through the water schemes aggravating the saltwater intrusion to the aquifer. Downstream environmental risks are
                     considered substantial because they could have important effects on the receiving environment, however, they are
                     only downstream and indirect, predictable, reversable and could be effectively mitigated with readily available design
                     and operational measures. Any detailed design package that would be considered of a high risk will not be eligible in
                     the IPF component, and all other packages will be developed to fully incorporate relevant ESSs in the TOR and ES
                     studies.
                                                                                                                                    Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Under the IPF component, the primary focus will be on technical assistance and capacity building, which are not
                     expected to negatively impact communities or stakeholders. In Tanzania Mainland, the client plans to drill boreholes
                     and install hydromet stations which will be done on government or institutional land that is free of encumbrances,
                     thereby avoiding new land acquisition and displacement. However, it is anticipated that the planned drilling may pose




Public Disclosure
                     health and safety risks to workers, which will be mitigated appropriately. In Zanzibar, IPF activities include the
                     detailed design of sanitation and water infrastructure, which may require limited land acquisition and could lead to
                     restrictions on land use and involuntary resettlement. If needed, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared to
                     address such risks any risk that will be associated to above mentioned minimal land access. Activities involving large-
                     scale land acquisition or displacement will be excluded from the project.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant as there will be some environmental and social risks and impacts for the IPF TA in Zanzibar that need
                      to be managed consistent with ESS1 requirements. For the detailed designs and tender documents of sanitation
                      infrastructure in Zanzibar part of the TA, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) will be prepared for
                      each design package. The ESIAs will be finalized, consulted upon and disclosed per ESS1 and ESS10 requirements with
                      the finalization of the detailed designs. For physical interventions in the main land (i.e. digging monitoring wells and
                      installing hydromet stations) will require preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to
                      identify the different E&S risks, mitigation measures and include standard requirements to be included in contracts
                      with works/supply contracts. The preparation of Integrated Water Resource Management Plans in the main land,
                      inventory of dams, and HR assessment in Zanzibar, will include E&S requirements in their correspondent ToRs . These
                      actions have been reflected in the ESCP.


                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant to the project as it involves stakeholders at the national, regional, and district levels, with the IPF
                      component being centrally coordinated and involving minimal grassroots engagement. Key stakeholders under the
                      program include government entities, NGOs, CBOs, and sector partners such as the Development Partner Group for
                      Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (DPG-WASH). As part of program preparation, a series of consultation and meetings
                      were conducted in both Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar. In the Mainland, consultations focused primarily on
                      institutional actors, including key program implementing agencies such as the Ministry of Health, Ministry of
                      Education, Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (RUWASA), and the Ministry of Water. In Zanzibar, engagement
                      included the Ministry of Water, Energy, and Minerals (MoWEM) and local government authorities in Unguja and
                      Pemba. Specific meetings were held with the Principal Secretary, Zanzibar Utilities Regulatory Authority (ZURA),
                      Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Rand Water Zanzibar, and development
                      partners such as JICA, UNICEF, and GIZ. A comprehensive Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been developed to
                      ensure inclusive and meaningful engagement throughout the project lifecycle.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      Project workers are expected to be of the following main categories (i) direct workers; (ii) civil servants employed by
                      the Government at the National and local level in both main land and Zanzibar; and (iii) contracted workers including
                      consultants sourced nationally and internationally and contractor workers carrying out physical works. Working
                      hours, rest periods, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment, including benefits, as well as management
                      of risks associated with occupational, health and safety of Project Workers including all required insurances are issues



Public Disclosure
                      that will be managed per ESS2 requirements. Those aspects and risks will be managed in a dedicated section to labor
                      and working conditions of the ESIAs and ESMP that will be prepared for the TA activities. Such documents will be
                      prepared and incorporate the relevant requirements of ESS2 and national law.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant because the monitoring wells will abstract water, however just limited amount. The Integrated Water
                      Resource Management plans that will be prepared need to address ESS3 requirements in terms of water
                      conservation and pollution prevention measures, and those requirements will be included in their ToRs and will be
                      according to the requirements of the World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (WBG EHSG).
                      Also the detailed designs and tender documents that will be prepared in Zanzibar for sanitation infrastructure and
                      water schemes need to address resource efficiency requirements and may need to include water balance for water
                      schemes. Those requirements will be included in the ESIAs that will be prepared as part of the design packages.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      There will be some traffic for transporting equipment for drilling wells and Hydromet and traffic management
                      procedures, as part of the ESMP, need to be in place to ensure safety of the community. Also the detailed designs of
                      sanitation infrastructure and water schemes will be associated with some community risks related to the quality of
                      supplied water per the designs, impacts on groundwater availability and the impacts on the community from
                      downstream construction works. The dam inventory will not have on health and safety of people. However, the




                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                      inventory will consider assessment of existing dams including any existing dam safety issues and this will be included
                      in the ToRs of this task, in line with ESS4 requirements.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      The IPF will not involve the acquisition of new land, and there is no anticipated risk of displacing individuals. The plan
                      is to install monitoring equipment in the boreholes being drilled as part of the RUWASA supply project, ensuring that
                      the activity remains within the boundaries of existing land, which is free of encumbrances. IPF activities being
                      supported in Zanzibar will have a component of detailed design of sanitation infrastructure and water schemes that
                      will require additional limited land acquisition that may lead to restrictions on land use and involuntary resettlement.
                      Those detailed studies will include a resettlement action plan, if needed, to address land acquisition and resettlement
                      risks and impacts.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The ToRs of IWRM will include assessment of the downstream impacts on aquatic habitats and mitigation measures
                      to those impacts. The ESIAs of detailed designs of sanitation infrastructure in Zanzibar will include assessing potential
                      impacts on marine habitats and mitigation measures. All such ToRs and assessments will incorporate relevant
                      requirements and/or be undertaken in line with ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities



Public Disclosure
                      The IPF component does not include areas where there Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                      Underserved Traditional Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      The detailed design of sanitation infrastructure and water schemes may have some impacts to physical culture
                      resources that will require some mitigation measures. Assessment of such impacts and identification of mitigation
                      measures will be part of the ESIAs mentioned under ESS1.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      No fi that is expected



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No


                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                       Borrower framework will only be used for the PforR. The IPF component will rely on the ESF.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       The project will not use Common Approach

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     By Appraisal
                     -      Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), and final version following negotiations
                     -      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

                     During implementation:
                     - ESMP for well drilling works before works are contracted
                     - ESIAs for detailed designs of sanitation infrastructure and water schemes in Zanzibar before detailed designs are
                     finalized


                     III. CONTACT POINT




Public Disclosure
                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Toyoko Kodama                            Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                 tkodama@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Ruth Jane Kennedy-Walker                 Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                 rkennedywalker@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           James Origa Otieno                       Job Title:      Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                 jotieno2@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Sustainable Rural Water Supply And Sanitation Program Phase 2 (P508698)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Toyoko Kodama, Ruth Jane Kennedy-Walker, James Origa Otieno

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Mohammad Farouk Ibrahim Kandeel

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Emil Mathew Karuranga




Public Disclosure




                    Aug 06, 2025                                                                                         Page 9 of 9
