Public Disclosure Authorized
                                      State of Santa Catarina
                               State Secretariat for Civil Defense and
                                            Protection


Public Disclosure Authorized

                                 Santa Catarina Climate Resilience
                                             (P508221)


Public Disclosure Authorized

                                 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
                                   COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP)



Public Disclosure Authorized               Appraisal Version
                                            October, 2025


                                                                           1


                                                                         Official Use Only
                          ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN



1. The State of Santa Catarina (the Borrower) will implement the Santa Catarina Climate Resilience
   Project (the Project), with the involvement of State Secretariat for Civil Defense and Protection (SDC),
   State Planning Secretariat (SEPLAN), and State Finance Secretariat (SEF), as set out in the Loan
   Agreement (the Agreement). The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the Bank)
   has agreed to provide the original financing for the Project, as set out in Agreement.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the Environmental and
   Social Standards (ESSs) and this Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), in a manner
   acceptable to the Bank. The ESCP is a part of the Agreement. Unless otherwise defined in this ESCP,
   capitalized terms used in this ESCP have the meanings ascribed to them in the Agreement.

3. Without limitation to the foregoing, this ESCP sets out material measures and actions that the
   Borrower shall carry out or cause to be carried out, including, as applicable, their respective
   timeframes; institutional, staffing, training, monitoring and reporting arrangements; and grievance
   management. The ESCP also sets out the environmental and social (E&S) documents that shall be
   prepared or updated, consulted, disclosed and implemented under the Project, consistent with the
   ESSs, in form and substance acceptable to the Bank. Said E&S documents may be revised from time
   to time with prior written agreement by the Bank. As provided for under the referred Agreement, the
   Borrower shall ensure that there are sufficient funds available to cover the costs of implementing the
   ESCP.

4. As agreed by the Bank and the Borrower, this ESCP will be revised from time to time, if necessary, to
   reflect adaptive management of Project changes or unforeseen circumstances or in response to
   Project performance. In such circumstances, the Bank and the Borrower agree to update the ESCP to
   reflect these changes through an exchange of letters signed between the Bank and the Borrower’s
   Representative specified in the Agreement. The Borrower shall promptly disclose the updated ESCP.

5. The subsection on “Indicators for Implementation Readiness” below identifies the actions and
   measures to be monitored to assess Project readiness to begin implementation in accordance with
   this ESCP. Nevertheless, all actions and measures in this ESCP shall be implemented as set out in the
   “Timeframe” column below irrespective of whether they are listed in the referred subsection.




                                                                                                         2


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                        TIMEFRAME                    RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS AND CAPACITY SUPPORT

A    ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE                                                                            a. Establish the PMU within 30 days      SDC - PMU
                                                                                                         after the Effective Date and
     a)   Establish and maintain a PMU with qualified staff and resources to support management of
                                                                                                         thereafter maintain the PMU and
          environmental, social, health and safety risks and impacts of the Project including a Social
                                                                                                         these positions throughout Project
          Specialist, an Environmental Specialist, and a Social Communications Specialist (with large
                                                                                                         implementation.
          community consultation background).
                                                                                                         b. Hire the consultancy firms
     b) Hire and maintain consultancy firms to advise on the development by Contractors of the site
                                                                                                         according to the timeline set by the
        specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and Environmental and Social
                                                                                                         state environmental agency for
        Management Plans (ESMP) required by the state environmental agency and the Environmental
                                                                                                         licensing the works.
        and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for large infrastructure work.
                                                                                                         c. Hire the supervising firms prior to
     c)   Hire and maintain supervising firm(s) staffed with qualified environmental and social risk
                                                                                                         the issuance of the service order for
          management specialists to monitor and ensure the implementation of the ESMF and the
                                                                                                         infrastructure works and thereafter
          Contractors’ Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMPs) by the contractor and to
                                                                                                         maintain the supervising firms
          report to SDC on contractors’ performance on environmental and social risk management
                                                                                                         throughout the implementation of
                                                                                                         the corresponding infrastructure
                                                                                                         works.




                                                                                                                                                                         3


                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                 TIMEFRAME                   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

B       CAPACITY BUILDING PLAN/MEASURES                                                                           a)   No later than 120 days after the   SDC -PMU
                                                                                                                       Effective day and thereafter on
        Prepare and implement the following capacity building measures:
                                                                                                                       an annual basis.
            a)   Provide training to PMU and SDC staff directly engaged to work specifically in relation to the
                                                                                                                  b) No later than 120 days after the
                 project on the requirements and tools available for environmental and social risk
                                                                                                                     Effective day and thereafter on
                 management and the relevant Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs).
                                                                                                                     an annual basis
            b) Provide training to PMU and SDC staff directly engaged to work specifically in relation to the
                                                                                                                  c)   Prior to the beginning of the
               project on the requirements and tools available for dam safety.
                                                                                                                       works in each work front.
            c)   Provide training for direct workers (SDC staff) and contracted workers (Contractors and
                                                                                                                  d) As per the timeline set in the
                 supervising firms) involved in routine relationships with members of affected communities
                                                                                                                     ESMP approved by the state
                 on Non-Aggressive/Non-Violent Communication (NVC).
                                                                                                                     environmental agency.
            d) Implement the Environmental Education Program required by the state environmental
                                                                                                                  e)   As per the timeline set in the
               agency as part of the ESMP of each large infrastructure work.
                                                                                                                       ESMP approved by the state
            e)   Implement the training program for emergency responders (including drills at regular                  environmental agency.
                 intervals) required by the state environmental agency as part of the ESMP of each large
                 infrastructure work.

MONITORING AND REPORTING

    C   REGULAR REPORTING                                                                                         Submit quarterly reports to the         SDC-PMU
                                                                                                                  Bank throughout till large
        Prepare and submit to the Bank regular monitoring reports on the environmental, social, health and
                                                                                                                  infrastructure works are completed,
        safety (ESHS) performance of the Project. The reports shall include, inter alia:
                                                                                                                  commencing after the Effective
        •    Status of preparation and implementation of E&S documents required under the ESCP.                   Date.
        •    Summary of stakeholder engagement activities carried out as per the Stakeholder Engagement           Thereafter submit semiannual
             Plan.                                                                                                reports to the Bank during the
                                                                                                                  remaining period of Project
        •    Complaints submitted to the grievance mechanism(s), the grievance log, and progress made in          implementation.
             resolving them.
                                                                                                                  Submit each report to the Bank no
        •    E&S performance of contractors and subcontractors as reported through monthly contractors’           later than 45 days after the end of
             and supervision firms’ reports.                                                                      each reporting period.
        •    Number and status of resolution of incidents and accidents reported under action E below.




                                                                                                                                                                                4


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                 TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

 D    CONTRACTORS’ MONTHLY REPORTS                                                                                Submit the monthly reports to the      SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                  Bank upon request and summarize
      a)   Require Contractors of large infrastructure work, consultancy firms in charge of ESMP
                                                                                                                  their main aspects as annex to the
           implementation, and supervising firms to provide monthly monitoring reports on E&S
                                                                                                                  reports to be submitted under
           performance in accordance with the metrics specified in the respective bidding documents and
                                                                                                                  action C above.
           contracts.
      b) Submit such reports to the Bank upon request.

 E    INCIDENTS AND ACCIDENTS                                                                                     a)   Notify the Bank no later than     SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                       48 hours after learning of the
      c)   Notify the Bank of any incident or accident relating to the project which has, or is likely to have,
                                                                                                                       incident or accident. Provide
           a significant adverse effect on the environment, the affected communities, the public or workers,
                                                                                                                       available details upon request.
           including those resulting in death or significant injury to workers or the public; acts of violence,
           discrimination or protest; unforeseen impacts to cultural heritage or biodiversity resources;          b) Provide review report and
           pollution of the environment; dam failure; forced or child labor; displacement without due                Corrective Action Plan to the
           process (forced eviction); allegations of sexual exploitation or abuse (SEA), or sexual harassment        Bank no later than 10 days
           (SH); or disease outbreaks. Provide available details of the incident or accident to the Bank upon        following the submission of
           request.                                                                                                  the initial notice, unless a
                                                                                                                     different timeframe is agreed
      d) Arrange for an appropriate review of the incident or accident to establish its immediate,
                                                                                                                     to in writing by the Bank.
         underlying and root causes and prepare, agree with the Bank, and implement a Corrective Action
         Plan that sets out the measures and actions to be taken to address the incident or accident and
         prevent its recurrence.

ESS 1: ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

1.1   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENTS AND PLANS                                                              a)   No later than 30 days after the   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                       Effective Date and thereafter
      a)   Incorporate consultation feedback; update the document to reflect any additional studies
                                                                                                                       implement the ESMF
           required by the licensing authority and/or the Bank (e.g., biodiversity assessments, cumulative
                                                                                                                       throughout Project
           impact assessments, or other relevant studies); disclose and implement the Project’s ESMF in a
                                                                                                                       implementation.
           manner consistent with ESSs.
                                                                                                                  b) Obtain environmental licenses
      b) Hire or cause contractors of large infrastructure work financed by the Project to hire independent
                                                                                                                     for the works according to BESF
         and qualified consultancy firms to develop and implement the C-ESMP, according to Terms of
                                                                                                                     procedures.
         Reference previously reviewed and with a no objection from the Bank consistent with the
         requirements of the World Bank Environmental and Social Standards and the Brazil’s                       c)   No later than 90 days after the
         Environmental and Social Framework (BESF, see action 1.5 below)..                                             Effective Date.



                                                                                                                                                                                5


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                              TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
      c)   Hire independent and qualified consultancy firms to conduct a Cumulative Impact Assessment           d) Finalize the Due Diligence Work
           (CIA) of the whole flood control system of the Itajaí River basin, according to Terms of Reference      Plan before start of
           approved by the Bank and consistent with ESS 1.                                                         construction and thereafter
                                                                                                                   implement it throughout
      d) Establish and implement a Due Diligence Work Plan, conducting periodical inspections on the
                                                                                                                   Project implementation.
         construction sites of large infrastructure work.
                                                                                                                e)   Throughout Project
      e)   Ensure that any supplementary studies or technical work required to bring the environmental
                                                                                                                     implementation.
           and social assessments into full alignment with the ESF —additional cumulative impact analyses,
           biodiversity studies, detailed ESMPs, dam safety plans, or other specialist inputs — have adequate
           budgetary allocations made for those activities as part of project preparation and
           implementation.

1.2   ENVIRONMENTAL LICENSING                                                                                   Before start of construction          SDC - PMU
      Obtain and provide to the Bank the environmental licenses (and other applicable permits) for the
      implementation of the Projects’ interventions, pursuant to the relevant country’s legislation and the
      environmental agency requirements, before the commencement of the works.

1.3   ASSOCIATED FACILITIES                                                                                     Before the start of AF construction   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                and prior to any related project
      If facilities meeting the ESS1 definition of Associated Facilities are identified, ensure that their
                                                                                                                activities that depend on the AF
      planning, development, and operation are carried out in accordance with the applicable requirements
                                                                                                                and thereafter implement it
      of this ESCP and the ESSs, including preparation, disclosure, and implementation of relevant E&S
                                                                                                                throughout Project
      instruments (e.g., ESMP), to the extent of the Borrower’s control or influence. This may include
                                                                                                                implementation.
      conducting E&S due diligence of third-party owners/operators and agreeing on time-bound actions to
      address gaps.

1.4   MANAGEMENT OF CONTRACTORS                                                                                 Throughout Project                    SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                implementation.
      a)   Cause contractors of large infrastructure work to develop, submit to PMU’s approval and
           implement approved Contractors’ ESMP (C-ESMP) complying with the requirements set in both
           the Project’s ESMF, the environmental licenses issued by the state environmental agency and the
           corresponding ESMP.
      b) Thereafter ensure that the contractors implement the C-ESMP and that they require their
         subcontractors to comply with the E&S specifications of their respective C-ESMP.
      c)   Cause the supervising firms to oversee and ensure the implementation of the C-ESMP by
           Contractors and sub-contractors.



                                                                                                                                                                             6


                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                 TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
      d) Provide copies of the relevant contracts with contractors/subcontractors and supervision firms
         to the Bank upon request.

1.5   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                                                                                        Throughout Project                     SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                  implementation.
      Ensure that the consultancies (including for the preparation of ESIAs and ESMPs for each large
      infrastructure work), studies, capacity building, training, and any other technical assistance activities
      under the Project are carried out in accordance with terms of reference reviewed and found
      acceptable to the Bank, that incorporate the relevant requirements of the ESSs, the ESMF, the
      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and BESF. Thereafter ensure that the outputs of such activities
      comply with the terms of reference.

1.6   USE OF BRAZIL’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL FRAMEWORK (BESF)                                                   a), b), c) and d)Throughout Project    SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                  implementation.
      a)   Comply and cause contractors, subcontractors, consultancy and supervising firms to comply with
           the requirements of the Brazilian law – and the ESMF with regards to standards of conduct that         e) Notify the Bank immediately
           do not condone with SEA/SH and GBV) – with regards to fair and equal treatment of the                  after taking notice of the change to
           workforce, non-discrimination, freedom of association, working conditions, Occupational Health         the BESF. Subsequent actions, if
           and Safety (OHS), and zero tolerance with child labor, forced labor, and SEA/SH.                       requested by the Bank, shall be
                                                                                                                  reflected in an updated ESCP as
      b) Disclose information and cause contractors, subcontractors, consultancy and supervising firms to
                                                                                                                  indicated in paragraph 4 of the
         disclose information among Project workers on SEA/SH Prevention laws, policies, plans and
                                                                                                                  Initial Section of this ESCP.
         programs that set standards of behavior and establish responsibilities and procedures for
         responding to SEA/SH and Gender Based Violence substantiated allegations as well as on the
         SEA/SH referral services network that are in place at state and municipal levels.
      c)   Disclose information and cause contractors, subcontractors, consultancy and supervising firms to
           disclose information among project workers on internal and external grievance mechanisms
           where project workers can raise concerns about working conditions and terms (including SEA/SH
           and Gender-Based Violence issues).
      d) Ensure that the ESHS risks and impacts of the Project, including in relation to labor and working
         conditions, are managed in accordance with this ESCP and the BESF, which includes inter alia, the
         country’s relevant policy, legal and institutional framework, including its national, departmental
         or local implementing institutions and applicable laws, regulations, procedures and
         implementation capacity.




                                                                                                                                                                                7


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                TIMEFRAME                RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
      e)   Promptly notify the Bank of any changes to the BESF that may materially adversely affect the
           Borrower’s ability to manage the ESHS risks and impacts of the Project in line with the ESSs and
           the immediate measures taken or that are planned to be taken to address said changes and the
           ensuing potential risks and impacts of the Project. If, in the opinion of the Bank, such changes
           adversely affect relevant ESHS risk management aspects of the Project, the Borrower shall agree
           to implement measures and actions to address them in a manner acceptable to the Bank and
           shall update the ESCP to reflect such agreed actions.

1.7   ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO RETROACTIVE FINANCING                                                                As part of the submission of the     SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                 request for retroactive financing.
      a)   Conduct an E&S Assessment of activities that may be subject to retroactive financing under the
           project evidencing they have been conducted in a manner consistent with the applicable ESSs
           (i.e., prior screening and assessment of E&S risks and impacts, implementation of mitigation
           measures required by the environmental license, compliance with the Brazilian labor law,
           consultation with affected communities, prior compensation of affected assets at replacement
           cost) and including a proposal of corrective action plans or measures as deemed necessary in
           accordance with the ESSs.
      b) Submit the Report on the E&S Assessment to Bank approval as a disbursement condition and
         thereafter implement any corrective action plans or measures in a timeline acceptable to the
         Bank.

ESS 2: LABOR AND WORKING CONDITIONS
                                                                                                                 Throughout Project
2.1   USE OF BESF’S FOR LABOR MANAGEMENT                                                                                                              SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                 implementation.
      Incorporate into the E&S specifications of the procurement documents and contracts with
      contractors, consultancy and supervising firms the requirement to comply with (a) the BESF in relation
      to labor which includes, inter alia, the country’s relevant policies, legal and institutional frameworks
      with regards to fair and equal treatment of the workforce, non-discrimination, freedom of association,
      working conditions and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), zero tolerance with child and forced
      labor and SEA/SH, and (b) the standards of conduct contained in the Project’s ESMF that do not
      condone with SEA/SH and GBV in a manner consistent with the requirements of ESS 2.

2.2   PROJECT INDUCED LABOR INFLUX                                                                               Throughout Project                   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                 implementation.
      Incorporate in the procurement documents with contractors of large infrastructure work the
      requirement to prioritize the hiring of local labor force as much as feasible as mandate under the
      licenses for the corresponding works issued by the state environmental agency.


                                                                                                                                                                             8


                                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                              TIMEFRAME               RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

2.3   GRIEVANCE MECHANISM FOR PROJECT WORKERS                                                                   Throughout Project                 SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                implementation.
      Provide information and cause contractors, consultancy and supervising firms to provide information
      to all Project Workers about the grievance mechanism in place for raising concerns about working and
      working place conditions (including the governmental channels and judicial instances).

ESS 3: RESOURCE EFFICIENCY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT

3.1   RESOURCE EFFICIENCY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT                                               a) Throughout project              SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                implementation.
      a)   Adopt, implement, and cause contractors to implement the environmental plans and programs
           as with the guidelines of the ESIAs prepared for each large infrastructure financed by the Project   b) Same as Action A above.
           and in a manner consistent with the Project’s ESMF – defined in action 1.1 (above), the
           requirements of BESF (incorporated in the environmental licenses issued by the state
           environmental agency and the corresponding ESMP) and ESS3.
      b) Report to the Bank on the implementation of the environmental plans and programs, including
         eventual corrective and preventive measures and other requests, pursuant to the environmental
         agency requirements and routinary audits.

3.2   HAZARDOUS AND NON-HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT                                                              a) and b) Throughout project       SDC-PMU
                                                                                                                implementation
      a)   Cause Contractors to prepare and implement a Waste Management Plan (WMP), following the
           principles and procedures set in the Brazilan National Waste Policy and described in the ESMF
           prepared for the Project, to manage hazardous and non-hazardous wastes, consistent with ESS3.
      b) Cause supervising firms to monitor and report on the implementation of the WMP.

ESS 4: COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY

4.1   TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY                                                                                   Same timeframe as for action 1.1   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                above.
      Incorporate in all bidding documents and cause all contractors, subcontractors and supervising firms
      to adopt and implement measures to manage traffic and road safety risks as required in the ESMF
      defined in action 1.1 (above).




                                                                                                                                                                          9


                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                               TIMEFRAME               RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

4.2   COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY                                                                                Same timeframe as for action 1.1   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                 above.
      Assess, manage and cause contractors, subcontractors and concessionaries to assess and manage
      specific risks and impacts to the community arising from Project activities – including, inter alia,
      erosion, noise and dust emissions, work zones hazards, obstacles to traffic flux – and manage them
      in accordance with the ESMF defined in action 1.1 (above).
      PREVENTION OF SEA/SH RISKS
4.3                                                                                                              Throughout Project                 SDC - PMU
      a)   Adopt and cause contractors, subcontractors and consultancy firms and all project workers to          implementation.
           adopt standards of conduct that do not condone with SEA/SH and Gender-based Violence (GBV)
           as set in the SEA/SH Prevention Plan included in the Project’s ESMF.
      b) Disclose information and cause contractors and supervising firms to disclose information to the
         residents of communities nearby the work sites on:
           •   The Project’s rule of zero tolerance for acts of SEA/SH and GBV by workers engaged in
               project-supported activities and works.
           •   The laws, policies and programs against SEA/SH and GBV
           •   The channels of the grievance mechanism of the project available to make allegations of acts
               of SEA/SH and GBV by workers engaged in project-supported activities and works.
           •   The network of referral services available at state and municipal levels to assist survivors of
               SEA/SH and GBV.
      c)   Ensure the Project’s Grievance Mechanism is able to register and respond to grievances related
           to SEA/SH following a survivor-centered approach.

4.4   SECURITY PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT                                                                              Throughout Project                 SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                 implementation.
      Implement and cause contractors and supervision firms to implement measures to manage the risks
      of engaging security personnel to safeguard project workers, sites, assets, and activities in a manner
      consistent with the requirements of the BESF.




                                                                                                                                                                          10


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                 TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

4.5   DAM SAFETY                                                                                                  a)   No later than 60 days after the   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                       Effective Date.
         a)   Hire the Panel of Experts (PoE), which shall be composed of specialists in
              hydrology/hydraulics, geotechnics, concrete, and hydromechanical equipment, as defined in           b), c), d) e) and f) Throughout
              the ESMF.                                                                                           Project implementation.

         b) Ensure that the PoE inspects all the sites of the new dams and reviews/comments on the                g) Before the start of the
            reports, projects and safety requirements of the new dams, as well as formally presents               infrastructure works
            recommendations, if necessary, for the improvement of the dams' safety projects and                   h), i) and j) Throughout Project
            procedures.                                                                                           implementation.
         c)   Ensure that the PoE 's recommendations, including design review and further investigations,
              are incorporated into dam designs and works.
         d) Ensure that the PoE reviews the tender documents to confirm that they include key technical
            elements of the project.
         e)   Ensure that the PoE reviews the safety plans for the new dams, including: quality control
              plan, instrumentation plan (prior to bidding), preliminary O&M plan, and general framework
              of the emergency preparedness plan (EPP).
         f)   Ensure that the PoE recommendations regarding engineering design and construction
              methods are implemented by contractors and construction supervision companies.
         g)   Hire and mobilize a construction supervision consulting company, in accordance with the ToR
              acceptable by the Bank.
         h) Ensure that the PoE inspects the works, technical aspects and quality control of the
            construction, in accordance with the agreed schedule and dam safety plans, as necessary.
         i)   Ensure that the PoE reviews the definitive safety plans, including Final Instrumentation Plan
              (prior to bidding), Final O&M Plan (at least six months before starting first reservoir filling),
              Final EPP, along with dam failure analysis and flood maps, and the first reservoir filling plan
              at least one year before the start of reservoir filling.
         j)   Ensure that PoE reviews the performance of the new dams during the first filling and provide
              recommendations on the revision of the O&M and EPP plan, if necessary, to ensure the safety
              of the dam; and finally start the implementation of safety plans, including instrumentation,
              monitoring and inspections in accordance with the O&M and EPP plan.



                                                                                                                                                                               11


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                               TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

ESS 5: LAND ACQUISITION, RESTRICTIONS ON LAND USE AND INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT

5.1   RESETTLEMENT FRAMEWORK AND PLANS                                                                          a)   No later than 90 days after the   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                     Effective Date. Corrective
      a)   Prepare and submit to the Bank of a report on the 10 processes of land acquisition already
                                                                                                                     measures, if any, shall be
           conducted according to the country’s law for the construction site of the Petrolândia dam
                                                                                                                     implemented in a timeframe
           (including information on the current living conditions of the affected people – as feasible).
                                                                                                                     agreed upon with the Bank.
           Implement corrective measures as agreed upon with the Bank.
                                                                                                                b) No later than 30 days after the
      b) Prepare and implement a Resettlement Framework (RF) for the Project, consistent with ESS5.
                                                                                                                   Effective Date and thereafter
      c)   Prepare and implement Resettlement Plans (RP) or a Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP) for each           implement the RF throughout
           activity under the Project for such RP or LRP is required, following the principles and procedures      Project implementation.
           set out in the RF and consistent with ESS5.
                                                                                                                c)   Prepare and implement the
                                                                                                                     respective RP or LRP prior to
                                                                                                                     carrying out the relevant
                                                                                                                     works, including ensuring that
                                                                                                                     before taking possession of the
                                                                                                                     land and related assets, full
                                                                                                                     compensation has been
                                                                                                                     provided and (as applicable)
                                                                                                                     displaced people have been
                                                                                                                     resettled and moving
                                                                                                                     allowances have been
                                                                                                                     provided.

ESS 6: BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF LIVING NATURAL RESOURCES

6.1   BIODIVERSITY RISKS AND IMPACTS                                                                            a) Throughout project                  SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                implementation.
      a)   Adopt, implement, and cause contractors to implement the environmental plans and programs
           as with the guidelines of the ESIAs prepared for each large infrastructure financed by the Project   b) No later than 90 days after the
           and in a manner consistent with the Project’s ESMF – defined in action 1.1 (above), the              Project Effective Date.
           requirements of BESF (incorporated in the environmental licenses issued by the state
                                                                                                                c) Same as Action A above.
           environmental agency and the corresponding ESMP) and ESS6.




                                                                                                                                                                             12


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                  TIMEFRAME                 RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
        b) Conduct a supplementary Biodiversity Assessment for the investments that have already
           undergone the first stage of the licensing process and will be supported by the Project (fluvial
           improvements in the Itajaí-Mirim river).
        c)   Report to the Bank on the implementation of the environmental plans and programs, including
             eventual corrective and preventive measures and other requests, pursuant to the environmental
             agency requirements and routinary audits.

6.2     BIODIVERSITY ASSESSMENTS                                                                                   a) No later than 60 days after the    SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                   Project Effective Date.
        a)   Hire an independent and qualified consultancy to conduct a Biodiversity Assessment for each
             large infrastructure financed by the Project and works involving important vegetation                 b) Integrate the technical
             suppression, according to Terms of Reference approved by the Bank and consistent with ESS 1,          recommendations into project
             for the characterization of natural and modified habitats, and identification of potential critical   planning and design immediately
             habitats in the Study Areas (SAs).                                                                    after the assessments are
                                                                                                                   completed, in coordination with the
        b) The technical recommendations arising from these assessments should guide the improvement
                                                                                                                   preparation of the relevant ESMPs.
           of forest compensation, ecological restoration, fauna management and biodiversity monitoring
           programs, ensuring that the mitigation and compensation measures adopted are proportional to
           the ecological sensitivity of the affected areas and compatible with the biodiversity conservation
           objectives of the Project.

6.3     CRITICAL HABITAT                                                                                           Throughout project                    SDC - PMU
                                                                                                                   implementation.
        If Critical Habitat is encountered in the Biodiversity Assessments (action 6.2 above),
             a)   Apply the mitigation hierarchy with priority on avoidance and demonstrate no measurable
                  net reduction in the Critical Habitat’s biodiversity values or in populations of affected
                  threatened species;
             b) Ensure no significant conversion or degradation of Critical Habitat; and
             c)   Prepare (or include in the Biodiversity Program required by BESF) and implement a
                  Biodiversity Management Plan that achieves net gains for the relevant biodiversity values,
                  with long-term monitoring.

ESS 7: INDIGENOUS PEOPLES/SUB-SAHARAN AFRICAN HISTORICALLY UNDERSERVED TRADITIONAL LOCAL COMMUNITIES [

This standard is not currently relevant.




                                                                                                                                                                               13


                                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                            TIMEFRAME                  RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

ESS 8: CULTURAL HERITAGE

8.1    CULTURAL HERITAGE RISKS AND IMPACTS                                                                    Prepare each CHMP prior to start      SDC - PMU
                                                                                                              the works and thereafter
       Prepare and implement a Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) in accordance with the
                                                                                                              implement the CHMP throughout
       guidelines of the ESIAs prepared for each large infrastructure financed by the Project and in a
                                                                                                              the construction stage.
       manner consistent with the requirements of BESF (incorporated in the environmental licenses
       issued by the state environmental agency) and ESS8.

8.2    CHANCE FINDS PROCEDURES                                                                                Prior to the beginning of the works   SDC - PMU
                                                                                                              and thereafter ensure contractors
       Cause contractors of large infrastructure work to describe and implement chance finds procedures
                                                                                                              implement these procedures
       as part of the Contractor’s ESMP (C-ESMP) and in a manner consistent with the mutual requirements
                                                                                                              throughout the construction stage
       of BESF and ESS 8.
                                                                                                              of each large infrastructure work.

ESS 9: FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES

This standard is not currently relevant

ESS 10: STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE

10.1   STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN                                                                            Disclose the updated SEP in SDC       SDC-PMU
                                                                                                              website no later than 30 days after
       Incorporate the feedback of the consultation process, update, disclose, and implement the
                                                                                                              the Effective Date, and thereafter
       Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for the Project, in a manner consistent with ESS10, which shall
                                                                                                              implement the SEP throughout
       include, at a minimal: a) measures to provide key stakeholders with timely, relevant,
                                                                                                              Project implementation
       understandable, and accessible information on Project activities and material measures taken to
       address its potential E&S risks; b) measures to receive feedback from key stakeholders on Project
       activities and the management of its potential E&S risks, and c) receive and respond to requests of
       information and grievances with regards to Project activities and the management of its potential or
       actual E&S risks and impacts.




                                                                                                                                                                          14


                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
MATERIAL MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                  TIMEFRAME                 RESPONSIBLE ENTITY

10.2    PROJECT GRIEVANCE MECHANISM                                                                                 Same timeframe as for action 10.1.   SDC-PMU
        a)   Disclose public information and operate the SDC Ombudsman Office as the overarching Project
             Grievance Mechanism (GM), including information that the GM are equipped to receive, register,
             and facilitate the resolution of SEA/SH complaints, including through the referral of survivors to
             relevant gender-based violence service providers, all in a safe, confidential, and survivor-centered
             manner.
        b) Cause contractors of large infrastructure subprojects to establish, maintain and operate
           accessible onsite grievance mechanisms, to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and
           grievances in relation to their subprojects, promptly and effectively, in a transparent manner that
           is culturally appropriate and readily accessible to all Project-affected parties, at no cost and
           without retribution, including concerns and grievances filed anonymously, in a manner consistent
           with ESS10.
        c)   Cause contractors to disclose information on the role of SDC Ombudsman Office as the
             overarching GM of the Project also available for whoever has grievances that they are not
             confident to report to the onsite GM or has grievances that have not been satisfactorily resolved
             through the onsite GM.

INDICATORS FOR IMPLEMENTATION READINESS

The following actions are indicators for implementation readiness:
A
1.1
4.5.a
10.1
10.2




                                                                                                                                                                             15


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
