Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 09/18/2025 | Report No: ESRSA03889




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 03, 2025                                                                                              Page 1 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508202                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        BIOMAS                       2026

                     Operation Name            Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                    LATIN AMERICA AND            Agriculture and Food
                                                                                         CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Banco do Brasil           Banco do Brasil                           30-Sep-2025                  24-Feb-2026


                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     26-Sep-2025               701,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Expand access to finance for the bioeconomy, forest restoration, and climate-smart agriculture, and enhance climate
                     adaptation and mitigation of targeted beneficiaries


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Project is a is a financial intermediary project that seeks to enhance the availability of financial resources
                     for sustainable agricultural and bioeconomy and the restoration of degraded forests and pasturelands, while
                     simultaneously advancing the inclusion, economic stability, and climate resilience of the targeted beneficiaries.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     The project will support Banco do Brasil (BB) in financing bioeconomy initiatives, sustainable agricultural practices, and
                     the restoration of degraded forests/pasturelands in the Amazon and Cerrado biomes. It will provide funding to private
                     family farms, small businesses, and cooperatives, including those led by forest dwellers, traditional and indigenous
                     peoples.

                     The Amazon biome covers an area of 420 million hectares, accounting for over 40% of Brazil's territory. It is
                     characterized by humid tropical forests, an extensive hydrographic network, and immense biodiversity. In 2021, its
                     population was estimated at 28.6 million people (5.6 inhabitants per km²). According to the UNDP, in 2023, the Human
                     Development Index (HDI) of the states in the Northern Region was below the Brazilian average (0.754), ranging between
                     0.687 in Maranhão and 0.740 in Amapá.
                     The Cerrado biome spans 203 million hectares in the central region, representing 24% of Brazil's territory.
                     Approximately 25 million people live in the region, with low population density in rural areas. Its flat lands, regular rains,
                     and tropical climate have made it a hub for agricultural growth.

                     These biomes are crucial for biodiversity conservation and agricultural significance. They play a pivotal role in Brazil's
                     climate strategy as 62% of the country's greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions come from agriculture, land use, and forestry.
                     In the Cerrado, high fertilizer consumption exacerbates environmental issues like water pollution and soil
                     contamination.

                     The Project focus area is the Tocantins-Araguaia river basin within the Arc of Deforestation. The Arc of Deforestation is a
                     zone of intense forest loss extending from western Maranhão and southern Pará through Mato Grosso, Rondônia, and




Public Disclosure
                     Acre states in North Brazil – that accumulate 191,633 hectares of deforested area. It comprises 266 municipalities that
                     account for most Amazon forest loss. High rates of deforestation led to environmental degradation, poverty, and social
                     conflicts. Sixty percent of these municipalities are in the Tocantins-Araguaia river basin.

                     This basin covers approximately 918,822 km² or 11% of Brazil and encompasses 453 municipalities, spanning six states.
                     It is one of the largest river systems in South America and includes two major Brazilian biomes – the Amazon and the
                     Cerrado. It has also undergone significant environmental changes due to large-scale agriculture, aquaculture, mining,
                     and hydroelectric projects, which have altered land cover and hydrology but have not improved social or economic
                     indicators. Indeed, areas of high forest loss often correlate with low social progress indices.

                     The Tocantins-Araguaia river basin was sparsely populated until the 1950s, with indigenous peoples, traditional
                     communities, and quilombolas inhabiting the area for centuries. Development and occupation occurred without
                     adequately considering their needs or traditional knowledge. The construction of major highways in the 1960s and
                     1970s, alongside public policies and infrastructure projects, accelerated settlement and deforestation. Livestock farming
                     and mineral extraction have been key economic drivers, and the region has become a major agribusiness frontier. The
                     environmental liabilities of the target area include large areas of low-productivity pastures and agriculture that require
                     restoration.

                     Despite this, it contains significant protected areas, including 35 indigenous lands, 10 quilombola territories, and 23
                     conservation units. Family farmers, forest-dwellers, traditional communities, and indigenous peoples face increased
                     risks from extreme weather events. They will benefit the most from the project's activities, as bioeconomy, forest



                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     restoration, low-carbon agriculture, and the recovery of degraded pastures offer sustainable options to promote
                     resilient, sustainable growth in these regions.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     BB is a Financial Intermediary that operates commercially, with just over half of its total shares controlled by the Federal
                     Government. BB’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) was recently assessed as part of the
                     preparation for the Brazil Climate Finance Project (P178888) and deemed adequate to manage the substantial E&S risks
                     posed by this early operation.

                     Key highlights of BB’s ESMS are:

                     •      The ESMS complies with the increasingly stringent regulations set by the Central Bank and the National
                     Monetary Council (CNM). Between September and October 2021, the Central Bank issued the following rules, which
                     have an impact on the management of socio-environmental and climate risks by BB:

                     o       CMN Resolution 4,943, of September 15, 2021, which amends CMN Resolution 4,557, of February 23, 2017, and
                     improves the rules for managing Social Risks, Environmental and Climate Policies, applicable to financial institutions.
                     o       CMN Resolution 4,945, of September 15, 2021, which establishes new rules on the Social, Environmental and
                     Climate Responsibility Policy (PRSAC) and on the actions for its effective implementation by the SFN institutions.

                     •        In line with CNM Resolution 4,945/2021, BB updated its Social, Environmental, and Climate Responsibility Policy




Public Disclosure
                     (endorsed by its Board of Directors in 2022) and its Specific Policy for Management of Risk and Capital to enhance the
                     management of social, environmental, and climate (ESC) risks. In 2024, BB has also updated its Sustainability Guidelines
                     for Credit, considering new legal, economic, social, environmental and climate aspects. These Guidelines aim to
                     publicize and improve the practices adopted by Banco do Brasil in the analysis and granting of credit, reinforcing
                     compliance with internal regulations and current legislation, and in compliance with the principles of social,
                     environmental and climate responsibility contained in our general and specific policies. They address strategic topics
                     such as Forest & Biodiversity, Water Resources, Human Rights and Climate Change and are applicable to individuals and
                     legal entities.
                     •        Within the scope of the Sustainability Guidelines, BB adopted the Restrictive List and the Exclusion List. In the
                     Restrictive List, BB includes activities in which it assumes credit risk under certain conditions, applying differentiated
                     rigor in the analysis, granting and monitoring of credit. The Exclusion List lists the activities in which BB does not assume
                     credit risk due to legal impediments or because they are not in alignment with its guidelines. The guidelines require
                     environmental compliance, proof of mitigation/compensation measures for socio-environmental impacts, maintenance
                     of communication channels with surrounding communities, and prohibit granting credit to clients financing activities on
                     indigenous lands, engaging in forced labor, sexual exploitation of minors, child labor, intentional environmental
                     damage, or crimes related to racial or gender discrimination.
                     •        BB incorporates ESC conditions into credit contracts, conducts periodic compliance monitoring, and non-
                     compliance may lead to the early maturity of the operation.
                     •        BB’s organizational structure includes the Risk Management Unit under the Vice-Presidency of Internal Controls
                     and Management Risks, responsible for corporate management of social, environmental, and climate risk, and the ESG
                     Unit under the Vice-Presidency of Business, Government, and Corporate Sustainability, responsible for the specific
                     management of ESC risks.


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)




                     BB has also signed recent agreements with governmental agencies, multilateral institutions and civil society
                     organizations aimed at promoting financial education, technical assistance, and credit provision, under the integrated
                     perspective of sociobiodiversity value chains in the Brazilian Amazon, with a special attention to the most sensitive
                     target audiences, such as ventures involving indigenous peoples, quilombolas, traditional peoples and communities, and
                     family farming, among others, which include:

                     a)       The partnership signed with the World Bank to promote sustainable solutions for socio-bioeconomy,
                     sustainable agriculture, and low-carbon agriculture in Brazil, with a focus on the Amazon biome and the Cerrado (2024).
                     b)       A technical cooperation agreement to stimulate the sustainable socioeconomic development of communities in
                     the Amazon region and strengthen productive inclusion of associations and cooperatives through bioeconomy projects
                     (2024).
                     c)       The Memorandum of Understanding with the Association for the Development of the Bioeconomy (Assobio) to
                     provide credit and technical assistance tailored to the needs of traditional extractive communities (2024).
                     d)       The Technical Cooperation Agreement with the Climate and Society Institute (iCS) to develop and implement a
                     program to support Indigenous peoples, quilombolas, and traditional communities by encouraging the production and
                     sale of socio-bioeconomy products, the implementation of projects to restore degraded lands, promoting ecological
                     restoration and to promote ethno-tourism (2025).
                     e)       The loan agreement with IDB/GFC (BB Amazonia Program) aimed at promoting bioeconomy businesses and
                     expanding sustainable infrastructure for these chains in the Brazilian Legal Amazon, reducing historical financing
                     barriers faced by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises, productive cooperatives, family farmers, women-led




Public Disclosure
                     businesses, and traditional communities and expanding access to credit for small, local businesses along bioeconomy
                     value chains (2025).

                     In 2024, BB opened the BB Hub Bioeconomy and Inclusion aimed to support the bioeconomy (focusing on the Legal
                     Amazon) and promote sustainable businesses that generate positive impacts on the environment and society, especially
                     traditional communities through the generation of income and employment opportunities. The Hub offers credit and
                     technical assistance services to cooperatives, associations, and family farmers, for renewable energy, sustainable
                     agriculture, and sociobiodiversity conservation projects, seeking economic development that combines income
                     generation with environmental preservation and cultural respect. Since then, BB has developed actions to activate
                     community business ecosystems for access to credit in 4 territories in the Amazon (Marajó, Baixo Tapajós,
                     Transamazônica and Médio Purus). These actions include a training program for Credit Activators and Financial Agents,
                     which has already carried out ten training sessions. Furthermore, 27 riverside communities and extractive settlements
                     have received special services, leading to 1,438 financing contracts for family farmers, including the provision of
                     financial education and technical assistance to enable the financing of productive activities in the communities.

                     These agreements, projects and initiatives have strengthened BB’ institutional capacity to manage environmental and
                     social risks associated with the sectors and activities supported by the Project.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                      Moderate



                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                  Page 5 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The environmental risk of the project is Moderate. Overall environmental positive impacts are expected as outcomes
                     of the Project, such as boosting of sustainable human development, the reduction of deforestation, restoration of
                     degraded pastures and reduction of GHG emissions. Forest and ecological restoration projects could also be linked to
                     multiple environmental benefits, such as improved air and water quality, improvements in water regulation services,
                     reduced soil erosion, carbon removal and capture, and biodiversity conservation. There are no civil works envisaged
                     under the projetct, and key physical interventions are mostly linked to Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices, land
                     management, forest preservation and restoration. Although the Project’s targeted areas, Amazon and Cerrado
                     biomes, include a vast amount of environmental protected areas, conservation units, and internationally recognized
                     as high biodiversity value area (KBA), interventions will target the generation of positive environmental outcomes and
                     will most likely be located in already modified habitats, such as pastures and degraded lands. The potential
                     environmental risks and impacts are not likely to be significant and do not have a high potential for harming the
                     environment, nor are envisaged to result in the conversion of natural habitats. Even though the general impacts of
                     the Project will be positive, activities could have negative impacts resulting from risks associated with inadequate use
                     of exotic or unsuitable species, increase in the amount of biomass raising the risks and intensity of wildfires in early
                     stages of vegetation growth, greater demand for water affecting local water availability, potential use of pesticides
                     requiring integrated pest/control management (IPM or IVM) approaches, and limited waste and wastewater
                     generation. These environmental risks and impacts are expected to be predictable, temporary and/or reversible; low
                     in magnitude and site-specific; of low probability of serious adverse effects to the environment and able to be
                     mitigated in a predictable manner, with well-known control and mitigation measures. The project incorporates in its
                     design measures that minimize or mitigate any risks associated with the conversion of natural forests and encourage



Public Disclosure
                     the protection and conservation of natural forests, biodiversity and ecosystem services.
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating of the project is Moderate. By financing locally-led initiatives, technical assistance and capacity
                     building activities to develop the bioeconomy value chain, forest and land restauration and sustainable, low-carbon
                     agriculture, the Project is expected to render huge benefits for the livelihood and well-being of family farmers, forest
                     dwellers, traditional communities and indigenous peoples in the Tocantins-Araguaia river basin. New job
                     opportunities, increased earnings, improved food security and reduced threats to their territories and livelihoods that
                     they currently face due to the expansion of the agricultural frontier are positive direct and indirect effects expected
                     from the subprojects that will be financed to SMEs, rural producers and community organizations. They are also
                     expected to lead to protection and conservation of the distinct habitats and ancestral territories traditional
                     communities, and Indigenous Peoples are collectively attached to. The Project will need to address three context-
                     related challenges: i) many intended beneficiaries face challenges to access financing institutions and are risk aversion
                     to make debts and invest in unknown practices and technologies; ii) traditionally children play a key role in
                     bioeconomy value chains in the Amazon and Cerrado biome and the possible occurrence of forced labor in the
                     agriculture sector at the project area; and ii) local population still lack or have a poor understanding about carbon
                     markets and some show some resistance to it due to recent harmful experiences with “carbon cowboys”. These risks
                     can be mitigated through the Project’s provision of technical assistance, capacity building and
                     communication/awareness raising measures, and veto to grant financing to subborrowers involved with child and
                     forced labor. It will also need to address concerns ordinarily associated with forest restoration about reduced
                     opportunities and potential exclusion of local communities and vulnerable social groups given the high financial costs,
                     restrictions on access to natural resources, and conflicts with traditional activities that can lead to disputes over land

                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     and water use. Such risks are expected to be of moderate likelyhood and small magnitude given the fact that
                     investments in agroforestry/forest restoration will be a) focused on recovering degraded lands within privately owned
                     farms and/or b) driven by community-demands subprojects that will have to evidence community broad support.
                     Therefore, subprojects will neither require land acquisition, nor adversely affect lands occupied by Indigenous
                     Peoples/traditional communities. Contrariwise, these forest restoration subprojects are expected to reduce the
                     adverse impacts caused by agricultural expansion on natural resources available within these lands and traditional
                     livelihoods. They may also indirectly benefit smallholders and local communities as seedling production has significant
                     potential for job creation and income generation, especially for women and local communities. In addition,
                     considering the remote areas that may be reached by Project activities and the vulnerable social context where they
                     will be developed, the Project must also address two main concerns associated with a) the occupational health and
                     safety risks that project workers providing technical assistance may face in remotely located and hard to supervise
                     areas ridden by endemic diseases and b) the risk that incidents of SEA/SH and cultural conflicts may eventually occur
                     due to close/without supervision interactions between project workers and vulnerable and culturally distinct local
                     communities (including Indigenous Peoples). These risks can be mitigated through the enforcement of both OHS and
                     behavioral standards incorporated by BB’s ESMS, BESF and the Project-Specific Environmental and Social
                     Management Manual (ESMM) as required under the Project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant


Public Disclosure
                      BB’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) has been assessed for its capacity to evaluate the
                      environmental and social commitment and track record of potential sub-borrowers before granting sub-loans and to
                      monitor their performance throughout the sub-loan period. This assessment concluded that BB’s ESMS is robust and
                      sophisticated, capable of managing E&S risks in line with the ESF. Moreover, the Project will operate within a robust
                      regulatory framework governing environmental licensing, labor conditions, land rights of Indigenous Peoples and
                      traditional communities, and information disclosure and citizen engagement. BB’s ESMS and Policy are governed by
                      three main regulatory instruments: i) National Monetary Council (CNM) Resolution 4,945/21; ii) SARB Normative
                      14/2014 (revised by SARB Normative 31/2020), and; iii) Brazil Central Bank (BCB) Resolution 139/2021. E&S
                      Management Policies, Guidelines and Plans BB’s ESMS includes key instruments that outline its commitment to
                      sustainability and guide its due diligence and risk management processes. These instruments are the E&S and Climate
                      Responsibility Policy (PRSAC), the E&S Directives, the Sustainability Guidelines for Loans, and the Sustainable Finance
                      Framework. In the decision-making process regarding whether or not to grant credit, a broader analysis of the
                      customer is carried out, using public information, registration data, accounting documents, and consultation with the
                      financial system, in order to measure the customer's payment capacity and credit risk. The first screening consists of
                      assessing the proponents against Exclusion, Restriction and Alert lists: Screening of E&S Risks and Impacts BB ESMS
                      establishes processes, procedures, and tools to identify and assess the environmental and social risks of companies
                      and individual loan transactions within its portfolio. BB has well-defined procedures for assessing (a) the E&S and
                      climate responsibility of its clients and (b) the E&S risks of their loans. The screening and assessment of E&S risks are
                      made by a specialized team which is independent and segregated from the commercial area, aiming to ensure
                      unbiased analysis. Processes & Procedures BB ESMS procedures evaluate a set of E&S risk factors, which are


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      situations or circumstances that can increase the likelihood of risk occurrence. These factors include, but are not
                      limited to, the absence of documentation for animal, plant, or wood origin (when applicable), lack of socio-
                      environmental risk management tools, intentional environmental damage, evidence of environmental liabilities, and
                      discriminatory or harassing practices. Some of these factors are considered extremely high risk and are termed
                      vetoing socio-environmental risk factors for management purposes. These include: (a) submission of workers to
                      degrading labor conditions or slave-like conditions; (b) sexual exploitation of minors; (c) exploitation of child labor;
                      and (d) malicious environmental damage. BB assesses environmental and social risks at the sector level, company
                      level, and specific financed activities. Sector Level Assessment All BB companies and individual customers are
                      classified according to the socio-environmental risk level of their operating sectors. This classification uses socio-
                      environmental risk factors characteristic of each sector, as stipulated by CONAMA Resolution 237/1997 and derived
                      from studies conducted during the creation of BB’s Manual of Socio-environmental Due Diligence. The CONAMA
                      Resolution considers the pollution potential, the degree of natural resource use, and the need for environmental
                      licensing for projects in each sector, as well as potential social impacts. Sectors are classified into three categories:
                      High, Medium and Low Risk. Based on the sector risk level, BB identifies customers for the E&S Responsibility
                      Assessment Questionnaire and determines their E&S Rating. Considering the size of the customers and the potential
                      socio-environmental impact of their activities, BB decides which customers will undergo mass or customized E&S risk
                      assessments. The Risk Management Department is responsible for sector risk classification, which, along with
                      company size, informs the application of the E&S Responsibility Assessment Questionnaire (QRSAC) and the
                      determination of the E&S Rating at the company level. Company Level Assessment BB assesses companies' E&S
                      responsibility by applying the QRSAC, which identifies the social and environmental practices of customers with
                      medium or high socio-environmental risk and the potential risks in their operations. Companies are classified into




Public Disclosure
                      three categories: High, Medium and Low Level, regarding their E&S responsibility strategy. The Questionnaire results
                      inform the Customer's E&S Rating. Mass Assessment of Social and Environmental Risk – This procedure applies to all
                      BB customers and considers: i) Government lists of companies with incidents of slave labor (Dirty List), embargoed
                      areas due to environmental violations (Embargo List), and areas with evidence of contamination (Survey of Evidence
                      of Contamination); ii) E&S Risk by Sector; iii) Company size and E&S responsibility level, and; iv) Media monitoring of
                      E&S news by BB’s Risk Management Department. The mass assessment results in an E&S Rating, classifying and
                      monitoring customers based on socio-environmental risk, company size, sector, and socio-environmental practices.
                      The Rating scale has seven levels (A to G): • A, B, C: Lowest risk, assigned to small customers without blacklist,
                      embargo list, or negative media occurrences. • D, E, F: Medium to high risk, with up to three embargo list or media
                      monitoring occurrences. Category F customers undergo Custom Assessment. • G: Very high risk, with at least one
                      occurrence in any vetoing socio-environmental risk factor. BB does not operate with category G customers. Only low
                      to medium-risk subprojects (BB criteria) will be eligible for this operation. Substantial and high-risk subprojects, per
                      the Bank criteria, will be in the Project-specific Exclusion List. Customized Assessment – BB conducts the customized
                      assessment for category F customers, which deepens the socio-environmental risk evaluation and may result in: i)
                      Increased client risk; ii) Suspension, reduction, or early maturity of the credit limit, and; iii) Specific conditions, action
                      plans, or recommendations to mitigate or remedy identified socio-environmental weaknesses. Application of the
                      Equator Principles - To assess the environmental and social risks of high-impact financing products, BB applies the
                      Equator Principles, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) Performance Standards on Environmental and Social
                      Sustainability, and the WBG EHS Guidelines. When applicable, a contracted consultancy with a multidisciplinary team
                      conducts the E&S risk classification of proposed investments. This team also evaluates and monitors the E&S
                      programs proposed by the customer. Projects categorized as A or B undergo periodic evaluations as per a schedule
                      defined in the legal agreement between the client and BB. For category A projects, and at BB's discretion for category


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                           Page 8 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      B projects, an action plan is developed to ensure compliance with IFC Performance Standards and to mitigate project
                      impacts. These periodic assessments are documented in the E&S Report, prepared by an independent consultancy,
                      which details the progress of the action plan and the project's adherence to IFC standards. E&S Risk Assessment Tools
                      - BB's E&S risk assessment tools include public lists (Dirty List of Slave Labor, IBAMA Embargo List, FEBRABAN/SARB
                      Survey for Signs of Contamination), methodologies (sector risk matrix, socio-environmental responsibility
                      questionnaire, mass assessment, customized assessment, socio-environmental rating), and internal processes (field
                      visits, E&S due diligence, Geo-Socioenvironmental Diagnostic, monitoring regulatory changes, and media monitoring).
                      These tools provide information on a customer's E&S responsibility and their status concerning BB's E&S Risk Factors,
                      enabling BB to evaluate customers' risk management strategies. Monitoring and Reporting of E&S Aspects – E&S
                      monitoring and reporting occur throughout the credit operation's duration. Monitoring procedures are tailored to the
                      E&S risk levels of the supported sectors and activities, as well as the E&S Rating of the financed companies. To ensure
                      commitment to the E&S agenda, BB includes specific clauses in all credit instruments that formalize the sub-
                      borrowers' E&S responsibility. These clauses allow BB to suspend fund transfers and/or accelerate debt maturity in
                      case of non-compliance with E&S commitments, especially when public authorities identify violations of
                      environmental legislation. BB has developed a Geo-Socio-Environmental Diagnosis tool to prevent rural operations in
                      areas with legal E&S restrictions. This tool generates alerts about potential risks and provides qualified information
                      from public geographic databases on E&S impacts. During the validation of rural credit operations, the system
                      displays any occurrences, enabling appropriate risk management actions. BB’s Risk Management Department (DIRIS)
                      produces regular E&S Risk Reports to inform managers and committees within the E&S risk governance structure,
                      supporting decision-making processes. These reports are available through DIRIS's Risk Portal on the intranet.
                      Additionally, BB publishes annual Sustainability Reports and maintains a dedicated sustainability website. By




Public Disclosure
                      Effectiveness, BB will develop a Project Environmental and Social Management Manual (ESMM), compiling the
                      Project-specific procedures deriving from BB’s existing ESMS, the Project-specific Exclusion List, and the requirements
                      set forth in the ESCP. This Manual shall set the Project-specific E&S criteria to validate the eligible expenditure
                      submitted for reimbursement, with a few supplemental measures to manage the moderate risk sub-projects.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      As required under ESS9, BB-ESMS offers multiple channels for external communication and stakeholder engagement.
                      They include: • The Relationship Center (CRBB): A phone service for customer relations, providing quick, quality
                      solutions and supporting the branch network. • The Customer Service (SAC): A multichannel service (phone, internet,
                      mobile) addressing information requests, questions, complaints, and contract/service issues. SAC aims for First Call
                      Resolution (FCR) in over 93% of cases. • The External Ombudsman: For unresolved issues from primary service
                      channels. • The Illegal Acts Reporting Channel: For reporting suspected unlawful acts related to BB’s activities. • The
                      IR Contact Channel: For investor inquiries about shares, dividends, and accounting information. BB's External
                      Ombudsman Office is an autonomous executive unit under the Corporate Vice Presidency. It informs the Board of
                      Directors about detected issues and the effectiveness of measures taken to resolve them. The primary goal is to
                      enhance stakeholder engagement, satisfaction, and experience. In line with BB's Relationship and Users Policy, the
                      Ombudsman mediates conflicts, fostering a cooperative and balanced relationship with customers and ensuring fair
                      treatment in second-instance cases. Users can contact the External Ombudsman Office via a toll-free phone line or
                      through the website (www.bb.com.br/ouvidoria). A specific toll-free line is available for stakeholders with hearing or
                      speech impairments. As mandated by CMN Resolution 4,433/15, all grievances are handled by certified professionals
                      in conflict resolution and mediation. The Ombudsman has up to 10 working days to investigate and provide a


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 9 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      conclusive solution. Customers can escalate unresolved issues from BB's usual service channels to Ombudsman.
                      Contact information is widely disseminated through websites, print, and digital channels. According to the latest BB
                      Ombudsman Report (second semester of 2024), BB Ombudsman dealt with 57,880 requests, of which 63.63%
                      answered within 5 business days and 99.99% answered within 10 business days. The average time for response
                      equaled 4.91 business days. Furthermore, 64.89% reached first-call resolution. Nearly 16% of Ombudsman service
                      users participated in a satisfaction survey, rating their satisfaction with the quality of the service by an average of 3.3
                      out of 5 and their satisfaction with the quality of the resolution by an average of 3.5 both in a 5 points scale.
                      Complaints can be reported anonymously or identified, with guaranteed protection for the identity of the
                      complainants. BB’s grievance redress mechanism has been evaluated for appropriateness and compliance with ESS
                      requirements, and no gaps have been found. In compliance with SARB Normative 14/2014 and Resolution BCB
                      139/2021, BB discloses information on social, environmental, and climate-related issues in the standardized Report
                      on Social, Environmental, and Climate-related Risks and Opportunities (GRSAC Report). This report aligns with the
                      Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) recommendations, covering governance, strategy, risk
                      management, and metrics and targets. The GRSAC Report includes: • Governance of risk management, detailing the
                      roles and responsibilities of decision-making bodies, such as the board and senior management. • Real and potential
                      impacts of social, environmental, and climate-related risks on business strategies, risk management, and capital
                      management over short, medium, and long-term scenarios. • Processes for managing these risks. The GRSAC Report
                      is published annually, with December 31 as the reference date, and must be available within 90 days of this date. It
                      remains accessible for five years on BB’s website and is provided in an open data format as specified by the Central
                      Bank of Brazil. As per the requirements of ESS9, BB will: • Disclose and permit, in writing, the Bank to disclose at the
                      Bank’s external website the Project-specific Environmental and Social Management Manual. • Develop a




Public Disclosure
                      communication strategy to disclose relevant information on the Project, its exclusion list, eligibility criteria, supported
                      subprojects and outcomes in a culturally appropriate manner to reach out the diversity of key stakeholders. • Keep a
                      channel to collect feedback from citizens and stakeholders on environmental and social issues associated with the
                      Project. • Disclose information on and operate its Ombudsman Office as the Project’s Grievance Mechanism to
                      facilitate in a timely manner resolution of concerns and grievances related to the Project. • Require the sub-
                      borrowers to: - Disclose information and conduct stakeholder engagement in a manner proportionate to the risks and
                      impacts of their subprojects and as required under the country’s licensing legislation and permits. Establish and
                      maintain a grievance mechanism if the sub-project in question has adverse impacts on Affected Communities as
                      identified by BB’s environmental and social risk screening procedures.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      The Project will engage workers contracted directly by BB and through third parties for core business processes,
                      including supply chain workers. BB operates under the comprehensive Brazilian regulatory framework with regards to
                      labor and working conditions (ensuring fair, equitable, and non-discriminatory treatment, workers’ freedom of
                      association, protection against forced labor and child labor), Occupational Health and Safety standards and against
                      Sexual Harassment, Abuse and Exploitation. As required under ESS 9, BB has in place Labor Management Procedures
                      that provide a safe and healthy working environment, including procedures relating to working conditions and terms
                      of employment, nondiscrimination and equal opportunity, grievance mechanisms and occupational health and safety.
                      BB also complies with national laws on workers’ freedom of association and Collective bargaining agreements are in
                      place. BB Policy and Code of Ethics reject harassment and discrimination, ensure fair treatment, non-discrimination,
                      and equal opportunity for workers, and aims to increase the share of women, race and ethnic minorities in leadership


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 10 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      positions. Furthermore, BB’s Specific Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Policy complies with Brazilian legislation
                      and international best practices and aims to protect workers by managing workplace risks, to foster worker
                      participation in OHS management and the continued OHS training for all workers. BB maintains a network across the
                      country (Service of Engineering and Occupational Medicine - SESMT), which operates in accordance with the
                      legislation. BB has in place a Grievance Mechanism – the Internal Ombudsman Office – that handles workers’
                      grievances confidentially and protects against retaliation. It is accessible through multiple channels (email, phone,
                      intranet, letter, personal assistance) and addresses complaints over workplace conflicts, misconduct, and
                      noncompliance with internal rules and regarding human management processes. Once a serious incident is identified,
                      the case is referred to investigation, analysis and trial by the Disciplinary Control, which sets involvement,
                      accountability and defines how to handle the case and those involved. Following Resolution BCB 139/2021 and SARB
                      Normative 14/2014 (Art. 15), BB addresses noncompliance with labor laws, slave-like conditions, and child labor
                      exploitation as social risks and its Policy prohibits the granting of finance to companies involved in degrading labor,
                      slavery-like conditions, or child labor, support companies with health and safety practices and withhold financing
                      from companies involved in racial or gender discrimination. BB’s credit instruments include early maturity clauses for
                      non-compliance with human rights laws (addressing child labor and sexual exploitation and abuse, forced and/or
                      slavery-like labor as well as race and gender discrimination). BB always consults the Ministry of Labor and
                      Employment's list of employers with slave-like labor practices and denies financing to listed companies. If the client
                      already has operations with BB and becomes part of the list, BB has the prerogative to close the operations in
                      advance. Throughout Project implementation, BB will follow these principles as they are enshrined in its policies and
                      the national law as well as consistent with the provisions of ESS2. To enhance further these provisions, the Project-
                      specific Exclusion List set forth in the Loan Agreement requires that BB do not provide financing to companies that in




Public Disclosure
                      their operations: a) Face proof of practice of sexual exploration of minors or exploration of child labor (a potential risk
                      on the bioeconomy value chain); and/or b) Face proof of submitting workers to degrading forms of labor or
                      maintaining them in conditions analogous to slavery (a relevant risk on the agriculture and livestock sector). As stated
                      in the ESCP, BB will: a) Require beneficiary SME and/or rural producer and/or association to be in compliance with the
                      Brazilian national law, BB’s ESMS and the requirements of this ESS with regards to provisions on working conditions,
                      management of workers relationships, occupational health and safety (including personal protective equipment, and
                      emergency preparedness and response), code of conduct (including relating to SEA and SH), forced labor, child labor,
                      and grievance arrangements for Project workers. b) Provide information, carry out awareness raising campaigns, and
                      cause direct and contracted Project workers (i.e., those who are employed or engaged to perform works that are
                      essential for a specific Project activity and without which the Project cannot continue, regardless of location -
                      employees of Banco do Brasil, outsourced workers and workers hired by contractors and consultancy firms) to abide
                      by the standards of behavior to combat discrimination, moral and sexual harassment, abuse, and exploitation, and all
                      forms of gender-based violence, as state in its Code of Ethics and Integrity and the country legislation.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      The Project proposes to facilitate access to credit and innovative financing instruments and leverage private finance
                      to scale-up impact in support of Brazil’s net-zero target, including in agriculture and land-based sectors. Physical
                      interventions will be associated with forest restoration, bioeconomy value chains, and restoration of degraded
                      pastures through the implementation of CSA practices. GHG emissions are expected to be reduced as a direct
                      outcome of the project. The key environmental impacts of the eligible subprojects are expected to be small-scale,
                      restricted to the projects’ footprint and include limited waste and effluent generation, soil carryover, chemicals and


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 11 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      pesticides management. BB ESMS has specific provisions/restrictions for financing activities involving the use of
                      agrochemicals and pesticides. Financing of activities subject to the use of pesticides are included in BB’s Restriction
                      List and encompass specific evidence and controls to be presented by the subproject proponent to demonstrate
                      compliance with national legislation and mitigation measures. Even though the Project’s activities might encompass
                      risks associated with the use of such products, i.e., CSA practices, no-till farming and integrated crop-livestock-
                      forestry systems, in practice, per design, the Project will focus on organic farming, integrated approaches, and
                      avoidance of use of pesticides, thus, not involving recourse to pest management measures (IPM/IVM). As a matter of
                      context, in Brazil, there is a comprehensive framework of environmental regulations that aligns with the objectives of
                      ESS3, ensuring environmental protection and management across the diverse activities involved in the Project. The
                      key ones are: the National Environmental Policy (Law No. 6,938/1981), containing the general principles for
                      environmental protection, environmental licensing and pollution control; National Solid Waste Policy (Law No.
                      12,305/2010); Water Law (Law No. 9,433/1997), establishing the National Water Resources Policy and granting
                      requirements of water use rights and effluent discharge; CONAMA Resolution No. 430/2011 and Complementing
                      Resolution No. 357/2005, which sets conditions and standards for effluent discharge into receiving bodies, along with
                      technical criteria for treatment and monitoring; Air Pollution Regulations: CONAMA Resolution No. 491/2018 sets air
                      quality standards, while Law No. 10,295/2001 establishes the National Policy for Energy Conservation and Rational
                      Use; Hazardous Substances Regulations, Law No. 10,165/2000, ABNT NBR 14001 and Regulatory Standard NR-26,
                      aimed at the identification and safe handling of hazardous chemical products. The application of these regulations in
                      Brazil is operationalized through environmental licensing (CONAMA Resolution No. 237/1997), which requires
                      environmental impact studies, proportionate to the interventions’ risk-level, and compliance with specific conditions
                      to mitigate risks, reduce resource consumption, and implement corrective and compensatory measures, consistent




Public Disclosure
                      with the concept of mitigation hierarchy. BB’s Policy affirms its commitment to: i) Develop actions for socio-
                      environmental management, eco-efficiency, pollution prevention, and carbon emission reduction in products,
                      services, and processes, including proper waste disposal; and ii) Support initiatives and partnerships that mitigate
                      climate change effects and aim to reduce or stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations. BB’s Guidelines for
                      Sustainability align with the ESS3 requirements for resource efficiency and pollution prevention. Hence, BB supports
                      practices that enable more sustainable practices and climate change adaptation, including: • Improving, developing,
                      and diversifying production systems, managing water resources, contracting insurance, and opening new markets. •
                      Providing credit lines for companies that preserve resources, reduce environmental risks, and use clean technologies
                      and efficient processes. • Supporting companies in water conservation, storage, treatment, recycling, reuse, and
                      monitoring. • Financing projects that contribute to a low-carbon economy, including low-carbon agriculture, energy
                      efficiency, and renewable energy. • Encouraging responsible consumption policies, eco-efficiency, and innovative use
                      of inputs, minimizing and properly disposing of waste. • Promoting energy-efficient systems, including using industrial
                      by-products for energy generation. • Supporting enterprises that analyze water-related risks and mitigate
                      environmental impacts in their hydrographic basins. • Considering proposals from companies capable of
                      implementing pollution and contamination prevention and response actions. BB ESMS outlines requirements for sub-
                      loans and investments in resource efficiency and pollution prevention, consistent with the national legislation,
                      international technologies and practices, and ESS3 key requirements. Whenever determined by the ESMS screening
                      procedure, BB demands from the subprojects’ proponent proof of environmental regularization, licensing, and water
                      permits for financed activities and projects, as well as proof of measures to mitigate and compensate for socio-
                      environmental impacts and monitor compliance. Project’s activities will not be considered high-water demand as per
                      the ESS3. Although water availability is not an issue in the target region of the Project and, in light of the its design,
                      water usage is indeed expected to be optimized in the benefited properties, water permits might be applicable to


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 12 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      some activities envisaged under the Project, such as CSA practices. In Brazil, in order to obtain the concession/water
                      permit, required for any project demanding water use/withdrawl (surface or underground sources), the proponent
                      must submit documentation to the responsible agency proving the amount of water it will use in a given period,
                      including hydrological studies and flow/hydrological balance studies. Although such studies do not include a
                      feasibility analysis that considers other current uses of water in the river basin as a whole, the granting authority is
                      required to perform this feasibility analysis (based on the Water Resource Plans developed for the river basin) and
                      other uses of the basin as a condition for issuing or not issuing the concession with the requested flows. As defined in
                      the ESCP, BB will incorporate in the sub-loan agreements E&S Obligations causing the FI Sub-borrowers (their
                      contractors and subcontractors) to adopt in their subprojects and monitor the implementation of the material
                      measures to: ensure efficient use of raw materials, optimization of energy and water use, ensure the safe
                      management of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, and chemicals, proper treatment of wastewater and other
                      industrial effluents, among other, as applicable, as required by the Brazilian environmental legislation and ESS 3.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      This ESS is relevant as the Project will finance eligible SMEs and rural producers and producer associations who
                      submit proposals for bioeconomy, forest restoration and land recovery that are expected to have a positive impact on
                      ecosystem services (in particular) and community health and safety (in general). It is not expected that subprojects
                      will: a) induce a large influx of workers in communities with low-absorption capacity and/or remote areas; b) increase
                      community exposure to health and safety risks, water-borne, water-based, vector-borne, and communicable
                      diseases, SEA/SH incidents, or hazardous materials and substances from routine and non-routine activities; or c)
                      adversely affect ecosystem services in a way that results in health-related risks or impacts; or d) exacerbate the



Public Disclosure
                      adverse impacts of climate change. Brazil has robust legislation for identifying and proposing preventive/mitigating
                      measures related to community impacts. CONAMA Resolution 01/86 defines environmental impact and mandates
                      the assessment of community safety during the environmental licensing process. Law 9,605/98 (Environmental
                      Crimes Law) establishes penalties for harmful environmental activities, including pollution that affects human health
                      or causes significant ecological damage. Law 12,305/10 establishes the National Policy for Solid Waste, and ANTT
                      Resolution 5,947/21 regulates the transportation of hazardous materials. Law 12,334/10 covers dam safety, with
                      enforcement split among national regulatory agencies. Furthermore, BB’s Policy addresses community health, safety,
                      and security, aligning with ESS4 requirements, including: a) the support to clients who minimize or compensate for
                      socio-environmental damage in their operations, b) the requirement of environmental compliance through credit
                      instrument clauses and proof of adoption of mitigation and compensation measures; c) the support to clients who
                      value the work of women, people with disabilities, and minority groups, who respect local communities' interests,
                      culture, and heritage; and d) the withhold of financing to clients who are involved in racial or gender discrimination. A
                      gap was found with regards to ESS 4 in matters related to the retention of security services, as BB does not: a) assess
                      risks posed by the clients’ arrangements to retain direct or contracted workers to provide security to safeguard its
                      personnel and property to those within and outside the subproject’s sites; b) require the clients to verify that these
                      workers are not implicated in past abuses, adequately trained in the u e of force (and where applicable, firearms) and
                      appropriate conduct toward workers and affected communities, or ensure they act within the applicable law; or c)
                      require clients to review all allegations of unlawful or abusive acts of security personnel, take action (or urge
                      appropriate parties to take action) to prevent recurrence and, where necessary, report unlawful and abusive acts to
                      the relevant authorities. Nevertheless, this gap is considered minor because the provision of security services to
                      safeguard personnel, and property is regulated and enforced by national laws (Law 7,102/83, Law 8,863/94, and


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 13 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      Federal Police Ordinance 3,233/2012). Security service authorizations and training are managed by the Federal Police,
                      Ministry of Justice, and State Secretariats of Public Security. To enhance community health and safety management,
                      the Project-specific Exclusion List set in the Loan Agreement includes provisions to deny financing to sub-borrowers
                      who a) face unresolved lawsuits from local populations over significant environmental and social issues and b) are
                      convicted of moral or sexual harassment. Furthermore, the ESCP will require BB: a) Provides evidence through regular
                      reports that sub-borrowers whose subprojects: a) may cause adverse risks and impacts on community health and
                      safety – such as exposure to odors, to excessive lighting, to significant noise or dust and to disease vectors or
                      increased risk of disease spread; risks of fires and explosions; movement or storage of toxic materials that may
                      generate contamination of the environment; use of machinery and equipment that can lead to accidents; increased
                      risk of traffic accidents; transport of hazardous or unhealthy materials that can lead to accidents) – as identified
                      through the screening procedures set in the Project-specific Environmental and Social Management Manual, have in
                      place mitigation measures to address such risks; and b) may retain security workers to protect their properties and
                      personnel i) exclusively hire security personnel services from companies that are authorized to operate on this sector,
                      and ii) provide adequate training in the use of force and appropriate conduct toward citizens as required by the
                      country’s law. b) Ensures firms directly contracted to carry out core activities of the project that involve face-to-face
                      interactions with sub-borrowers, rural producers and local communities take measures to i) preventing the spread of
                      communicable diseases and ensuring the health of project workers, ii) training on and requiring their workers to
                      follow proper behavioral standards and respect distinct cultural values and beliefs and iii) training on and requiring
                      their workers to follow proper behavioral standards and do not condone with SEA/SH and any other form of gender-
                      based violence.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      This standard is not currently relevant because BB will concede small size loans for on farmland restoration and
                      sustainable agricultural practices to private borrowers who – following the country legislation – do not hold powers
                      either to acquire land rights through expropriation or other compulsory procedures, or through negotiated
                      settlements in which failure to reach settlement would result in expropriation or other compulsory procedures. No
                      adverse impacts related to involuntary resettlement or restrictions on land use and access to natural resources use
                      are envisaged under the Project. Furthermore, the Project-specific Exclusion List will veto the financing of subprojects
                      that may lead to forced eviction or land acquisition causing physical and/or economic displacement.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The eligible subprojects might pose risks to biodiversity as the anticipated activities involve the implementation of
                      agricultural practices, reforestation and restoration of degraded pastures. The financing of bioeconomy value chains
                      could entail the management of living natural resources and thus encompass risks associated with the introduction of
                      invasive alien species, disturbances of local fauna, and affectation of ecosystem services. However, potential risks and
                      impacts to biodiversity are not expected to be significant, and the design of the Project itself already establishes a
                      series of measures and eligibility conditions that address and mitigate those potential risks. Forest restoration
                      initiatives, for example, will predominantly aim at restoring Legal Reserves (Reservas Legais – RLs) and Permanent
                      Preservation Areas (Áreas de Preservação Permanente – APPs), in private lands, in the context of Environmental
                      Regularization Programs (Programas de Regularização Ambiental - PRAs), as defined in the Brazilian Forest Code. The
                      Forest Code includes both ecological forest restoration with native species (APPs & RLs) and productive forest


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 14 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      restoration, combining native species with exotic species such as timber, fruits, palm fruits, latex, or nuts (RLs), only
                      for family farmers. For the latter, no new exotic species are allowed to be used, only the ones already regulated and
                      established in the country. The Project will not generate the conversion of natural forests and, indeed, will target the
                      protection and conservation of natural forests and biodiversity, and aim modified/degraded areas for forest
                      restoration practices and retrieval of their ecological functions. BB’s ESMS has clear provisions that require that
                      eligible subprojects are located on land that is already converted, modified habitats or legally allowed under Brazilian
                      Forest Code. Among other directives, it does not finance agribusinesses in areas embargoed by IBAMA, and the proof
                      of environmental and landholding legality is a key condition to agribusiness financing in Legal Amazon. Interventions
                      are not expected to take place in Conservation Units or other legally protected areas, unless there is a clear objective
                      – and aligned with their conservation purposes – to restore their ecological functions and support conservation.
                      Although the bioeconomy and CSA practices will involve primary production and harvesting of living natural
                      resources, as defined in ESS6, such activities will be designed based on sustainability principles and are not expected
                      to generate potential impacts on local, nearby or ecologically linked habitats, biodiversity and communities. The
                      Project’s ESMM will establish the proper measures required to ensure the application of good management practices
                      and available technologies, including requirements for certification and use of recognized standards, whenever
                      applicable. In Brazil, the legal framework for biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of natural
                      resources is strong and comprehensive. These regulations ensure that projects assess, avoid, minimize, and
                      compensate for adverse impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem services. Although there are points of agreement,
                      such as the protection of endangered species, the protection of endemic species, and the preservation of protected
                      areas, in general the concepts of Natural, Critical, or Modified Habitat are different from those applied in legislation.
                      However, these differences are not material and will not impact the Project, as subprojects pottentialy affecting




Public Disclosure
                      natural of critical habitats will be ineligible for this operation. The management of potential negative impacts on
                      modified habitats is supported by the requirements of the BESF. As previously stated, the Project aims to contribute
                      to biodiversity protection, conservation, maintenance of ecosystem services, and sustainable management of natural
                      resources. BB’s Guidelines for Sustainability address biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of
                      natural resources, aligned with ESS6 requirements, among which: • Supporting the environmental regularization of
                      rural properties and offering credit lines for the recovery of Legal Reserves and Areas of Permanent Preservation. •
                      Supporting national strategies to reduce deforestation rates through government plans • Supporting sustainable
                      agricultural practices, such as organic agriculture, agroforestry systems, and animal welfare. • Financing projects that
                      contribute to a low-carbon economy, including low-carbon agriculture, energy efficiency, and renewable energy. •
                      Encouraging sustainable practices in the value chain of agricultural, timber, and non-timber forest products. •
                      Promoting the recovery of degraded areas and the use of clean technologies. • Observing Agroecological Zoning,
                      Agricultural Climate Risk Zoning, and Ecological-Economic Zoning in rural credit. • Partnering to support water and
                      soil conservation practices. • Encouraging increased productivity in cattle ranching and its integration with crops and
                      forests to reduce deforestation pressure. • Promoting certification for Good Agricultural Practices in agricultural and
                      forestry production. • Strengthening family farming by financing sustainable production practices and ensuring food
                      security. • Encouraging afforestation, reforestation, and forest management to supply the timber industry and reduce
                      pressure on native vegetation. • Promoting differentiated production models such as crop-livestock-forest integration
                      systems and reducing nitrogen fertilizer use. Thus, the Project is not expected to provide sub-loans to companies
                      operating in critical habitats, legally protected areas, or those involved in converting or degrading natural habitats.
                      Eligible beneficiaries in land-based agribusiness and forestry are expected to operate on unforested or already
                      converted land, incorporate good management practices, and purchase primary production from suppliers who do
                      not risk significant habitat conversion. To enhance environmental risk management and limit the overall Project’s risk


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 15 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      profile, the Project-specific Exclusion List includes provisions to deny financing to beneficiaries (sub-borrowers) that:
                      • Operate in critical habitats or legally protected areas, or convert or degrade natural habitats. • Engage in
                      agribusiness in areas embargoed by IBAMA. • Conduct commercial logging in primary tropical moist forests or
                      purchase logging equipment for such use. • Cultivate, renew, or fund sugarcane production in areas not listed as
                      appropriate by the Agricultural and Ecological Zoning of sugarcane or in the Amazon and Pantanal biomes. • Trade in
                      wildlife or wildlife products regulated under CITES. • Produce, use, or trade pesticides/herbicides subject to
                      international bans. Finally, BB will also incorporate in the sub-loan agreements E&S Obligations causing the FI Sub-
                      borrowers (their contractors and subcontractors) to adopt and implement the material measures to protect and
                      conserve biodiversity and habitats and; support livelihoods of local communities and inclusive economic
                      development, through the adoption of practices that integrate conservation needs and development priorities,
                      required by the environmental legislation and the E&S risk assessment carried out by BB, as applicable.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant because indigenous peoples are present in the large geographic region of Project intervention (the
                      Amazon and Cerrado biomes) and the more focused Tocantins-Araguaia basin, which is home to 25 different ethnic
                      groups who live in 53 indigenous lands, totaling an area of 47,031 km2 (5% of the region’s total area). Indigenous
                      lands in this region are under constant pressure due to activities such as illegal mining, invasion, and logging, which
                      drive deforestation and threaten biodiversity. Furthermore, ESS7 is also relevant because a) Indigenous Peoples’s
                      representative organizations may apply to obtain financing of bioeconomy and forest restoration subprojects of their
                      own interest (Component 1) and b) Indigenous Peoples may benefit from receiving training provided by community-



Public Disclosure
                      based credit agents to increase their access to financing (Component 3). Finally, ESS7 is relevant because Indigenous
                      Peoples may also indirectly benefit from subprojects sponsored by nearby SMEs and rural producers, which are
                      expected to reduce the pressure to convert new native forest areas, protect headwaters and riparian zones, improve
                      soil conditions, reduce water and soil pollution, and conserve natural resources on which Indigenous Peoples
                      traditional livelihoods depend. The Project is not expected to: a) cause relocation of Indigenous Peoples from land
                      and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary use or occupation of Indigenous Peoples;
                      b) have adverse impacts on land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary use or
                      occupation; c) have significant adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples’ cultural heritage that is material to identity
                      and/or cultural, ceremonial, or spiritual aspects of their lives; or d) use the cultural heritage of Indigenous Peoples for
                      commercial purposes in benefit of third-parties. Supplemental measures to the ESMS that Banco do Brasil has in
                      place have been agreed and will be incorporated in both the Project-Specific Environmental and Social Management
                      Manual and the ESCP to meet the requirements of ESS7. These measures include: a) The Project-specific Exclusion List
                      includes the provision to deny sub-loans to clients involved in activities that can lead to impacts that would require
                      free, prior and informed consent as described in ESS 7 (paragraphs 24-33). b) BB shall provide information on the
                      Project to local and regional Indigenous Peoples’ and traditional communities’ representative organizations and
                      governmental and civil society agencies working with these social groups in the focus area of the Project to ensure
                      equal access to Project opportunities by distinct Indigenous Peoples/traditional communities. c) Prior to granting the
                      finance, BB shall ensure that: i. The potential impacts of subprojects directly proposed by Indigenous Peoples
                      organizations on beneficiary communities have been assessed, consulted in a culturally appropriate manner with
                      them, and received their broad support prior to grant financing. ii. Subprojects proposed by representative
                      organizations of Indigenous Peoples/traditional communities address the goals and preferences of the beneficiary


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 16 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      Indigenous Peoples/traditional communities (including improving their standard of living and livelihoods in a
                      culturally appropriate manner, and to foster the long-term sustainability of the natural resources on which they
                      depend) and have been endorsed by the Indigenous Peoples National Foundation (FUNAI). iii. These subprojects
                      incorporate practicable mechanisms for the determination, delivery, and effective distribution of shared benefits to
                      Indigenous Peoples/traditional communities that fully consider their institutions, rules and customs. d) BB shall
                      Ensure consultancy firms hired to provide technical assistance (Component 3) propose and implement a strategy for
                      working with Indigenous Peoples/traditional communities in a culturally adequate manner. e) BB shall submit to no-
                      objection by the World Bank i) all proposals submitted by representative organizations of indigenous
                      peoples/traditional communities to finance subprojects that will be implemented within indigenous lands and/or
                      collective traditional territories and the evidence mentioned in b, c, and d (above) prior to grant financing and ii) the
                      Terms of Reference for hiring the Technical Assistance firms to implement Component 3 prior to their selection. f) BB
                      shall report to the World Bank on the E&S performance of subprojects implemented within indigenous lands and/or
                      collective traditional territories by representative organizations of indigenous peoples/traditional communities as a
                      condition of disbursements. g) As provided by its ESMS, BB will include in all sub-loan agreements a clause for
                      extraordinary early maturity in cases of non-compliance with laws and norms related to Human Rights, including
                      respect for traditional peoples and communities (such as Indigenous Peoples, quilombolas, rubber tappers, and
                      riverside dwellers). The Project will also benefit from the lessons learned by BB from recent agreements with
                      governmental agencies, multilateral institutions and civil society organizations aimed at promoting financial
                      education, technical assistance, and credit provision, under the integrated perspective of sociobiodiversity value
                      chains in the Brazilian Amazon, with a special attention to the most sensitive target audiences, such as ventures
                      involving indigenous peoples, quilombolas, traditional peoples and communities, and family farming, among others,




Public Disclosure
                      that have been mentioned in the section on BB’s institutional capacity. It is also relevant to highlight that, as part of
                      the actions of the Financial Hub for Socio-bioeconomy and Inclusion, Banco do Brasil signed a Memorandum of
                      Understanding with the Manxinerine Ywptowaka indigenous association – which represents the Manchineri
                      indigenous people of the Poktsi Twatwa Village located in the Mamoadate Indigenous Land, in the municipality of
                      Assis Brasil, state of Acre – with the aim of promoting employment and income generation by supporting local
                      productive activity.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      ESS8 aims to protect cultural heritage from the adverse impacts of Project activities, support its preservation, and
                      promote the equitable sharing of benefits from the use of cultural heritage, regardless of its legal protection status or
                      previous disturbance. Although the risks to cultural heritage are anticipated to be low, this standard remains relevant.
                      Its relevance responds to the limited information available on the location of subprojects that will be financed by the
                      Project and to its wide area of intervention, which does not allow to cast off potential impacts with areas of
                      intangible/tangible cultural heritage. The subprojects sponsored by BB are not expected to be in sites where they
                      could impact cultural heritage (whether replicable or critical tangible cultural heritage) or involve the use of cultural
                      heritage (including the knowledge, innovations, or practices of local communities) for commercial purposes in benefit
                      of third parties. The due diligence process followed by BB according to the ESMS in place and the requirements of the
                      Brazilian framework on protect cultural heritage (BESF) have been assessed and it is considered that their use sill
                      allow the achievement of outcomes materially consistent with the requirements of ESS8. Although the BB ESMS does
                      not provide for the monitoring of chance finds, requirements for stakeholder engagement regarding subprojects’
                      impacts on cultural heritage, community access or removal of cultural heritage, these gaps are bridged by the


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 17 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      relevant aspects of BESF. The country’s regulatory framework for the protection of tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage is well-developed, including procedures for chance finds. The National Historical and Artistic Heritage
                      Institute (IPHAN) is responsible for cultural heritage protection and operates through 27 Superintendencies (one in
                      each Federative Unit), 28 Technical Offices, and five Special Units. IPHAN is always consulted during environmental
                      licensing processes conducted by federal, state, or municipal agencies (Ministerial Decree 60/2015) to ensure that
                      projects or activities do not impact or destroy cultural heritage assets. During the environmental licensing process,
                      IPHAN assesses risks and impacts to tangible and intangible resources and evaluates proposed mitigation measures.
                      For projects with low land interference located in modified habitats not coinciding with registered archaeological
                      sites, IPHAN may require a Cultural Heritage Management Program or a Commitment from the entrepreneur. IPHAN
                      must also be consulted on decisions regarding stakeholder access to cultural heritage during the environmental
                      licensing process (Decree Law 25/1937, Law 3924/1961, Decree 3551/2000, Law 11483/2007, and IPHAN Instruction
                      001/2015). In the event of "chance finds," it is mandatory to halt work at the site and immediately notify IPHAN,
                      which will appoint a specialist to oversee the management of impacts on cultural heritage. Existing chance finds
                      procedures include archaeological rescue measures where in situ preservation is not possible and the identification of
                      institutions to receive the materials (Law 3,924/1961 and IPHAN Normative Instruction 01/2015). BESF has also
                      developed a robust legislation ruling on access the protection of the traditional knowledge on genetic
                      heritage/biodiversity that is held by Indigenous Peoples and traditional communities and on the sharing of benefits
                      generated by the sustainable use of biodiversity and traditional knowledge (Law No. 13.123/2015). It defines how
                      research, economic development and commercial use of traditional knowledge shall occur, ensuring the participation
                      of the holders of traditional knowledge in decision-making, and stating that access to associated traditional
                      knowledge requires free, prior informed consent granted according to community customs or protocols. It also




Public Disclosure
                      ensures that the economic, social and cultural benefits obtained from the economic exploitation of products from
                      traditional knowledge on biodiversity must be shared fairly and equitably, through monetary or non-monetary forms
                      with the holders of the traditional knowledge. To ensure full alignment with the requirements of ESS7 and ESS8 on
                      tangible and intangible cultural heritage, supplementary actions – which will be fully described in the Project-Specific
                      Environmental and Social Management Manual – have been agreed with BB and incorporated in the Project’s ESCP.
                      Thus, the Project’s exclusion list will assert that BB will not grant financing to subprojects in critical cultural sites or
                      that negatively impact cultural heritage (both tangible and intangible). Furthermore, the ESCP requires that BB: a)
                      Screens subproject proposals to check whether subprojects will (i) be located in, or in the vicinity of, recognized
                      cultural heritage sites, legally protected areas or legally defined buffer zones, or (ii) may involve excavations,
                      demolition, movement of earth, flooding or other changes in the physical environment. b) Ensures – in such
                      situations – that sub-borrowers shall commit to complying with the National Legislation on Cultural Heritage. Does
                      not grant financing to subprojects that may involve the commercial use of traditional knowledge held by Indigenous
                      Peoples and Traditional Communities (IPTCs) unless they are proposed by IPTCs who (according to the national law)
                      hold the traditional knowledge and evidence has been provided that: i) beneficiary IPTCs are informed and aware of
                      their rights under national law, the scope, the nature and the potential consequences of the proposed commercial
                      development; ii) have participated in the proposal’s decision-making and affected IPTCs have reached (through a
                      culturally appropriate process) collective support for the project activities that affect them (as required by the
                      country’s law); and iii) the subproject has incorporated practicable mechanisms that enable IPTCs to share equitably
                      in the benefits to be derived from commercial development of such cultural heritage in a manner consistent with
                      their customs and traditions.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                   Relevant


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 18 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      BB has in place an Environmental and Social Management System (BB-ESMS) that meets the requirements of ESS9.
                      BB-ESMS includes as major instruments: • A Social, Environmental and Climate Responsibility Policy, a Sustainability
                      Agenda, Socio-Environmental Directives, Sustainability Guidelines for Loans, Credit Guidelines – Exclusion List, a
                      Sustainable Finance Framework and corporative Commitments to Human Rights and Climate Change. These
                      instruments outline BB’s commitment to sustainability and guide its due diligence and risk management processes.
                      Endorsed by the Board of Directors, the Policy contains principles and guidelines of a social, environmental and
                      climate nature that guide BB in conducting its business, activities, and processes. BB has also adopted the Equator
                      Principles. • Clearly ascribed institutional roles and responsibilities for E&S risk management. BB’s Risk Management
                      Department (DIRIS) is responsible for the global management of risks, including socio-environmental risk, for
                      classifying the risk by sectors and for assigning the socio-environmental rating to clients. The customized assessment
                      is the responsibility of the Credit Department. The screening and assessment of Environmental, Social and
                      Governance (ESG) risks is made internally by a specialized team which is independent and segregated from the
                      commercial area. This procedure aims to ensure unbiased analysis. Currently, DIRIS has over 70 employees. BB has
                      integrated systems for georeferenced analysis, as well as media monitoring. • Clearly defined procedures for the
                      identification, assessment and management of the E&S risks and impacts of subprojects and portfolio. BB assesses
                      and rates E&S risks at three levels: the risks associated with the macro-sector of activity, with the client and with the
                      nature and size of the subproject. These procedures define the risk level category of the operation, the E&S risk
                      assessment methodology and the level of due diligence. The E&S risk level of the macro-sector of activity is rated
                      based on CONAMA Resolution 237/1997, BB’s Manual of Socio-environmental Due Diligence and FEBRABAN’s Green
                      Taxonomy. This assessment considers pollution potential, the degree of natural resource use, and the need for
                      environmental licensing for projects in each macro-sector, as well as potential social impacts. Afterwards, all clients




Public Disclosure
                      are subject to BB’s E&S risk Mass Assessment, which relies on information drawn from official sources (such as the
                      Ministry of Labor and Employment’s Slave Labor Dirty List, the list of largest labor debtors, IBAMA’s list of embargoed
                      areas, ICMBio’s Embargos List, Alerts of the MapBiomas Platform on illegal deforestation) and information gathered
                      through a Geo Socio-Environmental Diagnosis (which verifies data on the overlapping of the subproject site with
                      protected areas, indigenous lands and quilombola territories and considers information on vegetation, climate, relief,
                      hydrography, soils and agricultural potential available at IBGE’s cartographic bases, the Questionnaire for the
                      Assessment of Environmental, Social and Climate Responsibility Levels (QRSAC), and findings of media monitoring.
                      The Geo-Social Environmental Diagnosis Relying on GIS tools, this diagnosis locates the potential beneficiary in space
                      and gathers a multiplicity of information of the social and environmental fragility around it and ensures that the
                      subprojects are located outside areas with legal restrictions. In such cases, the credit contracting process is
                      interrupted. This assessment system is more robust when addressing large operations than smaller operations with
                      MSMEs. Clients are also screened against an Exclusion List and a Restriction List. According to the first, BB does not
                      assume credit risk for customers or activities that face legal impediments or do not meet its guidelines, including
                      companies or customers that: face legal restrictions or may harm BB’s image; are involved in the sexual exploitation
                      of minors or child labor; subject workers to degrading conditions or slavery-like conditions; are linked to unregulated
                      gambling; engage in sugarcane cultivation or industrialization in areas not approved by the Agricultural and Ecological
                      Zoning of sugarcane, or in new sugarcane areas within the Amazon and Pantanal Biomes or the Bacia do Alto Paraguai
                      after October 2009; agribusinesses companies located in areas embargoed by IBAMA. Clients and/or activities
                      included in the Restriction List can be granted financing insofar as they provide Environmental Impact Assessments
                      and implement Environmental and Social Management Plans as required by the country’s licensing regulations.
                      Clients are classified on a scale from A to G (ranging from low to high E&S risk levels), where: - A, B, C: Lowest risk,
                      assigned to small customers without blacklist, embargo list, or negative media occurrences. - D, E, F: Medium to high


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 19 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      risk, with up to three embargo list or media monitoring occurrences. - G: Very high risk, with at least one occurrence
                      in any vetoing socio-environmental risk factor. BB does not operate with category G customers. Category F clients
                      undergo a Customized Assessment, which findings may lead to the application of additional E&S risk management
                      requirements. • Due diligence procedures for monitoring and reviewing E&S risks of subprojects and the portfolio. BB
                      carries out visits to subprojects on a sample basis, and social and environmental issues are assessed in the client visit
                      report, which applies to all sectors. Furthermore, in compliance with the Brazilian legislation for Finance Intermediary
                      institutions, BB has a periodic reporting system related to sustainability issues of subprojects and the portfolio. •
                      Disclosure of information and stakeholder engagement. BB has in place both external communication channels and a
                      grievance redress mechanism that have been evaluated for appropriateness and compliance with the requirements
                      of the ESF. • Labor Management Procedures that provide for a safe and healthy working environment. BB has
                      corporative policies on Human Resources Management and Occupational Health and Safety. The first emphasizes
                      measures to value diversity, equity, and inclusion, ensure democratic access to career development opportunities
                      and mitigate risks linked to misconduct by employees and members of senior management (having mechanisms for
                      the protection of whistleblowers, witnesses and any person who has contributed or acted in the internal
                      investigations of deviations, as well as devices for dealing with situations of retaliation). The second establishes
                      commitments to: provide healthy and safe working conditions, to prevent injuries and work-related health problems
                      and that aim to prevent adverse socioeconomic impacts; comply with legislation and international quality
                      management instruments, which are recognized in Brazil; anticipate, recognize, evaluate and control the occurrence
                      of risks in the workplace; consult and engage employees and representatives in OSH matters; provide OHS training for
                      the entire staff; and maintain a Specialized Service in Safety Engineering and Occupational Medicine (SESMT).
                      Supplementary actions to enhance BB’s due diligence have been agreed and incorporated in the Project’s ESCP. Thus:




Public Disclosure
                      a) A Project-specific Exclusion List in addition to BB’s corporative one (which aims to exclude high and substantial E&S
                      risks subprojects and ensure the achievement of outcomes materially consistent with the objectives of the relevant
                      ESSs) will be used to assess the eligibility of subprojects. It ensures the Project will not grant financing to clients that
                      are: i. Involved with sexual exploitation of minors or child labor; degrading labor practices or conditions analogous to
                      slavery; unresolved lawsuits from local populations over significant E&S issues. ii. Operating subprojects in critical
                      habitats or converting/degrading natural habitats; IBAMA’s embargoed area. iii. Propose subprojects that may lead
                      to: - Adverse impacts on land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary use or
                      occupation and/or their cultural heritage, relocation of Indigenous Peoples. - Commercial use of Indigenous Peoples’
                      cultural heritage. Proposals of subprojects on forest restoration and bioeconomy development submitted by
                      Indigenous Peoples and Traditional Communities that are based on the use of their traditional knowledge will be
                      allowed. - Forced eviction or land acquisition causing physical and/or economic displacement. - Forest clearing
                      (habitat conversion or loss) of primary or secondary forest under advanced or middle stage of regeneration,
                      according to the Brazilian legislation (potential critical habitats per ESS6). - Adverse impacts on areas that – due to
                      their biodiversity, conservation value, or ecosystem services – are protected by the State or on marine/riverine
                      ecosystems. - Significant adverse impacts on tangible and intangible cultural heritage as well as on community health
                      and safety. - Intentionally introduce new alien species (not currently established in the country or the Project area). b)
                      BB will: i. Designate to act as a focal point for the E&S aspects of the Project and to be responsible for internal
                      coordination and liaison regarding compliance with the actions of this ESCP. ii. Provide and facilitate access by the
                      Bank to relevant documentation, personnel, and subprojects. iii. Provide semi-annual E&S reports to the Bank,
                      summarizing the financed portfolio of subprojects alongside its main findings, metrics, identified risks and challenges
                      etc. iv. Promptly notify the Bank of relevant changes to the ESMS that may materially adversely affect BB’s capacity to
                      screen, identify, classify and monitor the E&S risks of FI subproject and in the aspects of BESF that the Bank considers


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 20 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                      acceptable. These measures and their implementation procedures and tools will be further detailed in the Project´s
                      ESMM.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        In Whole
                       This is a Financial Intermediary operation. As such, it must rely on the FI ESMS as far as it allows the achievement of
                       outcomes that are materially consistent with the objectives and requirements of ESS 9. As part of the due diligence,
                       the task team re-assessed BB’s ESMS and considered that – with a few supplemental measures (incorporated in the
                       Project’s ESCP and to be further detailed in the Project-Specific Environmental and Social Management Manual) it is
                       able to manage the moderate risks associated with potential subprojects in a manner consistent with the ESF.

                       The Project-Specific Exclusion List includes all subprojects that involves land acquisition leading to physical and/or
                       economic displacement, or adverse risks or impacts on Indigenous Peoples, or significant risks or impacts on the
                       environment, community health and safety, labor and working conditions, biodiversity or cultural heritage.




Public Disclosure
                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                   No
                       Component 2 will be financed by a grant from FFO/PROGREEN/German Government. The World Bank's ESF will apply
                       to the whole operation.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Prior to Effectiveness:

                     •       BB will publicly disclose in its website relevant information on the Project (its objectives, scope, area of
                     intervention, criteria of eligibility, potential environmental and social risks) and the negotiated version of the Project’s
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan.
                     •       BB will also finalize the Project-Specific Environmental and Social Management Manual (ESMM) – detailing the
                     processes and procedures through which the material measures incorporated in the ESCP will be operationalized – and
                     submit to the World Bank no objection.
                     •       BB will allow the World Bank, in writing, to disclose the ESMM in its website.

                     During project implementation:


                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 21 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)




                     •        BB will keep the ESMM in its website and operate its Ombudsman Office as the Project’s grievance mechanism.
                     •        BB will screen all subproject proposals against the Project-Specific Exclusion List, assess its E&S risks, classify
                     subprojects according to its own E&S risk system, and monitor their implementation through a due diligence processe
                     proportionate to their E&S risk rating.
                     •        BB will regularly report to the Bank on the E&S risk management performance of the subprojects and promptly
                     on accidents and incidents associated with their direct and contracted workers hired to perform core functions of the
                     project as well as those associated with subprojects that may cause harm to the environment and society.
                     •        BB will also facilitate the World Bank’s due diligence.
                     •        BB must immediately communicate to the Bank on any relevant change in its ESMS (and the country’s
                     regulatory framework) that may adversely affect its capacity to manage the environmental and social risks of the
                     subprojects as well as the measures taken to review and adjust its ESMS in a manner acceptable to the Bank. BB must
                     also communicate to the Bank about all relevant environmental and social incidents and accidents related with the
                     Project in a timely manner and provide information on the root causes of such incidents and accidents and on the
                     measures taken to avoid their reoccurrence.
                     •        The World Bank task team will carry out: a) a prior review of the E&S assessment of (i) the first three
                     subprojects conducted by BB’s environmental and social team and (ii) all subprojects proposed by Indigenous Peoples;
                     and b) carry out biannual implementation support missions (including field visits to a sample of subprojects).




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Werner L. Kornexl                         Title:          Senior Natural Resources
                                                                                                       Management Specialist

                      Email:                 wkornexl@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Marie Caroline Paviot                     Job Title:      Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                 mpaviot@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Gabriel J D Sensenbrenner                 Job Title:      Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                 sensenbrennerg@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 22 of 23
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon And Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, And Climate-smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Werner L. Kornexl, Marie Caroline Paviot, Gabriel J D Sensenbrenner

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Eric Shayer

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa




Public Disclosure




                    Oct 03, 2025                                                                                                 Page 23 of 23
