Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)




                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Project Information Document (PID)


            _For Official Use Only_
                                                       Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01309




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)         Region                        Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                       Santa Catarina Flood
                                                           LATIN AMERICA AND                                           Infrastructure and
                          Brazil                                                         P508221
                                                           CARIBBEAN                                                   Resilience Improvement
                                                                                                                       Project
                          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                           01-Oct-2025                   27-Feb-2026                   Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                      Implementing Agency
                                                           Secretariat for Civil
                          State of Santa Catarina          Defense and Protection




_For Official Use Only_
                                                           (SDC)

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To build resilience to climate related disasters in targeted areas of Santa Catarina and strengthen institutional capacity
                          for disaster risk management in the state

                          Components
                          Building resilience to floods and other disaster risks in select basins of Santa Catarina
                          Investing in early-warning systems and local capacities for resilience
                          Project Management and Institutional Capacity

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                              149.40

                            Total Financing                                                                                                   149.40
                                          of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 119.20


                                                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)



                             Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                                 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                119.20
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                 Counterpart Funding                                                                                           29.80
                                   Borrower/Recipient                                                                                          29.80
                                 Trust Funds                                                                                                    0.40
                                   Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                          0.40




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate




_For Official Use Only_
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          High


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context
                          1. The project will establish critical resilience to floods in key economic hubs in Santa Catarina, while creating the
                             foundation for future investment across the state. The project will implement a series of structural flood mitigation
                             investments in the Itajaí Valley and forecasting and alert system upgrades to improve early warning at state level,
                             while also supporting municipal authorities to identify and implement local nature-based solutions to further bolster
                             local resilience. The project strengthens the State Civil Protection and Defense State Secretariat(SDC), as lead
                             implementer, while also stimulating other partnerships to improve planning and adaptation.

                          2. Brazil is increasingly facing the consequences climate-related disasters. Between 2013 and 2022, more than 34
                             million people were affected, with estimated losses exceeding $70 billion. Unregulated urbanization combined with
                             intensifying climate shocks, disproportionately endangers urban lives and jobs. Lower-income families are often
                             forced to inhabit precarious steep hillsides, riverbanks, and flood plains, because they offer better access to jobs and
                             opportunities. Brazilian states like Santa Catarina are well placed to promote planning for these risks at scale.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)




                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          3. Santa Catarina is a champion of state-led approaches to building climate resilience in Brazil. Its diversified economy
                             is attractive to foreign direct investors and multinational employers, particularly in manufacturing and technology
                             sectors. The state’s outward-looking perspective and robust research ecosystem makes it an ideal hub for
                             disseminating successful models to other regions of Brazil.

                          4. Santa Catarina is one of the most climate-exposed states in Brazil and is expected these events will increase.
                             Between 1991 and 2023, flooding and landslides caused more than $7.2 billion in economic losses, affecting more
                             than 20 million people. The state suffered more economic impacts from flooding and landslides than any other state
                             during this period. In 2008, a major flood affected over 1.5 million people and displaced 120,000. The Bank estimated
                             total costs at $ 1.7 billion. More recently, floods in October 2023 caused a state of emergency in 89 of the state’s
                             295 municipalities. A major flood disaster in the neighboring state of Rio Grande do Sul in May 2024 far exceeded
                             any precipitation event recorded in Brazil. The Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change 6th Assessment Report
                             pointed to increased frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall in southern Brazil. Studies already show evidence
                             of increased extreme rainfall events, peak flows and flash floods




_For Official Use Only_
                          5. The Itajaí valley is the largest and most populated of 10 hydrographic regions in the state . According to the latest
                             census (2022), 1.93 million people live in the valley’s 51 municipalities–a quarter of the state’s population. The region
                             produces around a quarter of state GDP (US$15.5 billion in 2021).

                          6. Around a third of all jobs in Santa Catarina are generated in the Itajaí valley, driven by the port, tourism and
                             construction sectors. Itajaí and Navegantes, two neighboring municipalities at the mouth of the Itajaí-Açu River, are
                             home to the densest urban area in the valley. The strategic importance of the Port of Itajaí drives the region’s
                             economic dynamism. As the second-largest port in Brazil in terms of container throughput, its operations have a
                             direct impact on the competitiveness of both the regional and national productive sectors, including as a major beef
                             export hub, generating $8.3 billion to the economy in 2021.

                          7. Access to jobs is driving fast urban growth in the Itajaí valley, well above national averages. Municipalities recorded
                             an average population increase of 27.4% during 2010-22, compared to just 6.5% nationally, making it one of the
                             fastest-growing regions in the country. Municipalities such as Camboriú (65.3%), Balneário Piçarras (58.8%), Itajaí
                             (44.0%), and Navegantes (42.7%) are emblematic of intensified in-migration flows and urban expansion in coastal
                             regions of Southern Brazil, driven by economic opportunities and quality of life. Rio do Sul, a town at the confluence
                             of two tributaries in the upper valley, saw an 18.4% increase in population between 2010 and 2022, despite almost
                             annual severe flood events. Spiraling housing demand, land speculation and increasing land costs leads to
                             densification and the occupation of at-risk areas. The price of land in Itajaí now ranks amongst the top 10 most
                             expensive in Brazil.

                          8. The Itajaí valley is the most disaster-impacted region, accounting for one in four recorded disasters and half of
                             economic losses. The 2008 floods left Itajaí 90% underwater and caused severe damage to the port. Revenue losses
                             were estimated by the Ports Ministry at $35 million per day, as vessels diverted to neighboring states for several
                             months. The federal government provided funding to repair damages, which took years to rebuild. Ongoing
                             mitigation strategies focus on continued dredging of the port area, much of which is privately managed by the port,


                                                                                                                                                   Page 3



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                              a key stakeholder of upstream flood control measures. Continued job generation and local prosperity in the region
                              will depend on sustainable strategies to adapt to growing flood risks.

                          9. Landslide risks are also a growing concern, particularly in hilly urban peripheries. Landslides account for the highest
                             number of disaster-related fatalities in the state. Despite improvements in flood early warning, landslide monitoring
                             and forecasting capacities remain limited. The Itajaí valley, like the rest of the state, lacks a systematic network of
                             sensors, rainfall thresholds, and community-level alert protocols for landslide-prone zones.

                          10. With rapid urban growth comes challenges to adapt to evolving risks. State and municipal authorities struggle to
                              balance the demands of growth with the need to leave room for the river, and other natural defense barriers.
                              Although good data on risks exists in the form of maps and other tools, that information is not consistently applied
                              to urban planning and land-use regulation, environmental licensing or housing policies. Limited local compliance
                              leads to increased occupation of high-risk areas. Only 2% of municipalities report having a Municipal Risk Reduction
                              Plan (MRRP), despite being a legal obligation, and only half have any local early warning system.

                          11. Although cell broadcast technology is evolving quickly, local preparedness is not always adequate or sufficiently
                              targeted at vulnerable groups. While Santa Catarina has an advanced meteorological network, alerts are only
                              effective if they are received and acted upon locally. In a recent local survey, women perceived lower coping
                              mechanisms and financial security in the event of a disaster, with emergency protocols biased towards men. Many




_For Official Use Only_
                              municipalities lack local monitoring stations and access to real-time data, reducing their ability to respond promptly.
                              The lack of standardized protocols and interoperable platforms complicates collaboration with neighboring states,
                              despite shared climatic patterns and cross-border risks.


                          12. Santa Catarina has been working to mitigate impacts and build institutional capacities to manage these risks.
                              Flood mitigation efforts began in the 1960s, when the first flood control dams were constructed by the federal
                              government. The 2008 floods led to more coordinated planning, with the development of an “Integrated Prevention
                              and Disaster Risk Mitigation Plan for Itajaí Valley. The state has continued in subsequent years to develop integrated
                              resilience planning under the leadership of the State Secretariat of Civil Protection and Defense (SDC).

                          13. SDC operates under a legal mandate as the central coordinating authority for DRM. Its responsibilities encompass
                              flood control infrastructure, monitoring, early warning, and emergency response. SDC works closely with other state
                              agencies—including the Environment Institute (IMA), the State Planning Secretariat (SEPLAN) and the State
                              Infrastructure Secretariat (SIE)—to integrate environmental regulations, planning, and promotion of local DRM.
                              Through its Disaster Management Center (CIGERD), SDC manages a large team of hydrologists, meteorologists,
                              engineers, geologists and community engagement specialists. Schools play a critical role in SDC’s outreach strategy,
                              with well-regarded awareness programs.

                          14. International partnerships have supported SDC’s leadership over many years. The Bank has supported SDC with
                              multiple technical studies over a decade, while the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) supported SDC
                              with a proposed “Masterplan for Flood Risk and Landslides Management for the Itajaí River Basin” (Itajaí
                              Masterplan). This masterplan outlined structural and non-structural measures for flood risk and landslide
                              management, serving as a critical navigation tool for directing adaptation efforts in the Itajaí valley. Under different
                              protection level scenarios, the masterplan proposes solutions that increase upstream retention capacity while also
                              minimizing negative environmental and social impacts and promoting efficient use of water resources. A



                                                                                                                                                   Page 4



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                               recommendation of the Masterplan is to integrate NBS to increase retention capacity, including the use of rice fields
                               to store water.

                           15. Under SDC’s leadership, in 2024 the Santa Catarina Governor announced multi-year $1 billion disaster resilience
                               investment plan. Known as the “Protection and Resilience Taken Seriously Program”, the Program expands the
                               scope of the Itajaí masterplan developed by JICA to i) replicate similar basin-level planning instruments in the whole
                               State; ii) add a focus on municipal capacity building; iii) integrate green, hybrid and non-structural actions to further
                               reduce risks; and (iv) study the implications of climate change.

                           16. The first phase of the Program is already underway with the State’s own resources. This first phase includes a series
                               of mainly “grey” flood control dams and river improvement works, which are no-regret investments for climate
                               change adaptation that will correct a large lag in flood protection for certain highly vulnerable municipalities. Several
                               analytical and institutional gaps will be addressed during project implementation to create an enabling environment
                               for the broader government Program, including dam construction/safety management capacity of the state
                               government, institutional arrangements for sustaining the program over multiple years, effective coordination
                               across sectors (housing and water resource management in particular) and integration of green and hybrid solutions.




_For Official Use Only_
                            C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                            Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                            To reduce the risk of climate related disasters in targeted areas of Santa Catarina and to strengthen institutional
                            capacities to manage those risks.

                            Key Results
                           17. PDO indicators are:
                                a) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (women/youth)
                                b) People benefiting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response (women/youth)
                                c) Number of municipalities with strengthened decision-making capacity for DRM demonstrated by municipal
                                   resilience investment plans under implementation (Number)


                             D. Project Description

                          18. The project is structured in three main components: i) Building resilience to floods and other disaster risks in selected
                              basins of Santa Catarina; ii) Investing in early-warning systems and local capacities for resilience; and iii) Project
                              Management and Institutional Capacity.


                           Component 1: Building resilience to floods and other disaster risks in select basins of Santa Catarina ($127.65M)

                          19. This component focuses on reducing climate-related disaster, in particular floods, impacts through the design, and
                              construction of gray and green infrastructure to mitigate flood risk impacts in priority areas of the Itajaí valley. The
                              component will also seek to establish an institutional and technical basis for DRM investments in other regions of the
                              state.

                                                                                                                                                     Page 5



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                           Sub-component 1.1 Flood risk mitigation in the Itajaí Valley ($122.91 M)

                          20. Structural/Grey Flood Control Measures: This project will finance critical climate resilience infrastructure including
                              hydraulic and flow control infrastructure such as dams, embankments, river training works, water storage areas, flow
                              control gates, among others. This subcomponent will also finance related design studies and environmental and social
                              instruments required to execute works. The project will finance up to four flow control dams and river training works
                              in an existing diversion canal in the city of Itajaí. The latter will include the installation of flood gates and construction
                              of dikes, which will provide critical flood protection for a highly urbanized and commercially important area of Itajaí.
                              The flood gates will protect from upstream peak flows resulting from excessive rainfall, in addition to downstream high
                              tide/surge risks.

                           21. Green and hybrid Infrastructure for Flood Mitigation, Climate Adaptation and Biodiversity Conservation: The project
                               will finance the design and implementation of NBS to complement grey interventions in the Itajaí valley, emphasizing
                               their role in climate adaptation. This will involve financing the necessary studies for design, environmental and social
                               assessments as well as implementation of selected NBS such as temporary retention basins, increased capacity in
                               floodable rice fields, changing land use or productive practices, or linear parks, among others.

                          22. Enhanced knowledge and decision-making tools. The project will support a decision management tool capable of
                              evaluating based on multi-criteria analysis potential DRM solutions (grey, green, and non-structural), with an initial




_For Official Use Only_
                              focus on the Itajaí Valley. Initially, the tool is being conceived as a digital platform for participatory and coordinated
                              decision making. The tool will enable decision makers and other users to visualize and simulate flood mitigation
                              scenarios—such as infrastructure, land use, or improved agricultural practices, among others—and assess their benefits
                              and costs for flood protection, GHG reduction, heat island mitigation, recreation, and biodiversity. The platform will
                              also assist in understanding intra-project linkages, for example between monitoring stations, early warning systems,
                              and dam operations. Through this activity, the project will create institutional capacity for improved decision-making
                              for climate adaptation in the Itajaí valley, to serve as a basis for future scale up in the rest of the state.
                           Sub-component 1.2 Establishing an enabling environment for DRM in selected basins of the state ($4.74 M)
                          23. This subcomponent will finance consulting services including risk assessments, data analysis and visualization
                              services to generate disaster resilience plans at the basin level outside of the Itajaí Valley. These analytical activities
                              will seek to replicate and adapt the Itajaí studies to provide a visual and quantified guide to investment planning,
                              ensuring that climate adaptation strategies are effectively integrated in other areas of the state. The studies will not
                              provide detailed engineering designs or social or environmental studies. Activities will include risk profiles for selected
                              watershed in Santa Catarina, considering local hazards, historical loss and damage data, and socioeconomic
                              characteristics, amongst others.

                          24. The subcomponent will also finance a state-level study to assess the impacts of climate scenarios and make
                              recommendations on further adaptation priorities. The study will analyze potential vulnerabilities across key sectors
                              including water resources, infrastructure, economy, health, agriculture, and food security, and will inform the final
                              versions of the watershed-level studies. Existing partnership with local expert groups and universities will be key for
                              this subcomponent, notably the Federal University of Santa Catarina, which is already supporting SDC in strengthening
                              climate resilience strategies. No loan proceeds will transfer to external partners.


                           Component 2: Investing in early-warning systems and local capacities for resilience ($19.07 M)



                                                                                                                                                       Page 6



                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                           Sub-component 2.1 Promoting analytics, planning, and project preparation for hybrid DRM solutions at the municipal
                           level ($11.57 M including $400k RETF)

                          25. The subcomponent will support municipalities in Itajaí Valley to design and finance local climate adaptation actions,
                              with a focus on nature-based and hybrid solutions. Resources from the RETF1 will finance the creation of a tool to
                              prioritize local adaptation actions, including grey and green solutions, or non-structural actions at municipal level. The
                              RETF will also finance coaching and project structuring guidance for selected municipalities, including identification of
                              PPP opportunities2. Activities to be financed from the loan include broader training and consulting services including
                              risk mapping, environmental studies, hydrological and hydraulic studies, municipal DRM plans, implementation of local
                              adaptation actions, among others.
                           Sub-component 2.2 Strengthening climate monitoring, early warning and local preparedness ($7.5 M)

                          26. This subcomponent will modernize and strengthen Santa Catarina’s climate monitoring, enhance short-term
                              forecasting and improve local action. This subcomponent will finance advanced technologies to enhance climate
                              monitoring, for example, a meteorological radar to complete the coastal monitoring network—currently limited in its
                              ability to detect maritime-influenced rainfall, improving climate resilience. The ground monitoring network will be
                              expanded through the installation of new hydrological and meteorological stations, including rain gauges, river level
                              sensors, and meteorological equipment. All stations installed will be high-availability Automatic Weather Stations




_For Official Use Only_
                              designed for continuous operation with minimal downtime and reliable data transmission.

                          27. A new integrated system for hydrometeorological analysis and forecasting will be developed, hosted by the existing
                              CIGERD emergency center, to support early warning issuance and local-level disaster response. Opportunities for
                              installing new capacities for landslide monitoring and early warning in CIGERD, which is not currently available, will be
                              explored. The project will create an open-data platform to improve public access to climate risk information, including
                              climate risk profiles, hazard maps and instructions for early action. The platform will promote transparency, informed
                              decision-making, and community preparedness through increasing awareness of near-time, seasonal and mid/long
                              range climate forecasts. The project will train women as early warning agents and community leaders in disaster
                              preparation, and to develop and implement awareness campaigns and early warning systems that are gender-sensitive
                              and culturally appropriate.
                           Component 3: Project Management and Institutional Capacity ($ 2.68 M)

                          28. This component will support the overall coordination, implementation, and monitoring of the Santa Catarina Climate
                              Resilience Project. Key activities include establishing a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) within the SDC to
                              oversee project execution and compliance; strengthening inter-agency coordination to facilitate collaboration among
                              municipal, state, and federal stakeholders; implementing a robust monitoring and evaluation framework with key
                              performance indicators to track outcomes and assess effectiveness; conducting capacity-building programs for
                              implementing agencies, including training in fiduciary management, procurement, and technical supervision; and
                              performing periodic independent evaluations to ensure transparency, accountability, and adaptive management. It will
                              also support effective capacity building around key environmental and social standards, notably on dam safety.



                           1 The grant is provided by the GFDRR Japan-World Bank Program for Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Management in Developing Countries for Global

                           Resilience - Phase 3
                           2 IFC, 2024. Nature-Based Solutions in Cities: Solutions and Examples for Municipalities and the Private Sector

                           https://www.ifc.org/content/dam/ifc/doc/2024/nbs-for-cities-solutions-and-examples-for-municipalities-and-private-sector.pdf

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                            Legal Operational Policies                                                              Triggered?
                            Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
                            Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No


                           Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          29. The Project has been classified as High Risk due to the nature, scale, and complexity of the proposed interventions,
                              as well as the sensitivity of the environmental context. It encompasses both structural and non-structural measures
                              aimed at disaster risk reduction and enhancing local flood resilience. Project activities are designed to benefit the
                              community and environment by enhancing preparedness and reducing vulnerability to climate-related risks and
                              minimizing potential disaster impacts. While the implementation of these activities may result in impacts from
                              construction, these are expected to be short-term, localized, and mitigated through procedures standardized by
                              applicable environmental legislation.




_For Official Use Only_
                          30. The Project involves the construction of up to four flood control dams and river improvement works in the Itajaí
                              River Basin. These are large-scale civil works with significant environmental footprints, including vegetation clearance,
                              earthworks, and hydrological alterations. The dams are classified as large under ESS4, with two rated as Risk Class IV –
                              High and two as Risk Class III – Substantial, according to ICOLD Bulletin 72 (as detailed in ESS4 paragraph). Although the
                              project area includes remnants of the Atlantic Forest biome, there is no direct overlap with protected areas.
                              Nonetheless, the ecological sensitivity of the region necessitates robust mitigation and restoration measures. The main
                              environmental impacts identified include: (i) soil degradation and erosion due to vegetation clearance and earthworks;
                              (ii) air and water pollution from particulate emissions, sedimentation, and fuel spills during dredging and construction;
                              (iii) waste generation, including hazardous and construction waste; (iv) hydrological disruptions, altering river flow,
                              aquatic habitats, and fish migration; (v) loss of native vegetation, including Atlantic Forest fragments and riparian zones;
                              (vi) impacts on fauna, affecting two threatened species through habitat loss and disturbance; (vii) aquatic ecosystem
                              changes due to dredging, invasive species, and water quality degradation; and (viii) noise pollution, especially in
                              inhabited areas. Importantly, the Project plans to expropriate areas for temporary flood reservoirs, restore them
                              ecologically, and achieve a net gain in biodiversity in floodplain and riparian ecosystems for long-term environmental
                              sustainability.

                          31. The environmental risks will be mitigated through the implementation of a comprehensive set of programs and
                              measures outlined in the ESMF and ESMPs. Key strategies include erosion and water quality control, recovery of
                              degraded areas, restoration of native vegetation, monitoring of fauna and flora, and proper waste management.
                              Specific measures will be adopted to minimize impacts on sensitive habitats and threatened species, based on
                              biodiversity assessments. Continuous environmental supervision, compliance with licensing conditions, and
                              institutional capacity building are integral to the approach, ensuring that environmental impacts are effectively
                              avoided, minimized, or compensated throughout all phases of the project.

                          32. Furthermore, an Independent Panel of Experts on Dam Safety will be hired, as required by ESS4, to review designs,
                              supervise construction, and ensure adoption of international best practices. An independent consultancy will also be
                              contracted by the SDC, no later than 90 days after the Project Effective Date, to carry out a Cumulative and Synergistic
                              Impact Assessment of the entire flood control system of the Itajaí River Basin, consistent with ESS 1, ensuring an

                                                                                                                                                     Page 8



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                              integrated analysis of the environmental effects of the multiple planned interventions. Additionally, before the start of
                              works, the SDC will hire firm to implement the ESMPs, as well as independent supervision company responsible for
                              monitoring the execution of these programs, evaluating their effectiveness, and ensuring compliance with the
                              established E&S requirements.

                          33. The social risk rating is Substantial. The Project aims to reduce exposure to cyclical floods and the ensuing life and
                              economic losses and it will benefit the most low-income and socially vulnerable rural and urban inhabitants (and among
                              them the women, the children and the elderly) in the Itajaí River Basin. These social groups have been driven by
                              historical socioeconomic trends to occupy at-risk flooding and sloping areas, are increasingly exposed to climate-related
                              disasters and hold the lowest capacity to cope with adversity. The social risk is rated Substantial because many Project-
                              supported activities are expected to lead to: a) Temporary disturbances in the everyday life of nearby communities,
                              due to the traffic of heavy machinery, noise, vibration, dust and temporary project-induced labor influx. b) Potential
                              interference with unknown archeological sites due to earth movement works. c) Land acquisition leading to physical
                              relocation and/or economic losses in rural and urban areas for the construction of flood control dams and their
                              retention lakes, the fluvial improvement works in the Itajaí-Mirim River and its dumping areas and, potentially, the
                              Nature-Based Solutions still to be defined. d) Community exposure to health and safety risks resulting from unexpected
                              and accidental failure or malfunction during the operation phase of the new dams, which, according to early dam safety
                              assessments, could under a worse case scenario require the evacuation downstream communities. Although severity
                              would be high, probability is low given the engineering standards to be applied and dams are single-use for flood




_For Official Use Only_
                              control, remaining open and empty for the majority of the time. e) Furthermore, the construction of flood control dams
                              has faced in the past opposition at one proposed site (municipal government and local communities), who raised
                              concerns related to potential social and environmental impacts and limited local benefits.

                          34. To avoid, minimize or mitigate the social risks, material measures have been agreed with the Borrower and are
                              reflected in the Project’s ESCP and already initiated by the client. The Project will rely on the Borrower’s Environmental
                              and Social Framework (BESF) to protect cultural heritage by implementing both a Cultural Heritage Management Plan
                              and minimize OHS risks. The Borrower is developing a Resettlement Framework that incorporates all objectives and
                              requirements of ESS 5 in the implementation of processes of land acquisition leading to physical relocation and/or
                              economic losses. It is also developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan to ensure that meaningful consultation with
                              affected communities guides the preparation and implementation of the works that will be contracted using the
                              “design and build” method. Finally, the risks associated with dam safety and labor influx on community health and
                              safety will be addressed through: a) compliance with high construction standards on the design and construction of the
                              new dams as advised by a Dam Safety Panel of Experts and implementation of Dam Safety Plans consistent with the
                              requirements set in ESS 4; and b) the tapping of local labor force giving priority for hiring local residents to fill available
                              positions and the enforcement of proper behavioral standards to prevent SEA/SH incidents.


                            E. Implementation

                           35. The SDC will host the PMU and will be responsible for the general coordination and implementation of the project.
                               This will be achieved through the involvement of both existing staff and a Project Management Unit (PMU) of staff
                               exclusively contracted to support project management. The PMU will be responsible for the overall planning,
                               technical, operational, financial, and administrative management of the program. Additionally, this group will
                               oversee institutional coordination, monitoring, and evaluation of project activities.




                                                                                                                                                        Page 9



                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                          36. SDC PMU will coordinate closely with the Executive Administration Secretariat (SEA) and the Infrastructure
                              Secretariat for procurement under the project. While the PMU will be responsible for technical aspects of
                              contracting documents, including consultancy TORs, technical specifications of works, evaluation of proposals, and
                              contract negotiation, external stages of procurement — including the preparation of bidding documents — will be
                              carried out by SEA (goods and consulting services) or by SIE (works). All contracts will be signed and monitored by
                              SDC.

                          37. SEPLAN will be responsible for monitoring project progress and providing technical inputs on territorial planning
                              and sector policy engagement. Through its Project Management Office, SEPLAN will monitor disbursements, support
                              the structuring of sectoral support teams, promote capacity building and tools for effective project management,
                              and ensure effective institutional collaboration. SEPLAN also plays a key role in promoting NBS through analytical
                              and technical initiatives and will partner with SDC to implement RETF financed activities under Component 2.1.

                          38. SEF is responsible for providing the state budget, including counterpart funds and allocations for the disbursement
                              of loan proceeds, as established by State Decree No. 385 (2019). Debt management and payments will be the
                              responsibility of the Public Debt Management Office, which is linked to the State Treasury Directorate. SEF will
                              oversee disbursement, assess contractual and financial regulation compliance, and other cashflow aspects.

                          39. To strengthen project governance, an Advisory Committee will be established. The committee will incorporate all




_For Official Use Only_
                              relevant heads of secretariats to help align the project with cross-government priorities. The committee will facilitate
                              coordination among entities, propose activity adjustments aligned with the project and Loan Agreement. Clear
                              institutional arrangements (such as MoU or TOR) will be established to define roles and responsibilities of each
                              member of the committee.



                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Jack Campbell
                             Lead Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                             Maria Catalina Ramirez
                             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            State of Santa Catarina

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Secretariat for Civil Defense and Protection (SDC)

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT



                                                                                                                                                  Page 10



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Improvement Project (P508221)


                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Jack Campbell, Maria Catalina Ramirez

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Federica Ranghieri                      24-Jun-2025

                          Country Director:                       Jorge A. Coarasa                        28-Oct-2025




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                               Page 11



                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
