Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 11/15/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04603




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 24, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508094                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)     PICP                         2026

                     Operation Name            Punjab Inclusive Cities Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                  SOUTH ASIA                   Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                      Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Islamic Republic of       Local Government and Community            21-Apr-2025                  27-Aug-2025
                     Pakistan                  Development Department,
                                               Government of Punjab

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     05-Nov-2024               480,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Program Development Objective is to provide inclusive and sustainable WASH services in selected cities of Punjab.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed PforR Program will support a subset of the GoPunjab’s program in selected cities focusing on three result
                     areas: (i) climate resilient infrastructure and service delivery improvements; (ii) revenue enhancement; and (iii)
                     institutional strengthening. Infrastructure investments through Program funds will include: (i) integrated water supply
                     networks; (ii) sewerage networks and wastewater treatment facilities; (iii) stormwater drainage networks, nature-based
                     solutions for flood control, and storage facilities; and (iv) piloting SWM infrastructure for material recovery and sanitary
                     disposal. The IPF Component will assist GoPunjab to further develop its sector policy, strategy, and programs;



                    Jan 24, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     strengthen its institutions and systems; and provide technical support to key provincial departments and urban agencies
                     to deliver on Program targets and Program-related technical, fiduciary, social and environment management aspects.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     In terms of geographical areas, Punjab is Pakistan's second largest province having an area of 205,344 km2. It is located
                     at 31.17° N and 72.70° E, at the north-western edge of the geologic Indian plate in South Asia. Extensive Piedmont
                     Plains have developed between the Indus River and the Suleiman-Kirthar mountains. These plains are dominated by
                     alluvial fans. The Potowar Plateau typically consists of dry, sparsely vegetated plains intersected by streams and rivers
                     that cut valleys and gorges into the sandstone, siltstone, and shale. The lower slopes of the hilly areas are covered with
                     forests that supply valuable timber. Generally, no high-biodiversity settings have been identified within Punjab's
                     intermediate cities and the biodiversity hotspots are not as prominent as in some other regions of the country, but they
                     still hold important ecological and conservation value. The most notable areas near these cities include the riverine
                     ecosystems of the Indus River, which support significant biodiversity including freshwater fish, amphibians, and riparian
                     flora. Punjab’s scrub forests and plains provide habitat for species such as the Punjab Urial and various migratory birds
                     that depend on these habitats for breeding and feeding. However, overgrazing, deforestation, and urban expansion
                     pose serious threats to biodiversity in these regions.
                     The social dynamics in Punjab’s cities are diverse, with various ethnic groups and minorities. Punjabis are the largest
                     ethnic group in the province. Social organization in Punjab's intermediate cities is strongly based on the Biradari
                     (brotherhood) system. majority of the population in intermediate cities is Muslim, with a small percentage of Christians
                     and other minorities. Community conflicts, both political and social, are typically resolved through reconciliation



Public Disclosure
                     meetings led by family heads or village notables, including Union Council Nazim and Naib Nazim.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The institutional arrangements proposed under the Program rely on Local Government and Community Development
                     Department (LG&CDD), with the assistance from the Punjab Municipal Development Fund Company (PMDFC), to have
                     the overall responsibility for the Program, including the activities under the IPF Window. PMDFC will provide technical
                     assistance support to the participating urban agencies and house the requisite technical specialists and systems for
                     overall management, coordination, and reporting, monitoring, and evaluation (RME). It will provide technical and
                     capacity building support to the beneficiary urban agencies (selected ULGs and WMCs) to achieve sub-program results
                     and implement institution-strengthening interventions, including procurement of consultancies under the IPF window
                     to develop and operationalize the requisite systems for transparency and accountability. The urban agencies will be
                     responsible for implementing the WASH investments. Other provincial departments including the Excise and Taxation
                     Department (E&TD) will also receive support from the IPF technical assistance window for specified activities.
                     The current arrangements under PMDFC, to address the E&S risks for PCP, which include Senior E&S Specialists housed
                     as part of the Central Program Management Team (CPMT), supplemented by E&S Officers in Regional Management
                     Teams (RMTs), will be followed for PICP as well, who will be further supported by E&S Interns. The details of these
                     arrangements including assessment for need of augmentation with additional staff, will be finalized during the program
                     preparation.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS




                    Jan 24, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The IPF Window of the Program is designed to support the preparation of engineering designs and technical support
                     along with development of strategies, policies and capacity building to key provincial departments and urban
                     agencies translating into Type 2 and 3 Technical Assistance (TA). Notably, the conduction of E&S assessments for
                     management of overall E&S risks and impacts will also be supported through this Window. The TA component is
                     expected to have positive environmental impacts by improving water access, reducing reliance on unsustainable
                     sources and supporting urban growth. Upgraded wastewater systems protect freshwater sources and ecosystems,
                     lowering waterborne disease risks. Solid waste management TA investments can lead to downstream reduction of
                     landfills, pollution, and greenhouse gas emissions while promoting recycling. Policy reforms and e-governance
                     strengthen environmental monitoring and enforcement. While the TA per se has Low risk, the downstream
                     investments that will be prepared vis-a’-vis the design and implementation of substantial scale infrastructure of water
                     pipes, sewers, drainage systems, pilot landfills site, can result in significant environmental risks and impacts.
                                                                                                                                  Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social Risk Rating is also assessed as Substantial. The TA can have considerable social benefits by supporting the
                     design of climate-resilient infrastructure, revenue enhancement, and institutional strengthening and can materialize
                     by better access to essential services, improved governance, and enhanced urban resilience, particularly for
                     vulnerable communities. The social impacts may include loss of land and land-based assets and impact on livelihoods
                     due to land acquisition. Furthermore, effective stakeholder engagement is imperative, especially in the formulation of



Public Disclosure
                     policies, procedures and guidelines in order to ensure sustainable planning and development of urban infrastructure
                     and services, catering to the needs of the community. Likewise, exclusion of vulnerable segments of community due
                     to inadequate consultation and impacts in livelihoods of waste pickers in particular, may lead to urban development
                     which precludes the needs of the marginalized segments of the community. Whilst the support of TA for digitization
                     can result in reduction of corrupt practices, the new tools need to be responsive and accessible.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      The project is expected to support Type 2 and 3 TAs. Proposed activities under the IPF include preparation of
                      engineering design & E&S risk management instruments of potential waste treatment, disposal investments & one
                      small/medium sanitary landfill. Downstream impact related to the implementation of TA could generate adverse E&S
                      risks and impacts such as risk of contamination of soil & water, disposal of hazardous waste, potential impacts on
                      local/vulnerable individuals in waste management/associated services (local garbage collectors, waste pickers.) who
                      may be affected by proposed improvements, exclusion of certain vulnerable groups in consultation processes & their
                      lack of access to project benefits, resource efficiency & pollution prevention/management, sensitive habitat
                      fragmentation & land use change. TORs and E&S instruments prepared under TA will be reviewed and cleared by the
                      Bank. The Bank will supervise if implementation of downstream activities is financed by the Bank.


                    Jan 24, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The project will prepare a Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP), delineating the mapping of all relevant stakeholders
                      including but not limited to: i) project affected parties such as local communities and authorities, farmers,
                      pastoralists, Urban Local Governments (ULGs), LG&CD, PMDFC, E&TD and related Waste Management Company; ii)
                      interested parties such as academia, CSOs, NGOs, Climate Change Ministry, Planning and Development Department;
                      as well as iii) the disadvantage and vulnerable groups including minorities, residents of Katchi Abadis, transgender
                      persons. Given the nature of the TA activities, the program will ensure that the relevant stakeholders are consulted
                      upon early on and their inputs will be reflected as part of the project development process, within a timeframe that
                      enables meaningful consultations with stakeholders. The GM will build on existing systems developed under PCP and
                      will include provisions to deal with SEA/SH.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      TA window involves multiple agencies, with dedicated teams who would be associated with the subject program
                      activities. These would include Government and contracted workers, wherein, ESS2 will require ensuring fair
                      treatment, non-discrimination, and equal opportunity for all workers. This will involve provision of clear and
                      reasonable contracts outlining workers' rights and obligations and the establishment of a GRM for all workers to raise
                      workplace concerns without fear of retaliation. Labor Management Procedures (LMP) embedded will be developed
                      and implemented, outlining the management of labor issues, including recruitment, working conditions, and worker
                      rights, while ensuring compliance with national labor laws and regulations. Gap analysis will be carried out during the
                      preparation phase to identify the areas to be focused more on, during LMP preparation.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The requirements of this standard will be integrated into the Terms of References (ToRs) and design of the
                      investments. The TORs of the feasibility, technical and engineering studies will be reviewed, to ensure principles of
                      resource efficiency, pollution minimization and emissions generation, in accordance with the principles of mitigation
                      hierarchy, are adequately covered/reflected. The proposed measured will have to be viable in terms of commercially
                      available skills, equipment, and materials, while taking into consideration prevailing local factors such as climate,
                      geography, demography, infrastructure, capacity, and operational reliability and as relevant and appropriate to the
                      nature of the risks and impacts. These measures will be covered in the ESIAs/ESMPs and other related instruments,
                      prepared under the IPF Window.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      The key considerations related to CHS will include assessment of long-term implications on community health and
                      safety of waste management and sewage treatment areas. Considerations on the safety of services should also be
                      assessed. TORs prepared for the E&S assessment will be reviewed to ensure that these include inputs on CHS aspects.
                      More information will be included in appraisal ESRS when details become available.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      Though technical assistance itself will involve studies, designs, and policy recommendations rather than direct
                      implementation, the outcomes of the TA (i.e., infrastructure projects and urban development) may have impacts


                    Jan 24, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                      related to land acquisition and resettlement. Thus, impacts may include loss of land and land-based assets (land,
                      trees, crops, structures and others) and loss of income and livelihood disturbance due to involuntary land acquisition.
                      The technical assistance stage will have to anticipate the potential impacts of the future infrastructure projects to be
                      supported under this Program. The ToRs of these studies will be reviewed in a manner proportionate to the nature
                      and risks of the proposed activities under the Program, to anticipate the risks and develop appropriate risk
                      management instruments during the TA phase so as to guide the future project activities.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      Even though technical assistance itself will typically involve studies, designs, and policy recommendations rather than
                      direct implementation, the outcomes of the TA (i.e., infrastructure projects and urban development) may have
                      significant effects on biodiversity and natural resources. Thus, risks associated with the technical assistance stage will
                      have to anticipate the potential impacts of the future infrastructure projects to be supported under this Program. The
                      ToRs of these studies will be screened in a manner proportionate to the nature and risks of the proposed activities
                      under the Program, to anticipate the risks to ecosystems and develop appropriate mitigation strategies during the TA
                      phase so as to guide the future project activities. The environmental screening processes will include local
                      environmental assessments that account for Punjab’s specific ecosystems including exclusion of natural and critical
                      habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities



Public Disclosure
                      There are no known Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Undeserved Traditional Local Communities
                      in the project area.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant

                      The TA does not anticipate potential impacts on known cultural heritage. However, the downstream program
                      activities might involve excavation during expected investments phases. This may require preparation of Chance Find
                      Procedures. A more detailed assessment will be included in A-ESRS when more information on TA activities becomes
                      available.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      There are no FIs involved in the Porgram TA.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features



                    Jan 24, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                      TBD
                       Borrower Framework (BF)/Country Systems (CS) will be used to assess and manage the risks of the Program/PforR.
                       TORs for the assessments and designs supported under the IPF Component will address the gaps in BF/CS identified in
                       the ESSA.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                           No
                       Common approach is not being considered at this stage.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The Borrower will complete the following E&S analyses by appraisal:
                     i.     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     ii.    Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     iii.   Labor Management Procedures (LMP) embedded in the ESCP


                     III. CONTACT POINT




Public Disclosure
                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Amena Raja                             Title:        Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  araja1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Carlo Alberto Amadei                   Job Title:    Water Specialist

                      Email:                  camadei@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                       Amena Raja, Carlo Alberto Amadei

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                              Nida Asif

                    Jan 24, 2025                                                                                                 Page 7 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (P508094)



                     V. APPROVAL

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Imran-ul Haq




Public Disclosure




                    Jan 24, 2025                                                         Page 8 of 8
