Public Disclosure Authorized
                               ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1


                                                                                               RoA MINISTY OF TERRITORIAL
                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE




                               WATER AND IRRIGATION SERVICES ENHANCEMENT
                                           PROGRAM (P508124)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                      PHASE 1 OF THE MULTI-PHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          ENVIRONMENTAL AND
                                          SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
                                              FRAMEWORK


Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            1
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1




           ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK



                                               FOR THE


    WATER AND IRRIGATION SERVICES ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM PHASE 1



                                            PREPARED BY


      Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure of Armenia




                                  DRAFT (For Consultations)
                                            March 2025




                                                                             2
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACRONYMS                                                                                              1

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                     1

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION                                                                               6
  1.1 PROJECT DESCRIPTION                                                                             6
    Component 1:                                                                                      7
  1.2 ESMF RATIONALE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE                                                           11
  1.3 DISCLOSURE AND STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS                                                       12

CHAPTER 2. LEGAL, POLICY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                                                    13
  2.1 REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA’S LEGAL FRAMEWORK                                                          13
  2.2 WORLD BANK’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL STANDARDS                                                17
  2.3 REGULATORY GAP ANALYSIS                                                                        18

CHAPTER 3. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISK ASSESSMENTS                                                 27
  3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE                                                              27
  3.2 POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF THE ACTIVITIES                                               28
    3.2.1 Environmental and Social Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures (Construction Phase)       29
    3.2.2 Environmental and Social Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures (Operation and Maintenance
    Phase)                                                                                            36

CHAPTER 4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PROCESSES                                             40
  4.1 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT APPROACH                                                   40
    4.1.1 Integrating Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety into Technical Assistance            41
    4.1.2 Environmental and Social Screening of Subprojects                                          41
    4.1.3 Management of Environment and Social Risks and Impacts for Associated Facilities           48

CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT                        49
  5.1 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT                                                                      49
    5.1.1 Project Coordination Team                                                                  49
    5.1.2 Technical Supervision Consultants                                                          50
    5.1.3 Design and Construction Contractors                                                        50
    5.1.4 Supervising Agencies                                                                       50
    5.1.5 The World Bank                                                                             52

CHAPTER 6. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT, INFORMATION DISCLOSURE AND GRIEVANCE MANAGEMENT 53
  6.1 PUBLIC CONSULTATION                                                                            53
  6.2 OUTREACH TO COMMUNITY AND VULNERABLE GROUPS                                                    54
  6.3 INFORMATION DISCLOSURE                                                                         54
  6.4 FEEDBACK AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM                                                       54

CHAPTER 7. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING                                   56

CHAPTER 8. BUDGET AND COST OF IMPLEMENTING ESMF                                                      57

                                                                                                      3
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

LIST OF ANNEXES                                                             58
  ANNEX 1. EXCLUSION LIST                                                   59
  ANNEX 2. PROJECT-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL AND MONITORING TEMPLATE              60
  ANNEX 3. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING FORM                          63
  ANNEX 4. OUTLINE OF ESIA REPORT                                           69
  ANNEX 6. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL CODES OF PRACTICES                      82
  ANNEX 7. ASBESTOS MANAGEMENT GUIDANCE                                     89




                                                                            4
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1



ACRONYMS
 ACM                             Asbestos containing materials
 AFD                             Agence Francaise de Developement
 BoQ                             Bills of Quantities
 BMP                             Biodiversity Management Plan
 DED                             Detailed Engineering Design
 DPM                             Deputy Prime Minister
 ESCP                            Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
 EMIB                            Environmental and Mining Inspection Body
 ESCOP                           Code of Environmental and Social Practice
 ESF                             Environmental and Social Framework
 ESHS                            Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety
 ESIA                            Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
 ESMP                            Environmental and Social Management Plan
 ESS                             Environmental and Social Standard
 EU                              European Union
 FGRM                            Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
 FS                              Feasibility Study
 GoA                             Government of Armenia
 GRC                             Grievance Redress Committee
 H&S                             Health and Safety
 HLIB                            Health and Labor Inspection Body
 HMC                             Hydrometeorology and Monitoring Center
 IA                              Implementation Agency
 IBRD                            International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
 ILCS                            Integrated Living Conditions Survey
 ILO                             International Labor Organization
 IPF                             Investment Project Financing
 IS                              Irrigation Schemes
 KPI                             Key Performance Indicators
 LMP                             Labor Management Procedures
 LSGB                            Local Self-governance Bodies
 MoE                             Ministry of Environment
 MoESCS                          Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sports
 MSIP                            Management Strategies and Implementation Plans
 MTAI                            Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructures
 OHS                             Occupational Health and Safety
 PCT                             Project Coordination Team
 PDO                             Project Development Objective
 PEA                             Project Execution Agency
 POM                             Project Operations Manual
 RF                              Resettlement Framework
 RoA                             Republic of Armenia
 SEP                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan
 SNCO                            State Non-Commercial Organization
 TA                              Technical Assistance
 ToR                             Terms of Reference

                                                                                              1
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 WB                              World Bank
 WBG                             World Bank Group
 WC                              Water Committee
 WSA                             Water Supply Agency
 WSS                             Water Supply and Sanitation
 WMP                             Waste Management Plan
 WUA                             Water User Association




                                                                            2
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I.      Project Context
Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program Phase 1 (or hereafter “the WISE Project”, or “the
Project”) aims to enhance the sustainability and reliability of water service delivery by modernizing
irrigation and Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) infrastructure, strengthening policy and institutional
frameworks, and improving climate forecasting and management capacity. It focuses on five key
areas: (i) expanding irrigated areas through rehabilitation and modernization, with a focus on reducing
energy consumption in pumped irrigation; (ii) expanding access to safely managed water supply by
improving water systems in unserved rural settlements; (iii) developing a comprehensive National
Water Strategy, Standalone Irrigation and WSS strategies, National Irrigation Master Plan and a tariff
reform program; (iv) strengthening water sector agencies and Water User Associations (WUAs)
through capacity-building, financial sustainability measures, and technological upgrades; and (v) data
collection and investment planning for WSS in unserved areas.


II. ESMF Approaches, Rationale, Objectives and Scope
A framework approach has been adopted, as decisions on specific investments, their detailed
technical designs, and site locations will be made during project implementation. Therefore, the
project will utilize framework instruments to guide the necessary assessments and the preparation of
site-specific environmental and social management plans (ESMPs).
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) applies to all project components
(refer to 1.3) and outlines the necessary requirements to comply with the environmental and social
(E&S) laws and regulations of the Republic of Armenia (RoA), as well as the World Bank’s (WB)
Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) and the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Environmental, Health,
and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs).
The ESMF establishes principles, rules, guidelines, and procedures for assessing the E&S    risks and
impacts of each type of anticipated project investment, including screening criteria for proposed
activities. It provides a framework for generic mitigation measures to be undertaken at all stages—
from identification and selection through design and implementation to monitoring and evaluation of
results.
Additionally, the ESMF outlines the responsibilities of agencies tasked with addressing project risks
and impacts, including an assessment of their capacity to manage E&S risks effectively. It also includes
templates to facilitate the preparation of management tools as required by established procedures.


 III.     Project Description
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide improved access to efficient and financially
sustainable irrigation and rural WSS services in selected areas of Armenia. The project is part of a 10-
year Multi-phase Development Approach (MPA) that aims to improve the delivery of irrigation and
rural WSS services across Armenia. Phase 1 is designed to enhance climate-resilient irrigation and WSS
services. It will equip six Water User WUAs with modern irrigation systems and enhance irrigation
service efficiency through upgrades to primary, secondary and tertiary networks in selected schemes
to boost climate resilience towards drought, floods and extreme heat. Phase 1 will also improve access
to sustainable WSS services by developing rural WSS investment plans and upgrading water supply
infrastructure. It will also prepare FSs, designs, and bidding documents for Phase 2 investments.

                                                                                                      1
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

Further, Phase 1 will also include Performance-based Conditions (PBCs) to support policy, legal and
institutional reforms as well as a learning program that documents insights to guide implementation
through research, data analysis and policy development. The project implementation period of Phase
1 will be six years.
Phase 1 of the project includes four components, including one component with PBCs, as follows:
   a. Component 1. Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening (US$20M) supports
        MTAI and the Water Committee (WC) in key priority areas, including the development of
        national strategies for water, irrigation, and rural drinking water and sanitation; revision of
        irrigation tariffs based on land use and water consumption; establishment of an Asset
        Maintenance Fund and Plan for modernized irrigation schemes (IS); creation of Rural WSS
        units with defined agreements, performance indicators, and monitoring systems; and the
        launch of a National Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center (IWAAC) to enhance
        water management and adaptation efforts.) with PBCs. This component will also include two
        PBCs that seek to support institutional capacity building within MTAI, WC and WUAs.
    b. Component 2. Rural WSS Enhancement (US$30M) will focus on providing improved access to
       efficient and financially sustainable rural WSS services in selected areas of Armenia. This
       includes a combination of institutional strengthening, capacity building as well as regulatory
       reforms, FS and infrastructure assessments. This subcomponent will support FSs and detailed
       engineering designs (DEDs) for high-priority WSS investments to enhance resilience against
       climate-induced droughts, floods, and extreme heat under both phases of the MPA. Based on
       an agreed investment plan with the Government of Armenia (GoA), it will implement ‘no-
       regret’ infrastructure and service improvements in the most critical unserved settlements,
       considering technical, economic, socio-political, and institutional factors.
    c. Component 3. Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management (US$119M) will
       finance rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation systems at main, secondary,
       and tertiary canal levels currently managed jointly by WSA at the large main canal and
       reservoirs level and by WUAs at the secondary and tertiary distributary level. The total
       command area of the irrigation systems under consideration is about 39,580 ha which will be
       selected based on hydrological, technical, economic, and agricultural parameters, under a
       Framework Approach1. Similarly, for Phase 2 a total of additional 4 ISs were short-listed for
       consideration under this phase.
    d. Component 4: Project Management (US$6M). An interim WISE Project Coordination Team
       (PCT) will be housed within the WC and will assume primary responsibility for project
       implementation, including implementation of civil works and related procurement and
       financial management (FM), compliance with agreed E&S management measures, and project
       monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This component will finance staff costs; coordination of the
       project-financed activities with other ongoing International Financial Institution (IFI) projects
       in the water sector; design, implementation, and reporting of baseline and project completion
       surveys; and the preparation of assessment studies (e.g., pre-feasibility and FSs), DEDs, and




1 This is an indicative number based on the assumption that all short-listed schemes will qualify for project

investment upon completion of the preliminary and detailed design studies. This number is considered as a ‘high
scenario’ and the final project areas may be reduced after selection of I&D schemes for the project rehabilitation
program, which also has implications for the total beneficiaries under the project.

                                                                                                                2
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

        construction supervision. The component will also include capacity building support for the
        PCT, including citizen engagement training skills for the staff of the PCT.

IV.    Project Financing
The Project will finance four components for the total cost of US$175M (out of which US$80M is
proposed to be financed by IBRD, US$70M by AFD, US$20M by GoA, and US$5M will be an EU grant
(via AFD)). Project implementation will be six years.


V.    Potential Environmental and Social Impacts of the Activities
The overall E&S risk is assessed as substantial for both environment and social. While the Project is
envisaged to result in positive E&S outcomes through institutional strengthening of key agencies, as
well as improved sustainability, resilience, and quality of water supply and services in Armenia, there
could be residual impacts due to the quality of project implementation and institutional capacity for
risk management, particularly during the initial stage of the project implementation. Potential impacts
that typically result from medium-scale rehabilitation and/or construction works include generation
of construction and organic wastes, dusts and noise pollution, land acquisition and restrictions on land
use, occupational and community H&S for workers and host communities associated with
construction activities. Dam safety requirements will be assessed prior to appraisal considering
potential construction of small-scale regulating reservoirs.
Social risks may arise from inadequate stakeholder engagement, excluding vulnerable groups from
project benefits, policy decisions, and capacity-building opportunities in the water sector. Inequitable
access to water resources, whether real or perceived, could lead to conflicts and community tensions.
Tariff reforms may further exacerbate these issues by creating perceptions of unfair benefits or
financial burdens, particularly for poor and vulnerable populations facing reduced access to water
services. SEA/SH rating is assessed as moderate primarily associated with small- to medium-scale
construction activities and labor mobilization and the project's potential operations in rural settings.
Negative impacts, typical for medium-scale civil works under the project include generation of inert
construction, hazardous, and organic waste (e.g., from vegetation clearing in existing WSSs and ISs),
noise, dust, sedimentation, Occupational and Community H&S risks due to vehicle/machinery
movement. These impacts are expected to be low to medium in magnitude, temporary, and revisable.
Project activities are not expected to affect any known historical/cultural monuments and intangible
cultural; ESS8 is considered relevant as a pre-cautionary measure for potential chance finds of physical
cultural heritage. No impacts on intangible cultural heritage are envisaged.
Operation of irrigation and WSSs systems will improve quality of life for rural communities and reduce
likelihood of water-borne disease outbreaks, but it may pose E&S risks, primarily due to: (i) increased
nutrient and pollutant concentrations at discharge points, which can degrade surface and
groundwater quality in natural aquifers; and (ii) increased water uptake from surface or groundwater
sources, which may cause environmental impacts, including competition for water use, resulting in
moderate to substantial long-term consequences on ecosystem balance, depending on the source and
volume of water extracted. Additionally, intensified agriculture may cause soil and water pollution
from agrochemical misuse.
The roll out of specific interventions contemplated in the future National Water Strategy, the National
Irrigation Strategy, and the National WSS Strategy to be developed under Subcomponent 1.1 could
have potential adverse implications if not properly assessed. These could include: i) disruption of
water balance and alteration of ecosystems and habitats; ii) pollution from insufficiently treated
wastewater near discharge points; iii) lack of resilience in the irrigation sector to climate change
                                                                                                      3
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

impacts. The medium and long-term E&S outcomes will depend on how effectively these risks are
addressed during the development of the strategies and managed by the preparation of a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) in line with ToR to be developed as per the
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


VI.    Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
E&S risk screening will be conducted to determine the level of assessment and planning required for
the sub-project proportionate to the significance of associated risks and potential impacts. E&S risk
screening is a two-step process that begins with screening against the exclusion criteria followed by
screening of site-specific risks.
The latter will take into account i) the type, location, sensitivity and scale of the sub-project activities
being proposed; ii) the nature and magnitude of the potential E&S risks and impacts; iii) the capacity
of the responsible implementing entities to manage such risks and impacts in a manner consistent
with the ESSs; and iv) other areas of risk that may be relevant to the delivery of E&S mitigation
measures and outcomes, depending on the specific sub-project and the context in which it is being
prepared.
A site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), along with an ESMP, will be
required for subprojects classified as substantial risk to address potential risks and impacts and/or
comply with national environmental permitting laws. For moderate-risk subprojects, a stand-alone
ESMP will be prepared unless a specific activity presents distinct E&S risks that necessitate an ESIA. A
Code of Environmental and Social Practice (ESCOP) will be adopted for low-risk and some moderate-
risk subprojects, unless renovation and/or rehabilitation activities pose specific E&S risks that require
a site-specific ESMP.
The project’s activities will be guided by a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), ensuring meaningful
stakeholder engagement, public consultations, information disclosure, and grievance management.
The SEP will integrate feedback from stakeholders, with a particular focus on project-impacted people
and vulnerable groups, incorporating their inputs into technical solutions, project designs, and site-
specific ESMPs.
The management of land acquisition and its associated livelihood impacts will be guided by a
Resettlement Framework (RF), a standalone document closely linked to the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). Likewise, labor and working conditions will be governed by the
Labor Management Procedures (LMP), another standalone document that remains aligned with the
ESMF.


VII.   Project Implementation Arrangement

Overall responsibilities for the project implementation will be located within the Ministry of Territorial
Administration and Infrastructures (MTAI) and the WC. Day-to-day implementation will be supported
by the PCT within the WC. Implementation of Components 1 - 3 will be conducted through the MTAI.
A project Steering Committee will be established at the level of the Deputy Prime Minister’s (DPM)
office to oversee and monitor the overall progress of the project. The project director will likely report
directly to the Steering Committee. The development of the National Water Strategy, the National
Irrigation Strategy, and the National WSS Strategy will be carried out under the leadership of the
DPM’s office and executed by the MTAI’s and the WC with close involvement of all stakeholders
engaged in the water sector in Armenia, as well as other entities involved in water sector development

                                                                                                          4
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

The PCT will be responsible for identifying subproject interventions for each component, developing
bidding documents, procuring consultancy services and subproject designs. The PCT will ensure LMP
are integrated into the bidding documents/ works contracts. Additionally, it will manage the
procurement of civil works and ensure technical supervision.
The PCT’s E&S specialists will ensure project implementation is in consistency with all relevant E&S
requirements. These requirements include adoption and implementation of framework E&S
management instruments as well as development and application of site-specific environmental and
social management tools, oversight on E&S performance, and reporting on the E&S impacts and
outcomes of the project. The E&S Specialists will ensure that the Bills of Quantities (BoQ) for the
designs of subprojects under Components 2 and 3 include Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety
(ESHS) provisions and that the technical proposals submitted by bidders include a budget line for ESHS
implementation. The E&S Specialists will also contribute to the development of the ToR for the TA,
ensuring that ESMF requirements are incorporated.
The E&S Specialists of the PCT will also carry out supervisory visits to the construction sites of
subprojects under Components 2 and 3 to ensure that the implemented works comply with the
requirements outlined in the ESMPs and ESCOP.




                                                                                                    5
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
 The Water and Irrigation Services (WISE) Project is Phase 1 of a 10-year Multi-phase Programmatic
Approach Program that is currently being developed to improve the delivery and rural WSS services
across Armenia. The program is integral to supporting the government's vision to address the
following ten priority areas of investment for responding to critical challenges in the country’s water
sector, as laid out by the Prime Minister in May 2024: (i) lack of adequate drinking water supplies to
500+ rural settlements; (ii) low water storage availability; (iii) poor financial sustainability of the water
sector; (iv) poor ecological quality of water bodies and limited coverage and efficiency of WWTPs; (v)
high water losses in agriculture due to deteriorated irrigation systems; (vi) diminishing Lake Sevan
water quantity and quality; (vii) high depletion and poor water quality of the Ararat Artesian Basin
(AAB) groundwater aquifer; (viii) low water use efficiency in most irrigated systems,; (ix) limited water
use monitoring and no water balance; and (x) high energy consumption and high costs to operate
most irrigation infrastructure. The MPA is expected to run over a 10-year period.
Phase 1 (US$175 million, of which US$80 million will be provided by IBRD, US$20 million by GOA, and
$75 million from AFD) will enhance climate-resilient irrigation and WSS services. It will equip six WUAs
with modern irrigation systems and enhance irrigation service efficiency through upgrades to primary,
secondary, and tertiary networks in selected schemes to boost climate resilience towards drought,
floods and extreme heat. It will also prepare FSs, designs, and bidding documents for Phase 2
investments. To improve efficiency and operational financial sustainability, the project will strengthen
the WSA by establishing a modern asset management system and creating the Irrigation Water
Accounting and Adaptation Center (IWAAC) for water and climate monitoring that will support climate
adaptation planning and subsequent decision making, including for emergency response plans in the
event of a climate disaster. Phase 1 will improve access to sustainable rural WSS services by developing
rural WSS investment plans and upgrading water supply infrastructure that will incorporate
engineering design principles from the Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief in a limited number
of settlements, alongside piloting the identified water supply service option. It will also lay the
groundwork for Phase 2 by preparing FSs and scaling up service deliver to boost the climate resilience
of WSS services. Financial sustainability will be enhanced through institutional strengthening and
drinking water tariff reforms to ensure cost recovery and affordability. Additionally, a Performance
Based Condition (PBC) Component will support policy, legal, and institutional reforms, while a learning
program will document insights to guide implementation through research, data analysis, and policy
development.
The overall E&S risk for this project is assessed as substantial for both E&S aspects. The classification
considers potential residual impacts due to the quality of project implementation, including designs,
and institutional capacity for risk management, particularly during the initial stage of the project
implementation. Potential impacts that typically result from medium-scale rehabilitation and/or
construction works include generation of construction and organic wastes, dusts and noise pollution,
land acquisition and restrictions on land use occupational and community H&S for workers and host
communities associated with construction activities. In view of these potential impacts, the following
WB ESSs are considered relevant:

1.1 PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The Project will take an integrated approach to infrastructure modernization and water resource
management, improving irrigation, drinking water and sanitation services in Armenia. The project aims
to enhance the sustainability and reliability of water service delivery by modernizing irrigation and
WSS infrastructure, strengthening policy and institutional frameworks, and improving climate
forecasting and management capacity. It focuses on five key areas: (i) expanding drought resilient
                                                                                                           6
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

irrigated areas through rehabilitation and modernization, with a focus on reducing energy
consumption in pumped irrigation; (ii) expanding access to drought and flood resilient, safely managed
water supply by improving water systems and developing capacity for sustainable WSS services in
unserved settlements; (iii) developing a comprehensive water strategy, standalone irrigation and WSS
strategies, and a tariff reform program; (iv) strengthening water sector agencies and WUAs through
capacity-building, financial sustainability measures, and technological upgrades; and (v) data
collection and investment planning for WSS in unserved areas.
The project will focus on enhanced climate resilient planning capabilities for key agencies to deliver
drinking water and irrigation services in Armenia, while mitigating against and adapting to emerging
climate threats to the water sector.
PDO is to provide improved access to efficient and financially sustainable irrigation and rural WSS
services in selected areas of Armenia.
The project instrument is Investment Project Financing (IPF) with Performance-Based Conditions (IPF-
PBC), organized around four components, including two components with PBCs, as follows: (i)
Component 1: Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening (with PBCs); (ii) Component 2:
Rural WSS Enhancement (with PBCs); (iii) Component 3: Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure &
System Management; and (iv) Component 4: Project Management.
Component 1: Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening (US$20M) PBC component will
provide support to the MTAI and the WC in key identified priority areas including: (i) the development
of a consolidated National Water Strategy, a National Irrigation Strategy, a Rural Drinking Water and
Sanitation Strategy, and a National Irrigation Master Plan to be approved by GoA; (ii) revision of the
irrigation sector tariffs system, to transition to setting fixed fees based on actual irrigated land and
variable fees based on actual use of water on the irrigated land; (iii) an Asset Maintenance Fund and
an Asset Maintenance Plan to be established by the WC and/or WSA dedicated for the proper
operations and maintenance (O&M) of any newly modernized irrigation scheme; (iv) the
establishment of RWSS units, contractual agreements to govern RWSS, agreement of key performance
indicators (KPI), and establishment of FGRM and M&E systems to better monitor RWSS activities; and
(v) establishment of a national Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center (IWAAC).
Component 1 includes two sub-components, and PBC, including:
    •   Subcomponent 1.1 and PBC 1: Strengthening national water resources policy and planning
        (US$3.4M). This PBC will provide support to the MTAI and the WC to develop and approve a
        comprehensive National Water Strategy, a standalone ten-year National Irrigation Strategy
        and a Rural WSS Strategy, and an Irrigation Master Plan. This subcomponent will also examine
        all existing legal frameworks for water sector management in Armenia including the Water
        Code, the WUA law, and other related legislative acts. PBC 1 includes three sub-PBCs, which
        are related to the drafting, development, and finalization of (i) a comprehensive National
        Water Strategy (PBC#1.1), (ii) a National Irrigation Strategy (PBC#1.2), (iii) a Rural Drinking
        Water and Sanitation Strategy (PBC#1.3). The project will also invest in a National Irrigation
        Master Plan. The Master Plan will assess technical feasibility, economic viability,
        environmental sustainability, social inclusivity, and climate adaptation in water-stressed
        areas. A thorough analysis of agricultural dynamics and market potential will guide
        investments, with the ToR addressing potential riparian issues under OP 7.5.
    •   Subcomponent 1.2: Improving irrigation sector management and service delivery (US$16.6M)
        will finance the following activities: (i) Comprehensive institutional reform program to
        improve functions of the WC and the WSA (US$5.3M), (ii) Implementation of a revised
        irrigation tariff (US$1.55M), focusing on reforming irrigation sector tariffs, balancing the main


                                                                                                       7
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

         principles of cost-recovery and affordability2, and transitioning to fixed fees based on irrigated
         land and variable fees based on water usage, (iii) PBC 2 includes three sub-PBCs, including a)
         an asset Maintenance Fund is established and dedicated for operations and maintenance
         (O&M) of any newly modernized irrigation scheme under the WISE project and b) a revised
         bulk irrigation tariff and the WUA ISF methodology for 6 WUAs is approved and aligns with
         the WUA law to include 100 percent recovery of O&M costs as well as a two-part structure
         (fixed and volumetric) for the ISF(PBC#2.2); and c) a tariff roll out plan with communications
         strategy for outreach to WUAs that will be impacted by an increased tariff and an increased
         ISF(PBC#2.3). This sub-component will also finance Capacity building program for WUA
         (US$1.6M), focusing on six target WUAs in Armenia. The assistance will be provided through
         the re-established WUAs’ Support Group and will include strengthening legal, administrative,
         technical, managerial, and financial management capabilities. Lastly, this sub-component will
         also support establishment of a National Irrigation Water Accounting and Adaptation Center
         (US$8.15M). This activity will establish IWAAC within the WC or a new land and water agency
         to enhance water and irrigation management. Building on Armenia’s GIS-based system, it will
         integrate remote sensing, ground monitoring, and climate data to improve water accounting,
         crop monitoring, and adaptive irrigation planning.
Component 2. Rural WSS Enhancement (US$30M) will focus on providing improved access to efficient
and financially sustainable rural WSS services in selected areas of Armenia. This component consists
of the following sub-component:
    •    Subcomponent 2.1. Institutional strengthening, capacity building, and regulatory reform
         (US$7M). This component will support activities at the national, marz, and the local levels to
         build institutional capacity for delivering WSS services and expanding coverage. The project
         will also support the collection of baseline information on the status of the RWSS services in
         all Marzes, lay out a roadmap for unserved areas, including improving the institutional set-up
         of the sector, and develop a framework for the sector-wide monitoring system. Additionally,
         it will focus on the implementation of monitoring and control tools in the WC, to enhance the
         effectiveness of supervision and control of the WSS sector; implementation of to-be-
         determined soft measures to improve water quality, increase water quantity, reduce NRW,
         and increase community satisfaction; a socio-cultural and gender analysis to examine national
         policies, strategies, sectoral plans, and programs, and to identify gaps related to RWSS services
         and access in the target areas; development of a capacity capacity-building strategy along with
         a detailed capacity-building plan and associated costs; design and delivery of a learning and
         Information, Education, and Communications (IEC) program that includes trainings on scheme
         planning, design, and construction; operations and maintenance; procurement procedures
         and practices; financial accounting and reporting; monitoring and evaluation; etc.; and the
         completion of sector development studies to develop the national strategy for the WSS sector
         (supported by Subcomponent 1.1. In addition to the enabling environment, the project will
         also focus on investment planning. Specifically, based on the comprehensive assessment
         regarding RWSS services, the project will develop an investment plan for drinking water in the
         unserved areas in all Marzes in line with the prioritization criteria agreed with the client.
    •    Subcomponent 2.2. FSs and Infrastructure Investments (US$23M). This subcomponent will
         support the undertaking of FSs to prepare and structure WSS investments that will withstand
         climate change exacerbated drought, flood, and extreme heat. Fs and DEDs will be developed

2 Cost recovery principle: costs for irrigation water supply, at least in terms of operational and maintenance costs,

should be covered by the ISF; Affordability principle: ISF should be affordable for the water users.


                                                                                                                   8
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

          for the highest-priority investments for implementation under both phases 1 and 2 of the
          MPA. Based on the prioritization of activities under the investment plan, the subcomponent
          will implement infrastructure and service improvement interventions deemed to be ‘no-
          regret’ in nature for the highest-priority unserved settlements, based on criteria agreed with
          GoA based on technical, economic, socio-political and institutional considerations.
          Infrastructure investments will include construction of water networks, including household
          connections (and connections to schools and healthcare facilities, where necessary),
          metering, and any necessary water treatment systems, which will incorporate climate resilient
          engineering principles. In phase 1, these investments are expected to be in Ararat, Kotayk,
          Aragatsotn, Shirak, and/or Tavush marzes – the confirmation of which will be based on
          technical, economic, socio-political and institutional considerations.
Component 3. Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management (US$119M) will finance
rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation systems at main, secondary, and tertiary canal
levels currently managed jointly by WSA at the large main canal and reservoirs level and by WUAs at
the secondary and tertiary distributary level. The total command area of the irrigation systems under
consideration is about 39,580 ha (Table 1) which will be selected based on hydrological, technical,
economic, and agricultural parameters, under a Framework Approach3. Similarly, for Phase 2 a total
of additional 4 ISs were short-listed for consideration under this phase. This component consists of
the following sub-components:
          •    Sub-component 3.1: Modernizing Climate Resilient Irrigation Infrastructure & System
               Management (US$114 million). The activities to be carried out in schemes selection
               include detailed FSs, including Economic and Financial Analysis, and ESIA for
               rehabilitation/modernization. Final selection of schemes will be based on technical
               feasibility, estimated investment cost, financial and economic viability, and allocated
               budget. In addition, the project will engage WUAs at an early stage of design to participate
               and sign-off on the designs. The following structures will be considered for rehabilitation
               and/or reconstruction/modernization across the selected schemes: headworks; critical
               sections of main canals inverted syphons; aqueducts, secondary and tertiary network
               (pipeline or lined); water control/distribution; outlets; mudflows; flood protection; flow
               and/or volumetric measurement structures, wherever necessary check structures for easy
               removal or flushing of trash, bridges, maintenance roads, and related pump stations with
               aim of identifying technological advancements that can modernize selected systems (e.g.,
               conversion from pumping to gravity or transition from gravity to pressurized pipe
               networks, where feasible, or construction of off-line canal side regulating reservoirs), and
               other required ancillary structures. Wherever feasible, the project will maximize elevation
               to convert from pumped to gravity systems, to reduce energy consumption and minimize
               GHG emissions. While a large part of the rehabilitation/modernization will involve
               reconstruction/modernization of original systems, the feasibility and detailed design
               studies will systematically examine the opportunities to consider water control and
               delivery structures, that are operated to maintain a constant canal water levels over time
               – regardless of the flow rate. Climate adaptation and hazard resilience principles will be
               embedded in the selection and in the technical design of investments based on the Water
               Global Practice's guidelines.
Table 1: Short-List of ISs for Phase 1

3 This is an indicative number based on the assumption that all short-listed schemes will qualify for project
investment upon completion of the preliminary and detailed design studies. This number is considered as a ‘high
scenario’ and the final project areas may be reduced after selection of I&D schemes for the project rehabilitation
program, which also has implications for the total beneficiaries under the project.

                                                                                                                9
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

  No        Irrigation     Water         WUAs      Command       Actual     Type of     Length of    length of
             scheme        source      involved    Area (ha)   Irrigated   irrigation     Main      secondary
                                        in O&M                 Area (ha)                  Canal     distributo
                                                                                          (km)        rs (km)
                                                    Phase I
   1    Lower            River         Yerevan      11,400       7,000      mixed         53.0        43.00
        Hrazdan canal    Hrazdan/Ra    WUA,
                         nchpar p/s    Echmiadzi
                                       n WUA
   2    Arzni-           River         Kotayk       20,600      12,000      gravity       89.1        15.2
        Shamiram         Hrazdan/Ap    WUA,
        canal            aran          Aragatsot
                         reservoir     n WUA
   3    Kotayk canal     River         Kotayk        4,000       1,400      mixed         32.0        74.0
                         Hrazdan       WUA,
   4    Lori canal       Rivers        Lori WUA      3,080       410        gravity       47.6        18.0
                         Tashir and
                         Dzoraget,
                         (also
                         dotaton
                         from Rivers
                         Miskhanka,
                         Agarak and
                         Hovandar)
   5    Debetavan        River Debet   Tavush        500         500        mixed         14.0         3.0
                                       WUA
        TOTAL                                       39,580      21,310



        •     Sub-component 3.2: Introduction of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
              (US$5 million). This sub-component will finance two activities. The first activity will be
              related to field data from throughout the canal and pipeline systems. Following the
              development of a comprehensive SCADA plan, the field data activity will include (i)
              accurate real-time measurement of critical flow rates and water levels, (ii) transmission
              of that data, (iii) organization and archiving of that data, (iv) providing easy access to real-
              time as well as historical data, (v) standardization of equipment and software for these
              purposes, (vi) training of an excellent SCADA team of technicians for installation,
              troubleshooting, and repair, and (vii) establishment of a high quality, well-stocked SCADA
              center with spare parts, equipment for testing, diagnostics, and component assembly. Of
              particular importance will be the establishment of data security and backup. Once the first
              activity is well established, investments will be made for a second SCADA activity. The
              second SCADA activity will provide limited remote manual operation and monitoring of
              headwork gates. This will not be the primary focus of SCADA but will provide valuable
              experience for future Armenian irrigation investments in remote manual and automatic
              (not included here) operation of gates and monitoring of water distribution in the larger
              canal systems, where modernization investments will be made. The use of flow
              measurement data will be integrated. The SCADA system will not only assist operators
              with real-time information for improved water management; it will also provide historical
              databases for later analysis and planning.
Component 4: Project Management (US$6M). An interim WISE PCT will be housed within the WC and
will assume primary responsibility for project implementation, including implementation of civil works
and related procurement and financial management (FM), compliance with agreed E&S management
measures, and project monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This component will finance staff costs;
coordination of the project-financed activities with other ongoing International Financial Institution
                                                                                                              10
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

(IFI) projects in the water sector; design, implementation, and reporting of baseline and project
completion surveys; and the preparation of assessment studies (e.g., pre-feasibility and FSs), DEDs,
and construction supervision. The component will also include capacity building support for the PCT,
including citizen engagement training skills to the staff of the PCT.

1.2 ESMF RATIONALE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
Since the specific details and locations of the project investments will be finalized during
implementation, with FSs and DEDs conducted in the early stages to guide site-specific investment
decisions, a framework approach has been adopted for the project to guide relevant E&S assessments
and preparation of the management plans at the sub-project level.
The present Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) serves as a guiding document
for the preparation and implementation of all project components, ensuring compliance with the E&S
laws and regulations of the RoA, as well as the WB’s ESSs and the WBG’s Environmental, Health, and
Safety Guidelines (EHSGs).
The ESMF establishes principles, rules, guidelines, and procedures for assessing the E&S risks and
impacts of each type of anticipated project investment, including screening criteria for proposed
activities. It provides a framework for generic mitigation measures to be undertaken at all stages—
from identification and selection through design and implementation to monitoring and evaluation of
results. Additionally, the ESMF outlines the responsibilities of agencies tasked with addressing project
risks and impacts, including an assessment of their capacity to manage E&S risks effectively. It also
includes templates to facilitate the preparation of management tools as required by established
procedures.
This ESMF applies to the Project’s components and activities with potential E&S implications and
guides the implementation of relevant ESSs. The Project’s SEP serves as a guiding reference for the
implementation of stakeholder engagement, consultations, disclosure, and outreach, to address
provision of ESS 10 provisions.
The scope of the ESMF also covers Associated Facilities. These include activities that are “i) directly
and significantly related to the Project; ii) carried out or planned to be carried out contemporaneously
with the Project; and iii) necessary for the Project to be viable and would not have been constructed,
expanded or conducted if the project did not exist. Provisions of ESSs relevant for the WISE Project
apply to the Associated Facilities, to the extent that the MTAI has control or influence over such
Associated Facilities.
This ESMF builds on lessons learned from previous water sector projects, as well as existing procedures
and systems within the WC. These projects include, but are not limited to, the Integrated Water
Resource Management (Akhouryan River) Project, the Construction of Kaps Reservoir Project, and the
Gravity Irrigation System Project, all funded by KfW.
Communal Infrastructure Program (CIP) II, Phase 3, funded by EIB/KfW
The ESMF comprises the following chapters:
    -   Chapter 1 outlines the introduction and rationale of the ESMF
    -   Chapter 2 outlines a regulatory analysis of the relevant Armenia’s legal framework and gaps
        with the WB’s ESSs
    -   Chapter 3 outlines the project’s E&S risk assessment along with the proposed mitigation
        measures
    -   Chapter 4 outlines E&S management processes for activities under the project.
    -   Chapter 5 outlines implementation arrangements for the E&S management.

                                                                                                     11
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

The annexes carry technical tools for the preparation of relevant site-specific E&S instruments. The
toolkit includes guidelines, forms, and templates that are intended to help implement this ESMF.
ESCP provides overall guidance for the agreed E&S       management commitments, as well as agreed
consultation and engagement approaches with relevant stakeholder groups, particularly target
communities. SEP serves as a guiding reference for stakeholder engagement, consultations,
disclosure, and outreach, to address provision of ESS 10. The ESCP and SEP are available as standalone
documents of the WC.



1.3 DISCLOSURE AND STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS

The ESMF, along with other E&S instruments including the SEP, RF, LMP, and ESCP will be publicly
disclosed in-country via the WC website. E&S instruments will be consulted at the national level
including national, regional and community level stakeholders before project appraisal.
Consultations will be continued during project implementation at the regional level and based on
consultation outcomes ESMF, along with other E&S instruments, will be finalized and redisclosed in-
country.
Stakeholder consultations at the sub-project level for the purpose of site-specific assessments and
preparation of management plans are guided in the project’s SEP.




                                                                                                   12
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1



CHAPTER 2. LEGAL, POLICY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Investments funded by the WISE project must be implemented in accordance with the principles of
sustainable development, including environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) considerations in
line with the applicable RoA legal framework and WB’s ESSs.
Specific provisions have been included in this ESMF to address any provisions in the ESSs that are not
fully addressed under the RA laws and regulations.

2.1 REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA’S LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Article 12. Protection of the Environment and Sustainable Development of the RoA Constitution
stipulates that the State shall foster the protection, enhancement, and restoration of the
environment, as well as the prudent use of natural resources, following the principles of sustainable
development and with due regard for the responsibility owed to future generations. All individuals
have a duty to contribute to environmental protection.
The table below presents summaries of key legislation most relevant to the WISE project:
Table 2: Relevant National Legal Framework for the Project
 Codes, Laws, Decrees       Description and Relevance to Project Activities
 Land Code (2001, last      The Land Code governs land ownership, use, and management in Armenia, defining legal
 amended in 2022)           frameworks for property rights and land protection. Land can be owned by the state,
                            communities, or private entities and may be leased or acquired through purchase,
                            inheritance, or privatization. It is categorized by purpose, such as agricultural, residential,
                            industrial, and protected areas. All ownership and use rights must be registered in the
                            state cadaster, with legal protection and dispute resolution through courts. The state may
                            revoke rights by court order in cases of pollution, degradation, or legal violations,
                            ensuring compliance in project-related land matters.
 Water Code (2002, last     The Water Code establishes the legal framework for the protection, use, and
 amended in 2024)           management of the country’s water resources. Its main purpose is to ensure the
                            sustainable and efficient use of water while balancing environmental conservation,
                            economic development, and public needs. The code regulates water ownership,
                            allocation, and quality, ensuring access to clean water for domestic, agricultural,
                            industrial, and energy purposes. It also sets guidelines for water protection, pollution
                            control, and disaster prevention related to water resources. By promoting integrated
                            water resource management, the Water Code aims to safeguard Armenia’s water
                            ecosystems, prevent overuse, and ensure long-term water security for present and future
                            generations.
 Subsoil Code (2011, last   The Code establishes the principles and procedure for use of natural resources in the
 amended in 2023)           territory of the RoA, the relations connected with management and conversion of waste
                            of subsurface use, environmental protection from harmful effects when using subsoil,
                            work safety, and also protection of the rights and legitimate interests of the state and
                            persons during use of natural resources are governed.
                            The Code shall be respected by works contractors who operate their own quarries as well
                            as by material suppliers to works contractors if the latter choose to purchase inputs in
                            the market.
 Forest Code (2005, last    The Code regulates relations connected with sustainable forest management – guarding,
 amended in 2022)           protection, rehabilitation, afforestation and rational use of forests and forest lands of the
                            RoA as well as forest stock-taking, monitoring, control and forest lands.



                                                                                                                13
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

                             Forest users are obliged to compensate or restore the damage caused to forests and
                             forest lands as a result of their forest use.
 Tax Code (2018, last         The Tax Code of Armenia regulates taxation, defining tax types, rates, payment
 amended in 2024)            procedures, and benefits. State taxes include environmental tax, while local taxes cover
                             real estate (land) tax. Mandatory payments include environmental fees. Agricultural
                             producers are exempt from profit tax on income from agricultural product sales, provided
                             other income does not exceed 10% of gross income. Environmental tax is imposed on
                             emissions from stationary and mobile sources, waste generation, and natural resource
                             use. The Code sets compensation levels for exceeding emission limits, and violators of
                             permissible emission norms face administrative liability.
 Civil Code (1998, last      The Civil Code defines the legal status of participants in civil commerce, property rights,
 amended in 2024)            contractual obligations, and related non-property relations. Land use rights may arise as
                             key issues in the WISE Project. The Code serves as a legal framework and must be
                             considered throughout all project phases in civil and juridical matters.
 Labor Code (2004, last       Armenia’s Labor Code regulates collective and individual labor relations, defining
 amended in 2023)            employment terms, rights, obligations, and workplace safety. It covers non-
                             discrimination, working hours, overtime, wages, leave, social insurance, and prohibits
                             child and forced labor. A written contract is mandatory. A 2023 amendment introduced
                             provisions against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH). The Code
                             applies to all Project staff, contractors, and consultants.
 Law on Environmental        The Law on Environmental Impact Assessment and Expertise (EIAE), adopted in 2014 and
 Impact Assessment and       amended in 2023, provides the legal basis for environmental impact assessments, state
 Expertise (2014, last       expertise of planned activities, and strategic ecological assessments (SEA) for programs
 amended in 2023)            or policies. Activities are classified into two categories (A and B) based on impact severity.
                             Certain activities outside these categories, if conducted in environmentally sensitive
                             areas, also require an EIA under Category B procedures.
                             It also outlines public consultation procedures, ensuring notification, access to
                             information, and stakeholder engagement, though meaningful early-stage consultations
                             and inclusion of vulnerable groups remain weak.
                             Project-financed activities will be screened for EIA and state expertise requirements,
                             while strategies and policies will require SEA, including transboundary impact
                             assessments if applicable.
 Law on Wastes (2004, last   The law regulates waste management, including collection, transfer, reduction, and
 amended in 2022)            prevention of negative impacts on human health and the environment. It defines state
                             policies, standardization, monitoring, statistical reporting, and mechanisms for waste
                             processing. It also outlines responsibilities for waste reduction, compensation for
                             environmental damage, and legal compliance.
                             Article 10(d) mandates territorial authorities to allocate construction waste disposal sites
                             and issue permits. Demolition and construction waste must be recycled when possible or
                             disposed of in designated locations.

 Law on surveillance over    The Law provides objectives and types of effective use and conservation of RA lands,
 the land use and land       inspection related to enforcement of land legislation and institutions, procedures of
 conservation (2008, last    control, rights and responsibilities of entities controlling land use and protection. The Law
 amended in 2020)            applies to all lands of the RA Land Fund, irrespective of purpose, ownership and/or right
                             to use.




                                                                                                                14
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 Law on Atmospheric Air     The Law regulates activities affecting air quality to ensure environmental safety and
 Protection (1994, last     public health. It sets legal measures to prevent and control pollution, establishes
 amended in 2022)           emission standards, and mandates air quality monitoring. Aligned with Armenia’s
                            environmental commitments, it applies to the project, requiring contractors to minimize
                            dust and emissions during construction, transportation, and waste storage.
 Law on Flora (1999, last   The Law on Flora defines Armenia’s state policy on the protection, maintenance,
 amended in 2023)           reproduction, and use of natural flora. Article 5 outlines government responsibilities,
                            including conservation programs, species protection, flora monitoring, and international
                            cooperation. It also regulates plant resource use, the flora register, and green zones in
                            settlements. Protected species are identified under this law, which applies to the project
 Law on Fauna (2000, last   The Law aims to ensure conservation of animals and their genetic diversity, maintain the
 amended in 2023)           integrity of animal populations, protect animals from inappropriate disturbance, protect
                            migration routes and regulate use of animal species. The responsibilities of different
                            agencies (including the government, ministries and other State bodies, local authorities
                            and local self-government institutions) are outlined. The law makes provision for listings
                            of animals and their use; elaboration of the Red Book for animals; setting goals for animal
                            conservation; measures for dealing with disputes; and international agreements relating
                            to animal conservation issues. The law applies to this project.
 Law      on    Specially   The Law establishes State policy and legal principles for the sustainable development,
 Protected Natural Areas    restoration, conservation and use of ecosystems, nature complexes, and SPNAs of
 (2006, last amended in     environmental, economic, social, scientific, historical-cultural, aesthetic, health, climate
 2023)                      regulating, recreational, and spiritual value. Protected areas are classified into (i)
                            biosphere reserve; (ii) state reserve; (iii) national park; (iv) natural park; (v) state
                            sanctuary, and (vi) natural monument. Formal designation of a protected area is possible
                            exclusively on the State-owned land. Activities prohibited in the territory of SPNAs
                            include hunting and fishing; harvest of plants, flowers, or seeds; timber extraction; animal
                            grazing; introduction alien species; and mineral exploration and mining. The law applies
                            to this project.
 Law on Environmental       The Law regulates the issues of organization and enforcement of oversight over the
 Oversight (2005, last      implementation of the national environmental legislation of Armenia and defines the
 amended in 2020)           legal and economic basis underlying the specifics of oversight, the relevant procedures,
                            conditions and relations, as well as environmental oversight.
 Law on Tariffs for         The Law sets tariffs for compensating damage to fauna and flora caused by
 Compensation          of   environmental violations. Article 3 addresses hunting or destruction of species in the Red
 Damage Caused to Flora     Book of Animals, while Article 5 outlines compensation for damage to flora, including
 and Fauna as a Result of   illegal tree cutting and destruction, with higher penalties for protected areas and natural
 Environmental Violations   monuments. Compensation varies by species and location, with up to 10 times the
 (2005, last amended in     standard tariff in certain areas. Article 6 details the calculation of damages based on the
 2023)                      number and volume of affected flora and fauna, tripling the tariff for habitat destruction.
 Law on State Regulation    The Law on State Regulation of Technical Safety establishes the legal, economic, and
 of Ensuring Technical      social framework for technical safety in Armenia. It defines state principles and
 Safety    2005,     last   mechanisms to prevent incidents, mitigate risks, and protect the population and
 amended in 2023)           environment. The law applies to hazardous production units, excluding nuclear, power,
                            and transport sectors. Dam construction requires technical safety expertise, with
                            compliance confirmed before commissioning, and registration in the Dangerous
                            Production Unit Register.
 Law on expropriation of    The Law on Expropriation of Property for Public Interests (2006) regulates land
 property   for   public    acquisition and resettlement in Armenia. However, it lacks alignment with ESS5, as it does
 interests (2006, last      not mandate public consultations, a grievance mechanism, or compensation for
 amended in 2018)           economic and social impacts, livelihood losses, or informal land users. It also lacks
                            provisions for supporting vulnerable groups. Additionally, outdated cadaster data pose

                                                                                                             15
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

                              challenges, though modernization efforts are underway. The Law establishes procedures
                              for determining public interest, expropriating property, and compensating owners. It
                              applies to all registered land, property, and rights belonging to individuals, legal entities,
                              and communities. Expropriation must occur only in exceptional cases defined by law,
                              with adequate compensation provided.
 Law on Rights of People      This law ensures that persons with disabilities can fully exercise their civil, political,
 with Disabilities (2021)     economic, social, and cultural rights on an equal basis, in line with the Armenian
                              Constitution and international standards. Its provisions will be upheld throughout the
                              Project to promote meaningful participation and full inclusion of people with disabilities.
 Law on Equal Rights and      The Law ensures equal rights and opportunities for men and women across political,
 Equal Opportunities of       social, economic, and cultural spheres.
 Women and Men (2013,
 last amended in 2020)


 Law on Sanitary and          The Law defines the legal, economic and organizational basis for insuring security of the
 Epidemiologic Security of    RA population, as well as state guarantees, eliminating adverse impact of the harmful
 Population (1992, last       working conditions on human health, and providing for favorable conditions for human
 amended in 2020)             life and vital activities for future generations.
                              The sanitary and epidemiological conditions defined by the Law should be applied to the
                              Project staff, as well as to the personnel of contractors and consultants involved in the
                              Project at all phases.
 Law on Fire Safety (2001,    The law governs the relationships between state bodies, local self-governing authorities
 last amended in 2023)        in Armenia, organizations, companies, and individuals in the field of fire safety. It outlines
                              the fundamental principles for shaping state fire safety policies and establishes the legal
                              mechanisms for their implementation, including ensuring the population has access to
                              effective and reliable fire protection systems. The law applies to this project.
 Law on the protection        The law establishes the State policy and legal basis for managing cultural monuments. It
 and use of immovable         classifies monuments into those of the national (Ran) and local value and defines rights
 monuments of history         and responsibilities of various parties in registering, protecting, studying, preserving,
 and culture and historical   rehabilitating, restoring, and using of monuments. Proposed investments and strategic
 surrounding (1998, last      documents undergo screening for potential impacts on cultural heritage, and the
 amended in 2024)             mitigation hierarchy is applied. Destroying cultural monument or undertaking any types
                              of works on them in the absence of or in non-conformity with the authorized design is
                              strictly prohibited.

 Law     on     Intangible    The Law establishes a legal framework for the identification, documentation, protection,
 Cultural Heritage (2009,     and promotion of intangible cultural heritage in the country. The law calls for the
 last amended in 2018)        establishment of a National Council for Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage
                              comprised of governmental and non-governmental agencies and communities of
                              different cultures. In addition, the law requires the Ministry of Education, Science,
                              Culture, and Sports to keep a National Inventory of Intangible Cultural Heritage and use
                              it for preserving and promoting cultural traditions, skills, and knowledge.
 Law      on      Urban       The law defines the principles of urban development activity in RoA and regulates the
 Development (1998, last      relations related to that activity.
 amended in 2023)
                              According to this law, obtaining the construction permit is not required for regular
                              maintenance, interior furnishing, landscaping of the area, and other low risk works on
                              buildings and structures from the list specified by the GoA in case these works do not
                              limit the intended use of the real estate or do not contravene specified servitudes.



                                                                                                                 16
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 The Law on Real Estate       This law establishes the principles of real estate appraisal in Armenia and regulates
 Valuation Activity (2005,    related activities. It defines property valuation objects as immovable assets, including
 last amended in 2021)        land, subsoil, water bodies, forests, buildings, and other structures that cannot be
                              separated from the land without damage or altering their intended use.
 Law on Freedom of            This law regulates relations connected to freedom of information, defines information
 Information (2003, last      managers in the field of information provision, as well as the procedure, forms and
 amended in 2023)             conditions of obtaining information.
                              The operation of this law extends to state and local self-government bodies, state
                              institutions, organizations financed from budgets, as well as public organizations and
                              their officials.
 Government Decree N          This procedure regulates the relations connected to the procedure of public notification,
 1325-N on the Procedure      discussions and hearings (hereinafter referred to as discussions) of the strategic
 for Public Notification      environmental impact assessment of the founding document and all categories of
 and Discussion (2014, last   planned activities: environmental impact assessment and expertise.
 amended in 2023)




2.2 WORLD BANK’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL STANDARDS
Based on the assessment of potential E&S risks and impacts, the following ESSs are relevant to the
project.
    •   ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts –
        Ensures that projects identify, assess, and manage E&S risks effectively.
    •   ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions – Establishes requirements for fair treatment, safe
        working conditions, and labor rights protection.
    •   ESS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management – Focuses on
        sustainable resource use and pollution control, including air, water, and waste management.
    •   ESS4: Community Health and Safety – Addresses potential project-related H&S risks to
        communities, including exposure to hazardous materials and infrastructure safety.
    •   ESS5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary Resettlement – Guides the
        management of displacement, compensation, and livelihood restoration due to land
        acquisition or restrictions.
    •   ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources –
        Ensures that projects protect biodiversity, ecosystems, and the sustainable use of natural
        resources.
    •   ESS8: Cultural Heritage – Requires the protection and preservation of tangible and intangible
        cultural heritage that may be affected by the project.
    •   ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure – Mandates meaningful
        consultation, public disclosure of project information, and grievance redress mechanisms to
        ensure stakeholder participation throughout the project’s cycle.
The WB undertakes E&S screening of each project and classifies all projects into one of four
classifications: High Risk, Substantial Risk, Moderate Risk or Low Risk. In determining the appropriate
risk classification, the Bank will take into account relevant issues, such as the type, location, sensitivity,
and scale of the project; the nature and magnitude of the potential E&S risks and impacts; and the
capacity and commitment of the Borrower (including any other entity responsible for the
implementation of the project) to manage the E&S risks and impacts in a manner consistent with the
ESSs. Other areas of risk may also be relevant to the delivery of E&S mitigation measures and
                                                                                                             17
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

outcomes, depending on the specific project and the context in which it is being developed. These
could include legal and institutional considerations; the nature of the mitigation and technology being
proposed; governance structures and legislation; and considerations relating to stability, conflict or
security. The Bank reviews the risk classification assigned to the project on a regular basis, including
during implementation, and changes the classification where necessary, to ensure that it continues to
be appropriate.
The E&S risk of the WISE Project is rated Substantial. All subprojects under the WISE Project must be
screened to filter out any activity which is ineligible for the Project financing. The E&S assessment
and/or relevant management tools will provide PCT with the information needed to ensure that each
subproject meets the E&S requirements of the national legislation and is consistent with the
Environmental and Social Framework of the WB.

2.3 REGULATORY GAP ANALYSIS
Table 3 presents the identified gaps between Armenia’s relevant laws and regulations and the
requirements of the WB’s ESSs and the required additional measures to address such gaps under the
ESMF.




                                                                                                     18
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1



Table 3: Assessment of the relevant laws and regulations in Armenia against the requirements of the WB’s ESSs4
 ESS Topics                                   Analysis                                                                  Gap Filling Measures
 ESS 1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

 Environmental and social assessment          E&S risk assessment and impact mitigation instruments other than a        The assessment and management of E&S risks and
 and management of risks and impacts,         full-scale EIA are acknowledged by the Law on EIAE, meaning that for      impacts will adhere to ESS1 requirements, as detailed
 including mitigation hierarchy               projects that do not require EIA, no environmental due diligence is       in the ESMF. The ESMF outlines guidelines for social
                                              applied.                                                                  assessments, stakeholder consultations, project
                                              Approach to defining environmental risk category of activities and        alternatives analysis, and cumulative impact
                                              selecting relevant environmental assessment instruments for risk          evaluation. Provisions on Associated Facilities will also
                                              mitigation differs between the national legislation and the ESF. While    be applied in accordance with the ESMF.
                                              the WB sets for criteria for risk classification and defines risk of
                                              projects case-by-case based on these criteria, the Law on EIAE
                                              provides exhaustive lists of risk category A and B activities based on
                                              their nature and scope.
                                              Environmental monitoring of activities permitted through the EIAE
                                              procedure is covered by the law but lacks details for due enforcement
                                              and value adding. Developer is required to produce an Environmental
                                              Monitoring Program as part of the EIA report. The level of technical
                                              detail to be included in the Monitoring Program is not specified (e.g.,
                                              monitoring parameters, methodology, timing/frequency, etc.). It is
                                              stated, though, that environmental impacts of ongoing activities,
                                              compliance with the terms of environmental permit, and post-project
                                              analysis of environmental outcome is to be covered.

 Project Area of Influence including          The EIAE Law does not refer to associated facilities (AF).                Sub-project activity screening will be applied as part of
 Associated Facilities                                                                                                  the feasibility study, in case AFs are identified, the
                                                                                                                        ESS1 requirements will be applied through a mutual
                                                                                                                        cooperation with the financiers of the respective AFs.


4 WB. 2024. Analysis of Gaps between National Legislation of Armenia and WB’s ESF Policy.


                                                                                                                                                                               19
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 Institutional responsibility and       The EIAE Law is not clear on the use of monitoring data for the           Monthly E&S monitoring of civil works will be used for
 enforcement capacity                   adaptive management of projects.                                          their adaptive management.

 Measures to protect vulnerable         The national legislation does not require the identification or           The ESS1 and ESS10 requirements will be applied as
 groups                                 management of impacts on disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.             further guided in the SEP. The RF also includes
                                                                                                                  provisions for informal land users.

 ESS 2 Labor and Working Conditions

 Terms and conditions of employment     Armenia has in place a comprehensive Labor Code (2004). Armenia           The ESS2 requirements will be applied where gaps
                                        has also ratified core labor conventions of the International Labor       exist in terms of law enforcement and supervision of
                                        Organization (ILO). However, enforcement of the Labor Code has been       Labor Code for Project workers. National legislative
                                        lagging, mainly due to the capacity of the Health and Labor Inspection    framework will be reassessed during implementation
                                        Body (HLIB) to enforce the laws, as well as the number and pace of        once the PCT has sufficient capacity and cooperation
                                        legislative changes in the past decade.                                   with law enforcement agencies, particularly the HLIB,
                                                                                                                  is fully established and functional.

 Occupational Health and Safety (OHS)   While the Labor Code includes main provisions concerning OHS, there       The project's LMP will require supervision engineers
                                        are certain gaps with ESS2 requirements as well as areas that require     and contractors to closely monitor labor and working
                                        further strengthening. The Labor Code requires employers to provide       conditions. Additionally, a workers' GRM will be
                                        safe and healthy work environments, conduct OHS risk assessments          established to facilitate reporting of unsafe working
                                        and plans, provide safety trainings to employees, and provide personal    conditions.
                                        protective equipment, sanitary and rest facilities. The OHS standards
                                        are also regulated by specific decrees, and acts. The Criminal Code       The OHS practices will be in line with ESS2 and WBG’s
                                        provides penalties for violations of OHS laws and regulations. The        General EHSG will be applied.
                                        Labor Code requires employers to establish procedures for monitoring
                                        compliance with OHS requirements, to approve internal OHS acts and
                                        regulations, and to appoint a dedicated safety expert. It also requires
                                        employers to inform and consult employees on OHS issues and
                                        provides for the establishment of H&S committees. While the Code
                                        requires employers to inform workers about any dangerous work
                                        situation and to suspend the works in such instances, it does not
                                        explicitly prohibit retaliating against a worker who reports an unsafe
                                        situation; nor does it explicitly provide for workers to leave unsafe
                                        work situations. The Labor Code does not include explicit
                                        requirements on provision of first aid kits in workplaces, nor is it
                                                                                                                                                                       20
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                             explicit on responsibility for keeping and maintaining training records.
                                             It does not require for the provision of separate washroom or other
                                             facilities for men and women.

    Child labor and forced labor             Armenia has ratified all key international conventions concerning child        Risks concerning child and forced labor are considered
                                             labor and the minimum working age for full time employment is 16               to be low The ESS2 requirements will be applied in
                                             years, which is in line with ESS2. National legislation prohibits all of the   terms of risk screening, age verification and
                                             worst forms of child labor. However, children aged between 14 and 16           supervision of labor and working conditions.
                                             years can work with the written consent of a parent or legal guardian.
                                             The law allows children younger than 14 to work in the entertainment
                                             sector, with prescribed limitations and parental or legal guardian
                                             consent. The maximum duration of the workweek is 24 hours for
                                             children who are 14 to 16, and 36 hours for children who are 16 to 18.
                                             Persons younger than 18 may not work overtime; in harmful,
                                             strenuous, or dangerous conditions; at night; or on holidays. However,
                                             the Labor Code does not explicitly require employers to conduct an
                                             appropriate risk assessment when employing a child between the ages
                                             of 14 and 18 to ensure that a minor is not exposed to occupational risk,
                                             nor that employers monitor how the protective measures for young
                                             workers are implemented.5

    Gender discrimination at workplace       Armenia has in place laws on gender discrimination and sexual                  The application of ESS2 will be required for
                                             harassment and abuse and newly introduced legal amendments to                  establishing worker's GRM, particularly sensitized to
                                             Labor Code prohibit violence and sexual harassment in the workplace.           SEA/SH, by contractors.
                                             However, sexual harassment of women in the workplace may take
                                             place in all regions, while responsiveness of law enforcement is
                                             reportedly more limited outside the capital.

    Grievance mechanism                      Employees who believe that their labor rights are violated can seek            The ESS2 requirements will be applied, and
                                             remedy through various judicial mechanisms, but the labor legislation          Contractors will have to establish worker's GRM.
                                             does not provide grievance mechanisms at the employer level for the

5
  The Labor Code requires that persons below the age of 18 years undergo medical examination before the commencement of employment. Therefore, a health certificate can be one of the
requirements to be included in the list of required employment documents for the conclusion of an employment contract.



                                                                                                                                                                                  21
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                       workers to directly raise any workplace concerns and solve individual
                                       labor disputes. This represents a gap with the ESS2 requirement for
                                       the workers’ grievance mechanism. Labor disputes are addressed by
                                       court according to the Code on Civil Procedure (2018). The Labor Code
                                       does provide a procedure for the resolution of collective disputes as a
                                       part of collective bargaining processes.

 ESS 3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
 Efficient use of resources            The main laws providing for efficient use of resources and pollution      The RoA legislation will be applied.
                                       management are the Water Code (2002), the RA Law on Fundamentals
                                       of National Water Policy (2005), the RA Law on Energy Saving and
                                       Renewable Energy (2004), as well as the Subsoil Code (2011), the Law
                                       on Waste (2004), and the Law on Atmospheric Air Protection (1994).

 Waste disposal                        The main laws providing for efficient use of resources and pollution      Waste management and disposal will comply with
                                       management are the Water Code (2002), the Law on Fundamentals of          national regulations, while Asbestos containing
                                       National Water Policy (2005), the Law on Energy Saving and                materials (ACM) management will follow WBG’s ESHS
                                       Renewable Energy (2004), as well as the Subsoil Code (2011), the Law      guidelines and EU standards.
                                       on Waste (2004), and the Law on Atmospheric Air Protection (1994).
                                       The national regulatory framework for pollution prevention prioritizes
                                       public health protection and is based on defining thresholds for
                                       permitted concentrations of pollutants to which humans may be
                                       exposed. The country lacks waste disposal and wastewater treatment
                                       infrastructure, which is a major challenge for pollution management.
                                       The Law of Waste (2004) and the Law on Waste Disposal and Sanitary
                                       Cleaning (2011) rule out informal dumping and free burning of waste,
                                       prohibit disposal of hazardous waste at municipal landfills, establish
                                       ownership of waste and the system of payment for its disposal. Waste
                                       separation is suggested for possible reuse and encouraged at the
                                       community level, and economic incentives are suggested for waste
                                       reduction and recycling. The Law on Waste provides incentives for
                                       waste reduction and recycling but does not establish waste
                                       management hierarchy.


                                                                                                                                                                 22
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 ESS 4 Community and Health Safety

 Infrastructure and equipment design    Emergency preparedness is provided through the Law of RA on the              The ESS4 requirements will be applied. Dam safety
 and safety                             Protection of Population in Emergency Situations (1998), the Law of          requirements will be assessed for each irrigation
                                        RA on Fire Safety (2001), the Law of RA on Seismic Protection (2002),        scheme requiring establishment of new regulating
                                        and the Law of RA on Civic Protection (2002). Despite the adopted            reservoirs and requirements of the ESS4 or Good
                                        principle of integrated watershed management, conflicts over water           International Industry Practices (GIIPs) will be
                                        use between communities as well as between communities and                   followed depending on the risk profiles.
                                        industrial water users occur.

 Security personnel                     The RA law on Private Custodian Service Activities defines legal bases       The RoA legislation requirements will be applied. The
                                        for custodians’, security personnel’s activities, licensing requirements,    project does not envisage mobilization of armed
                                        provides provisions for activities’ implementation and reservations for      security personnel for the purpose of the project’s
                                        activities implementation, use of force and arms, etc.                       activities. However, contextual risks and mitigation
                                                                                                                     measures concerning security will be assessed as part
                                                                                                                     of site-specific ESIAs.

 Community exposure to health issues    The Law on Ensuring Traffic Safety (2005) provides basis for the             The ESS4 requirements will be applied and relevant
                                        organization of traffic, including the installation of traffic signs, road   CHS risks will be assessed as part of site-specific ESIAs.
                                        marking, and management of traffic around work sites within road             Infrastructural design safety requirements will be
                                        corridors. These rules are usually followed on highways and main             integrated the feasibility and detailed design TORs.
                                        roads but less so on secondary roads.

                                        Enforcement of regulations on handling hazardous materials and
                                        hazardous waste is sometimes hindered by low public awareness of
                                        the rules and the effects of non-compliance on human health. For
                                        example, the willingness of communities to reuse asbestos-
                                        containing waste.

 ESS 5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary Settlement.

 Requirements to avoid or minimize      There are some key gaps between the RA Law on Expropriation of               The ESS5 requirements will be applied to supplement
 land acquisition and related adverse   Property for the Needs of Society and the State, and ESS5. The Law           the RA Law on Expropriation of Property for the Needs
 impacts                                requires that eminent domain is only used in “exceptional cases,”            of Society and the States. The project will adopt the RF
                                        defined as “no alternative is possible for the public interest project to    in the event that land acquisition and/or expropriation
                                        be implemented.” Accordingly, before the decision for land
                                                                                                                                                                             23
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                          acquisition, alternatives need to be explored to determine whether        of assets warranting application of the ESS5 are
                                          the project can be constructed on alternative plots.                      envisaged.
 Eligibility criteria for compensations   The RA Law on Expropriation of Property for the Needs of Society and      The ESS5 requirements will be applied in line with the
 and livelihoods support                  the State does not cover compensation for economic and social             RF.
                                          impacts and does not include informal land users as eligible for
                                          compensation.

 Livelihoods restoration                  The Law on the Expropriation of Property for the Needs of the Society     The ESS5 requirements will be applied in line with the
                                          and the State does not envisage livelihood restoration.                   RF.

 Measures    to    protect   vulnerable   The Law on the expropriation of Property for the Needs of the Society     The ESS5 requirements will be applied in line with the
 groups                                   and the State does not have provisions for assistance or support to       RF.
                                          disadvantaged and vulnerable people.

 Forced eviction                          Article 218 of the RA Civil Code and Article 60 of the RA                 The ESS5 requirements will be applied in line with the
                                          Constitution refer to property ownership and expropriation of private     RF.
                                          property but neither clearly define what “public and state needs” or
                                          “overriding public interests” are. Even the 2006 RA Law
                                          on Expropriation of Property for the Needs of Society and the
                                          State does not fully explicate what the essence of those two key
                                          concepts is. The Law, however, identifies the principles and objectives
                                          based on which the prevailing public interest is determined, and
                                          property is expropriated to the Government. The Law contains
                                          provisions for forced eviction of property.
 Grievance mechanism                      The Law does not require public consultation or a grievance               The ESS5 and ESS10 requirements will be applied in
                                          mechanism during the land acquisition process.                            line with the RF and SEP.

 ESS 6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Resources.

 Biodiversity conservation                Management of biodiversity and living natural resources is regulated      The RoA legislation will be applied.
                                          by several laws, the most important being the RA Law on the Specially
                                          Protected Natural Areas (2004), the RA Law on Flora (1999), the Ra
                                          Law on Fauna (2000), and the RA Law on Hunting and Hunting
                                          Economy (2007). The EIAE Law (2023), the RA Law on Environmental


                                                                                                                                                                        24
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                       Oversight (2005), and the Forest Code (2005) also have several direct
                                       implications for the protection and management of biodiversity.

 Habitats                              The laws concentrate on the protection of populations and specimen        The ESS6 requirements will be applied to fill the gaps
                                       of wildlife. Whereas protection of their habitats is not given adequate   in in the RoA legislation. The E&S screening process
                                       importance. There is no categorization of habitats into transformed,      will guide species surveys and a standalone
                                       natural, and critical, and no uniform biophysical classification.         Biodiversity Management Plan will be prepared for
                                                                                                                 substantial risks and impacts.

 Living natural resources              Article 5 of the Law on Environmental Oversight prohibits                 The ESS6 requirements will be applied. ESIAs will
                                       overexploitation of natural resources, however, depletion and             assess water abstraction and ecosystem impacts, and
                                                                                                                 mitigation measures will follow GIIP, with SESAs
                                       degradation of living natural resources such as forests, fisheries,
                                       pastures, and individual species inhabiting them still occurs. Lack of    ensuring sustainable resource management in line
                                       human resources and technical means for inspection is obvious. The        with ESS6.
                                       absence of insufficiency-supported thresholds of sustainable
                                       resource use and/or methodological guidance for their
                                       establishment are key challenges for enforcement.

 ESS 7 Cultural Heritage

 Management of adverse impacts on      The RA Law on the Protection and Use of Immovable Monuments of            The RoA legislation will be applied for the protection
 cultural heritage both tangible and   History and Culture and Historical Surroundings (1998) and the RA Law     of known cultural heritage that could be affected by
 intangible                            on Import and Export of Cultural Values (2004) regulate the protection    civil works. Chance finds procedures will be
                                       and use of physical cultural resources of Armenia, and the RA Law on      implemented in accordance with the ESMF for any
                                       Intangible Cultural Heritage (2009) protects intangible values. Spatial   potential discoveries, particularly during earthworks.
                                       and urban planning procedures include provisions for the preservation
                                       of historic monuments and urban heritage. However, coordinated
                                       management and enforcement are challenging as part of assets are
                                       owned by the Armenian Apostolic Church and private bodies.

 ESS 10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure

 Engagement with stakeholders,         The Constitution, the RA Law on Urban Development (1998), the EIAE        The ESS10 requirements will be applied in line with
 including measures for vulnerable     Law (2023) guarantee public notification, access to information, and      the SEP, including required engagement with affected
 groups                                stakeholder engagement for development projects. Although the             people and vulnerable groups.
                                       legislative framework stipulates the need for proper public notices and
                                                                                                                                                                     25
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                       consultation meetings, it fails to ensure meaningful consultation
                                       meetings at the early stage of projects and ensure for the participation
                                       of vulnerable groups.

 Information disclosure                The EIAE Law (2023) guarantees public notification and access to           The RoA legislation will be applied to the disclosure of
                                       information.                                                               E&S management documents prepared following the
                                                                                                                  requirements of EIAE Law. ESS10 requirements will be
                                                                                                                  applied to E&S management documents, including
                                                                                                                  site-specific management plans in line with the SEP.

 Grievance mechanism                      Armenia has recently developed legislation and electronic tools to      The ESS10 requirements will be applied in line with the
                                       receive and handle citizens’ feedback and complaints. However, there       SEP.
                                       is no requirement for exercising specific grievance mechanism in the
                                       frames of projects.




                                                                                                                                                                        26
        ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1



CHAPTER 3. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISK ASSESSMENTS
3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE
Armenia is a land-locked country within the Caucasus region between Europe and Asia. The majority
of the country is at high altitude (greater than 1,000 meters above sea-level), including Lake Sevan, a
freshwater lake, with a surface area of 1,279 kilometers and the Seven River Basin with a surface area
of 4,721 km2, spans approximately one sixth of the nation’s total land area.
In general, ecosystems of Armenia are characterized by a number of peculiarities, which all together
contribute to formation of rich and unique biodiversity. Geographical distribution of main biotypes
of flora and fauna of Armenia is conditioned by vertical zonation and topographic diversity of the
area, thanks to which biodiversity of each zone is characterized by its species composition, qualitative
and quantitative indicators and consequently its specialized role. Dependent on the geological history
of the areas, landscape components and local climate 10 landscape-climatic zones have been formed
in Armenia. Their typical conditions contributed to formation of high diversity of habitats of flora and
fauna species and as a consequence the presence of unique communities, high level of endemism as
well as rich agrobiodiversity. The abundance of species composition of biodiversity in Armenia is
conditioned also by the fact that Armenia as a part of the Armenian Highland is located in the
intersection of important provinces of formation of flora and fauna of the region as well as is a
crossroad of migration routes of birds.
Proper management of water resources plays a key role in the socio-economic development of
Armenia. About 80% of the country’s crops are irrigated, with agriculture accounting for 15% of gross
domestic product. Net income per hectare, in general, is higher on irrigated lands. Hydropower
accounts for 40% of total electricity production. Groundwater is the source of 96% of drinking water.
Thus, availability of water resources and their management are important determinants of the
country’s overall macroeconomic performance.
Component 1 of the project will be implemented at a national level focusing on legal, regulatory,
institutional, and technical capacity reforms for the WC, the WSA, and selected WUA.
Construction of the water network under Component 2, including household connections, and any
necessary water treatment infrastructure is expected to be in Ararat, Tavush, Kotayk, Aragatsotn, or
Vayots Dzor, based on technical, economic, socio-political, and institutional considerations.
Investments in irrigation modernization under Component 3 will be considered in the following
canals/marzes: a) Kotayq main canal irrigation system in Kotayq marz, b) Arzni-Shamiram main canal
irrigation system in Argatsorn and partially in Kotayq marzes, c) Lower Hrazdan main canal irrigation
system in Armavir marz, d) Debetavan canal in Tavush marz, and e) Lori canal irrigation systems in
Lori marz with canals flowing through agricultural zones to support irrigation for farmlands. Some
sections may pass near or within the protective zones of designated natural areas or buffers. The
shortlisted schemes for several small-scale (0.2 to 0.6 mln.cub.m.) regulating reservoirs are located
across same marzes. There are no protected areas on the selected reservoir schemes. Given the
hydrological connectivity of the selected regions, some schemes may also be situated near
environmentally sensitive areas of Ramsar sites such as Khor Virap Marshes (Ararat Marz) and Lake
Sevan (Gegharkunik Marz bordering Kotayk Marz).
Final scheme selection will occur after a FS, considering water availability, technical soundness,
economic viability, E&S assessments, investment costs, and funding. Rural communities in target
areas rely on small-scale farming for food security and income, with limited employment
opportunities exacerbating poverty and social inequities. High proportions of vulnerable populations

                                                                                                     27
        ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

exist, including low-income households, elderly individuals, women-headed households, and those
with restricted access to essential services.
The project targets underserved rural settlements, where sanitation is under-developed and most
households use pit latrines. Water quality is declining, with 29% of surface water and 7% of
groundwater bodies at risk due to untreated wastewater, agricultural runoff, and waste. Vulnerable
groups face greater barriers to accessing water services and community participation.



3.2 POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF THE ACTIVITIES
While the Program is expected to generate positive E&S outcomes by strengthening institutions and
improving the sustainability, resilience, and quality of water services in Armenia, residual risks
remain, particularly due to the quality of implementation and institutional capacity for risk
management in the initial stages.
Negative impacts, typical for medium-scale civil works under the project include generation of inert
construction, hazardous, and organic waste (e.g., from vegetation clearing in existing WSSs and ISs,
noise, dust, sedimentation, Occupational and Community Health and Safety risks due to
vehicle/machinery movement. These impacts are expected to be low to medium in magnitude,
temporary, and revisable. Project activities are not expected to affect any known historical/cultural
monuments and intangible cultural heritage. No impacts on intangible cultural heritage are
envisaged.
Operation of irrigation and WSSs systems will improve quality of life for rural communities and reduce
likelihood of water-borne disease outbreaks, but it may pose E&S risks, primarily due to: (i) increased
nutrient and pollutant concentrations at discharge points, which can degrade surface and
groundwater quality in natural aquifers; and (ii) increased water uptake from surface or groundwater
sources, which may cause environmental impacts, including competition for water use, resulting in
moderate to substantial long-term consequences on ecosystem balance, depending on the source
and volume of water extracted. Additionally, intensified agriculture may cause soil and water
pollution from agrochemical misuse.
The National Water Strategy, the National Irrigation Strategy, and a Rural Drinking Water and
Sanitation Strategy to be developed under Subcomponent 1.1 may have broad environmental
implications: i) disruption of water balance and alteration of ecosystems and habitats; ii) pollution
from insufficiently treated wastewater near discharge points; iii) lack of resilience in the irrigation
sector to climate change impacts. The long-term E&S outcomes will depend on how effectively these
risks are addressed during the development of the strategies and managed by the preparation of a
SESA. ToRs for a SESA will be developed in alignment with regulatory reforms and national strategy
development for irrigation, guiding the assessment of downstream E&S risk management related to
policy reforms and national water, irrigation, and rural WSS strategies.
The overall E&S risk is classified as substantial with the following analysis for each relevant ESSs.




                                                                                                        28
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 3.2.1 Environmental and Social Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures (Construction Phase)
The main E&S risks and impacts expected during the construction phase, especially under Components 2 and 3, are summarized in the table below:
Table 4: E&S Impact Matrix for Construction Phase
 Issue                   Risks and Impacts                       Probability6   Magnitude7    Mitigation Measures
 Environmental Pollution (ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4)
 Generation of non-      Debris from canal lining                Probable       Significant   •   Sites for permanent waste disposal identified and agreed with local
 hazardous               replacement, excavation, and                                             officials.
 construction waste      demolition can accumulate in                                         •   Identify and approve permanent waste disposal sites with local
                         surrounding areas, including excess                                      authorities.
                         soil, rock, shrubs, and branches.                                    •   Allocate designated temporary storage areas to prevent scattered
                         Additional waste includes organic                                        dumping.
                         material from silt and vegetation
                                                                                              •   Prohibit open-air burning of waste both on and off the worksite.
                         removal, household waste from
                                                                                              •   Store waste and excess materials in designated on-site locations and
                         construction camps, and packaging
                                                                                                  promptly transport them to approved disposal sites.
                         materials (cardboard, wood).
                                                                                              •   Use covered vehicles for waste transportation to prevent spillage
                         Pollution from the sanitation
                                                                                                  and environmental contamination.
                         facilities provided at construction
                                                                                              •   Obtain written approval from municipal authorities for permanent
                         camps.
                                                                                                  waste disposal.
                                                                                              •   Promote reuse and recycling of packaging materials like cardboard
                                                                                                  and wood.
 Generation of           There is risk of leakage of             Probable       Severe        •   Temporarily storage on site of all hazardous or toxic substances will
 hazardous               oil/lubricants, littering of nearby                                      be in safe containers labeled with details of composition, properties
 construction wastes     area with used filters, tires, broken                                    and handling information.
                         equipment parts. Contamination                                       •   The containers of hazardous substances shall be placed in a leak-
                         from oil spills during vehicles and                                      proof container to prevent spillage and leaching.
                         equipment servicing and washing,                                     •   The wastes shall be transported by specially licensed carriers and
                         from stockpiled waste materials, oil                                     disposed in a licensed facility.
                         products, chemicals and other
                         hazardous materials.

6 Frequent, Highly Probable, Probable, Low, Not Probable
7 Severe, Significant, Moderate, Minor, Negligible


                                                                                                                                                                   29
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 Air pollution               Air pollution due to dust generation   Probable   Significant   •   Cover truck beds with tarps during material transport. Water work
                             associated with earthworks,                                         sites in the course of dusty works or in case of especially hot and dry
                             demolition works, transportation of                                 weather conditions.
                             construction materials/waste and                                •   Store and handle material appropriately to limit dust (e.g. protect
                             truck traffic, emissions from                                       cement with tarpaulins).
                             equipment.                                                      •   Keep construction equipment and machinery in an adequate
                                                                                                 technical condition.
                                                                                             •   Avoid idling engines. Do not use sub-standard fuel.
 Noise pollution             Increase in noise levels is expected   Probable   Significant   •   Keep construction equipment and machinery in an adequate
                             during demolition, construction and                                 technical condition.
                             transportation activities (in                                   •   Avoid idling of engines. Disallow on-site activities beyond the
                             particular, earthworks, pneumatic                                   working hours.
                             drilling, cranes operations,                                    •   Workers shall wear ear protection devices as part of their Personal
                             equipment dismantling, or                                           Protective Equipment (PPE), if they are exposed to noise levels
                             installation).                                                      higher than 85 dB (A).
 Soil Erosion (ESS1, ESS2, ESS4)
 Soil erosion and land     Heavy equipment use can cause            Probable   Significant   •   Minimize the use of heavy machinery to reduce soil disturbance.
 degradation               erosion, road damage, and soil                                    •   Design infrastructure to minimize environmental impact.
                           degradation. Site clearing and                                    •   Schedule construction during the dry season, when possible, to limit
                           leveling expose bare soil, increasing                                 erosion risks.
                           the risk of erosion and siltation.                                •   Implement erosion control measures such as hay bales and silt
                           Improperly piled excavated soil can                                   fencing.
                           lead to further erosion and sediment                              •   Cover excavated soil piles with plastic sheeting and use hay bales or
                           runoff.                                                               similar methods to prevent runoff
 Biodiversity (ESS1, ESS6)




                                                                                                                                                                    30
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 Biodiversity disruption   The likelihood of adverse impacts on   Low        Significant   For Flora
                           biodiversity and natural habitats is                                 • Schedule major earthworks outside the active vegetation
                           low, as Component 2 activities will                                       period in natural landscapes.
                           take place in rural or urban areas,                                  • Control vegetation clearance along renovated line alignments
                           away from protected zones, forests,                                       to prevent damage beyond designated corridors.
                           and wildlife. Component 3 works will                                 • Exclude the construction of new schemes in and around
                           follow existing canal alignments.                                         naturally protected areas and Ramsar sites.
                           However, vegetation cleaning for                                For Fauna
                           new schemes, material extraction,                                    • Limit construction activities to a narrow corridor along the
                           and waste disposal may still cause                                        pipeline to minimize habitat disruption.
                           wildlife disturbance and habitat                                     • Restrict vehicle movement and material storage to avoid
                           disruption, requiring careful                                             excessive site disturbance.
                           management.                                                     General Environmental Measures
                                                                                            • Screen all subprojects to prevent severe impacts on natural habitats
                                                                                                 and biodiversity.
                                                                                            • Source building materials responsibly from licensed suppliers with
                                                                                                 sustainable logging, quarrying, and borrowing plans, including
                                                                                                 reclamation measures.

 Impact on Aquatic Life    Increased water intake from the        Probable   Significant   •    Obtain a water use permit from the Ministry of Environment (ME)
 from Increased Water      surface water stream may harm                                        for the Shor-Shor water transmission pipeline.
 Intake                    aquatic life, leading to ecosystem                              •    Calculate and maintain environmental flow to protect aquatic
                           degradation, erosion, and siltation                                  ecosystems.
                                                                                           •    Regularly monitor environmental flow through scheduled
                                                                                                measurements to ensure compliance.
 Resource Efficiency (ESS1, ESS4, ESS3)
 Water use                Potential adverse effects on            Low        Moderate      •   Specify water requirements for drinking and technical use in design
                          communities, other water users, and                                  documents, including designated sources.
                          nearby natural water sources due to                              •   Obtain special permits from local communities for high water-
                          construction-related water use.                                      demand projects, based on water balance calculations.
                                                                                           •   Secure a water use permit from the ME for withdrawals from rivers
                                                                                               or natural streams.
                                                                                           •   Identify environmentally responsible material sources within budget
                                                                                               constraints.

                                                                                                                                                               31
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

                                                                                        •   Purchase building materials exclusively from certified and registered
                                                                                            suppliers to ensure sustainability.
 Labor and Working Conditions (ESS2) 8
 Workplace             Discrimination may occur based on          Probable   Moderate   •   Contractors are required to have signed employment contracts with
 discrimination        gender, age, ethnicity, sexual                                       all employees.
                       orientation, or disabilities,                                    •   Implement and monitor non-discrimination measures that ensure
                       particularly affecting foreign labor                                 fair hiring, wages, and treatment for all workers, including foreign
                       migrants, who are often employed                                     labor migrants.
                       in low-wage or temporary                                         •   Conduct regular training sessions on workplace diversity, inclusion,
                       construction jobs                                                    and anti-discrimination for employers and workers.
                                                                                        •   Provide accessible and confidential grievance channels for workers
                                                                                            to report discrimination cases, ensuring timely investigation and
                                                                                            resolution. Strengthen oversight through labor inspections and
                                                                                            collaboration with relevant regulatory bodies.
 Occurrence of           Direct impacts on H&S may result         Probable   Severe     •   Ensure that Contractors and Technical Supervision Consultants
 construction related    from various factors such as working                               include OHS experts to instruct workers on OHS requirements and
 OHS incidents           at heights, crane/bulldozer                                        monitor compliance.
                         operations, welding, electrical                                •   Ensure that Contractors develop and implement OHS Management
                         works, poorly organized                                            Plans as part of their C-ESMPs
                         construction sites, traffic-related                            •   Inspect and license construction equipment before use, ensuring
                         risks poorly organized construction                                strict adherence to operational guidelines.
                         sites, traffic-related risks and                               •   Maintain first aid medical kits and fire-fighting equipment on-site at
                         sanitary situation during                                          all times.
                         construction. Additional risk include                          •   Provide sanitation facilities with clean water and a designated
                         exposure to dangerous materials,                                   canteen for workers.
                         noise and vibration, poor air quality,                         •   Ensure that all personnel maintain proper hygiene, keeping
                         confined spaces, drowning risks, and                               workplaces and dining areas clean and pest-free.
                         unsafe site/structures conditions                              •   Require construction crews to stay hydrated and protect them from
                         leading to potential accidents.                                    extreme heat exposure, in compliance with local and national H&S
                                                                                            regulations.



8 Further specified in Program LMP


                                                                                                                                                             32
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

                                                                                       •  Ensure that all workers and visitors are provided with and use
                                                                                          personal protective gear (PPE).
                                                                                       • Conduct worksite safety training for all workers.
                                                                                       • Ensure that operators of large equipment are properly trained and
                                                                                          licensed.
 Sexual Exploitation     Misconduct by other project             Probable   Moderate    ● Ensure all workers receive and sign codes of conduct and SEA/SH
 and Abuse/Sexual        workers, potentially affecting                                    sensitization
 Harassment (SEA/SH)     women and other vulnerable                                     ● FGRM adapted to SEA/SH allegations
 at workplace            workers.

 Child and Forced        Currently assessed as very low in the   Low        Moderate       ● Minimum age requirements of 18 and age verification
 Labor                   context of the project                                            ● Close supervision on the LMP

 Community Health and Safety (ESS4)
 Public safety hazards Potential safety hazards from the         Probable   Severe         ● Ensure proper organization of construction materials, equipment,
                       movement of construction                                              excavation activities, and on-site storage in compliance with Site-
                       materials, vehicles, machinery,                                       Specific ESMPs.
                       excavation activities, and temporary
                       on-site storage due to inadequate
                       housekeeping.
 Dam safety            The WISE Project does not involve         Low        Severe         ● Application of dam safety requirements and/or GIIPs depending
                       large reservoir construction or                                       on the scale and characteristics of the reservoirs under ESS4.
                       reconstruction but includes daily                                   ● Develop an emergency response plan for potentially affected
                       regulation reservoirs for ISs. Failure                                communities.
                       or collapse of these structures could
                       cause localized damage to
                       neighboring areas.
 Service disruption    Water and irrigation services may         Probable   Moderate       ● Conduct prior consultations with affected residents to inform
 during construction   experience occasional disruptions                                     them about the expected disruptions and gather feedback.
                       during construction, potentially                                    ● Provide advance public announcements through appropriate
                       restricting access to water and                                       channels to ensure timely awareness of service interruptions
                       sanitation, which could pose public
                       health risks.



                                                                                                                                                              33
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 Traffic safety           Construction activities, increased     Probable         Severe       ● Install signage and warning signs to ensure the site is clearly visible
                          speed, and higher traffic volumes                                       and the public is informed of potential hazards before construction
                          pose direct and indirect hazards to                                     begins.
                          public traffic and pedestrians.                                      ● Implement active traffic management with trained personnel,
                                                                                                  especially near schools, to ensure safe public passage.
                                                                                               ● Enforce speed limits on public roads and establish onsite limits (20
                                                                                                  km/h for heavy trucks).
                                                                                               ● Design safe entry and exit points for construction vehicles.
                                                                                               ● Avoid high-risk roads, intersections, and turning points, opting for
                                                                                                  safer routes.
                                                                                               ● Ensure secure storage and restraint of equipment and goods to
                                                                                                  prevent hazards to other road users.
                                                                                               ● Equip moving machinery with restricted rear visibility with audible
                                                                                                  alarms.
                                                                                               ● Establish traffic control rules and procedures, such as prohibiting
                                                                                                  forklift operation with forks in a down position and regulating
                                                                                                  onsite traffic flow.
 SEA/SH                  Despite labor influx, SEA/SH risks for Low            Minor           ● Implement Codes of Conduct for all project’s workers
                         the host community remain                                             ● SEA/SH sensitization for the workers and host community, and
                         moderate, with no reported cases                                      ● Establishment of a SEA/SH-sensitive Feedback and Grievance
                         linked to major civil works, military                                    Redress Mechanism (FGRM)
                         mobilization, or paid security forces                                 ● Incorporation of SEA/SH preventive action plan into the ESMPs
                                                                                                  and E-ESMPs.
 Livelihoods Impacts associated with Land Acquisition and Temporary Restrictions on Land Use (ESS5) 9
 Land acquisition        Acquisition of land is not required    Probable       Moderate        ● Alternative designs to avoid and minimize physical and economic
                         for underground water pipelines,                                         displacement as established in the RF.
                         which will be based on servitude                                      ● Prior consultations, and implementation of Resettlement Plan(s)
                         contracts on a voluntary basis. The                                      (RPs) according to the ESS5.
                         project will likely use the existing
                         channels. However, additional land
                         may be required for retrofitting the
                         existing irrigation infrastructure,

9 Further detailed in Program RF


                                                                                                                                                                     34
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

                          constructing small and medium scale
                          regulating reservoirs, and expanding
                          piped water. The project will explore
                          alternative design options to avoid
                          and minimize physical and economic
                          displacement impacts resulting from
                          involuntary land acquisition.
 Restrictions on land     Access restrictions on land use          Probable   Moderate      ●   Schedule construction in coordination with the affected
 use                      during the construction phase,                                        community.
                          which could disrupt livelihoods                                   ●   Provide compensation and/or livelihood assistance in accordance
                          activities and access.                                                with the RF.

 Cultural Heritage (ESS8)
 Impacts on cultural      Excavation and earthworks may            Probable   Moderate      In case of chance finds:
 heritage                 unintentionally disturb physical                                   ● Immediately halt excavation and notify the State Agency for
                          cultural heritage or expose                                             Cultural Heritage Protection and local authorities.
                          hazardous materials from previous                                  ● Resume work only after receiving written approval from the
                          land use.                                                               relevant authorities.
                          Project activities are not expected to                             In case of unidentified objects or hazardous substances:
                          affect any known historical/cultural                               ● Stop all construction activities immediately and inform the
                          monuments.                                                              national emergency authorities.
                          No impacts on intangible cultural                                  ● Do not proceed until formal permission is granted.
                          heritage.                                                         In case of historical/cultural monuments:
                                                                                             ● Conduct E&S screening to inform the site-specific ESMPs and
                                                                                                  develop and implement Cultural Heritage Management Plan
                                                                                                  (CHMP) as part of ESMPs and C-ESMPs.
 Social Exclusion and Stakeholder Engagement (ESS1 and 10)
 Inadequate               Lack of early community                  Probable   Significant   •   Implement a standalone SEP to identify and engage all
 Stakeholder              engagement may lead to                                                stakeholders from the start.
 Engagement and           implementation challenges and                                     •   Ensure transparent communication by defining engagement
 Grievance                conflicts over water use.                                             principles, sharing information, and collecting feedback during
 Management                                                                                     project preparation.
                                                                                            •   Establish and maintain FGRM with designated focal points in each
                                                                                                affected community.

                                                                                                                                                             35
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

                                                                                               •    Display FGRM contact information publicly to ensure accessibility.



3.2.2 Environmental and Social Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures (Operation and Maintenance Phase)
The main E&S risks and impacts expected during the O&M phase, especially under Components 2 and 3, are summarized in the table below:
Table 5: E&S Risk Assessment during the O&M Phase
 Issue                   Risks and Impacts                       Probability10   Magnitude11   Mitigation Measures
 Environmental Pollution (ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4)
 Water contamination     Surface and groundwater may be          Probable        Significant   •   Identify contamination risks and collaborate with public
                         contaminated by natural and human-                                        authorities to protect water quality.
                         induced       sources,      including                                 •   Assess water source vulnerability to disruptions and
                         pathogens, toxic metals (e.g.,                                            implement necessary security measures.
                         arsenic), anions (e.g., nitrate), and                                 •   Ensure water treatment facilities operate in compliance
                         organic compounds. Contamination                                          with national water quality standards, maintaining system
                         can result from routine discharges,                                       security and resilience.
                         accidental spills, or intentional                                     •   Prioritize land application of high-dissolved-solids waste
                         actions (e.g., sabotage), leading to                                      over surface water discharge, following an impact
                         waterborne disease outbreaks due to                                       evaluation on soil, groundwater, and surface water.
                         deficiencies in the distribution                                      •   Recycle filter backwash when feasible and treat reject
                         system. Potential risks also include                                      streams (including brine) according to national regulations.
                         releases of septage and fecal sludge.                                     Disposal methods may include municipal sewer systems,
                                                                                                   evaporation, or underground injection
 Waste           water   An increase in water supply will lead   Probable        Significant   •   Engage stakeholders, including local authorities and
 discharges              to a higher volume of municipal                                           communities, to address wastewater management
                         wastewater, potentially overloading                                       challenges.
                         existing infrastructure                                               •   Support the development of small-scale wastewater
                                                                                                   collectors (e.g., large septic collectors) and utility services.
                                                                                               •   Promote water reuse initiatives for communal purposes to
                                                                                                   reduce wastewater discharge and improve sustainability.

10 Frequent, Highly Probable, Probable, Low, Not Probable
11 Severe, Significant, Moderate, Minor, Negligible


                                                                                                                                                                      36
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 Wastewater               Wastewater generated from water           TBD        TBD           •   Implement effective collection and management systems
 generation from water    treatment processes includes filter                                    for sewage and greywater, whether treated separately or
 treatments               backwash, reject streams from                                          combined.
                          membrane filtration, and brine                                     •   If managing greywater separately, apply source control
                          streams from ion exchange or                                           measures to prevent the discharge of problematic
                          demineralization.       These    waste                                 substances, such as oil, grease, large particles, and
                          streams may contain suspended                                          chemicals.
                          solids, organic matter, high dissolved
                          solids, extreme pH levels, and heavy
                          metals
 Solid wastes             Water treatment generates solid           Probable   Significant   •   Optimize coagulation processes to minimize solid waste
                          waste residuals, including process                                     generation.
                          residuals, used filtration membranes,                              •   Dispose of ferric and alum sludge via land application, if
                          spent media, and miscellaneous                                         permitted and proven safe through modeling and sampling
                          wastes.                                                                to prevent groundwater and surface water contamination.
                          Sludge is produced from pre-                                       •   Ensure special disposal for sludge containing toxic metals
                          sedimentation, coagulation (e.g.,                                      (e.g., arsenic, radionuclides).
                          alum or ferric hydroxide), lime                                    •   Regenerate activated carbon by returning spent carbon to
                          softening, iron/manganese removal,                                     the supplier for reuse
                          and filtration. It may contain arsenic,
                          heavy metals, radionuclides, lime,
                          polymers, and microorganisms.
                          Spent media may include filter
                          materials (sand, coal, diatomaceous
                          earth), ion exchange resins, and
                          granular activated carbon.
 Resource Efficiency (ESS3)
 Increased       Water Uncontrolled discharge of domestic           Probable   Moderate      •   Ensure water withdrawal complies with the conditions
 Consumption       and wastewater, including sewage and                                          specified in the Water Use Permit.
 Discharges               greywater, can cause microbial and                                 •   Maintain environmental flow through regular monitoring
                          chemical contamination, oxygen                                         and measurement to prevent ecological disruption.
                          depletion, increased turbidity, and
                          eutrophication in aquatic systems
 Water System Leaks Leaks in the water system reduce                TBD        TBD           •   Implement routine inspection and maintenance to detect

                                                                                                                                                              37
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 and Pressure Loss       pressure, compromising system                                        and address leaks early.
                         integrity and water quality by                                   •   Prioritize urgent repairs for blockages, pump failures,
                         allowing contamination. They also                                    sewer line ruptures, or imminent overflows.
                         increase demand on source water,                                 •   Prevent sewage entry into storm drains during spills using
                         chemical   usage,    and   energy                                    containment measures like sandbags or inflatable dams.
                         consumption for pumping and                                      •   Establish a leak detection and repair program, tracking past
                         treatment                                                            leaks and unaccounted-for water to identify high-risk
                                                                                              areas.
                                                                                          •   Replace aging or high-risk mains vulnerable to leaks due to
                                                                                              location, pressure stresses, or other risk factors.
 Community Health and Safety (ESS1, ESS4)
 Spread of water-borne Risks and Impacts: Inadequate            Probable    Significant   •   Operate and maintain the water distribution system in
 diseases              enforcement of water supply and                                        compliance with national and international standards.
                       wastewater discharge standards can                                 •   Prevent external contamination by ensuring the system
                       lead to public health risks, including                                 functions as a protective barrier.
                       disease outbreaks, foul odors, well                                •   Implement routine septic tank maintenance and a
                       contamination, and infrastructure                                      systematic collection process for fecal sludge and septic
                       deterioration due to wastewater                                        waste.
                       discharge in streets or open areas.                                •   Use appropriate collection vehicles, including vacuum
                                                                                              tanker trucks and hand-pushed vacuum tugs, for efficient
                                                                                              waste management.
                                                                                          •   Ensure safe disposal of fecal sludge and septage at
                                                                                              designated treatment facilities to prevent environmental
                                                                                              contamination.
                                                                                          •   Conduct periodic sludge collection and transport using
                                                                                              manual or mechanical methods to maintain sanitation
                                                                                              standards.
 Dam            Safety                                          TBD         TBD           •   Implement the Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Plan
 Requirements                                                                                 and ensure O&M procedures are effectively carried out
                                                                                          •   Implement the emergency preparedness plan and ensure
                                                                                              its effective execution.
 Climate change (ESS1, ESS4)
 Climate change risks    Climate screening identifies extreme   Probable    Significant   •   Incorporate climate resilience into engineering design,
                         heat, droughts, and floods as key                                    following the Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief.
                                                                                                                                                             38
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

                         risks that could affect infrastructure                            •   Enhance adaptation by implementing early warning
                         lifespan, equipment durability, and                                   systems and providing real-time evapotranspiration (ET)
                         community health and safety (CHS).                                    data to help farmers anticipate water shortages, optimize
                                                                                               irrigation, and reduce overuse.
                                                                                           •   Use resilient materials, construction methods, and local
                                                                                               knowledge to address climate stressors and allow for
                                                                                               future upgrades.
                                                                                           •   Select sites with multiple access routes, ensuring at least
                                                                                               one is protected against climate risks (e.g., paved roads to
                                                                                               prevent washouts or routes avoiding flood-prone areas).
 Social Exclusion and Stakeholder Engagement (ESS1 and 10)
 Exclusion            of Vulnerable groups may be excluded        Probable   Significant   •   Incorporate strategies to mitigate the impacts of possible
 vulnerable groups        due to financial or physical                                         tariff changes for vulnerable groups or provide temporary
                          constraints and increased fees.                                      subsidies through WUAs, Local Self-governance Bodies
                                                                                               (LSGBs), or government support.
                                                                                           •   Implement a standalone SEP with an FGRM to identify
                                                                                               vulnerable groups and ensure their meaningful
                                                                                               participation in the project.




                                                                                                                                                              39
         ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1



       CHAPTER 4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
                          PROCESSES
 This section describes the procedures to guide:
 a. E&S screening of the proposed subprojects,
 b. Preparation of relevant subproject specific E&S instruments,
 c. E&S review and approval processes,
 d. E&S monitoring of works, and
 e. Grievance resolution.


 4.1 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT APPROACH
The PCT will use the following approach in the overall management of E&S risks and potential impacts
associated with the Project activities:
a. Infrastructure investments under the Project (Components 2 and 3) will only be approved where
   these are considered technically feasible, from technical, economic, and E&S standpoints based
   on feasibility assessments.
b. Subprojects shall avoid, or minimize if unavoidable, adverse E&S impacts, including involuntary
   land acquisition. The project’s implementation agency should explore viable alternative designs
   to avoid/minimize negative impacts and/or enhance positive impacts as early as the design phase.
c. Any subproject with potential negative E&S impacts should be implemented in line with relevant
   management plans and/or guidelines to prevent, minimize and mitigate such impacts.
d. Monitoring and reporting of the implementation of E&S performance will be part of the overall
   Project supervision, monitoring and reporting arrangements. Unless there are systematic non-
   compliance issues, a third-party and/or independent monitor may be mobilized.
The overall E&S management seeks to guide targeted assessments and preparation of E&S
instruments proportional to the level of potential risks, impacts, and baseline sensitivity, including
vulnerability.
Technical assistance (TA) subprojects will integrate ESSs provisions into their activities and outputs.
Subprojects involving infrastructure investments with potential E&S implications will be managed in
line with the processes described in the ESMF. This may include the preparation of site-specific ESIA
reports and/or ESMPs in line with the ESSs provisions.




                                                                                                      40
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 4.1.1 Integrating Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety into Technical Assistance
In line with the ESS1, the terms of reference (ToR), workplans, and other processes defining the scope
and outputs of TA to be delivered under the Project shall be drafted so that the advice and other
support provided is consistent with applicable ESSs. TA outputs shall be grounded with a thorough
understanding of their potential E&S implications, informed by assessments and stakeholder
consultations and shall incorporate recommendations for addressing potential impacts consistent
with applicable ESSs. These may include technical inputs on policy, sector strategy, workplans and
capacity building. Since the Project will also finance FS and DEDs to inform the scope of infrastructure
financing under Components 2 and 3, ESIAs shall be carried out and ESMPs shall be prepared to
address relevant ESSs provisions. ToRs for undertaking ESIAs and developing ESMPs shall include
disclosure, stakeholder consultation, convening of expert panels, etc. at critical phases of the delivery
of TA.
The quality of TA outputs, including coverage of E&S aspects, shall be satisfactory to the WB. If Project-
financed TA produces inputs for intended civil works but the latter are not undertaken within the
scope of the Project, the Project’s responsibility does not extend to any further modifications that TA
products may undergo in future and to ensuring consistency of undertaken works with the WB’s ESF.

4.1.2 Environmental and Social Screening of Subprojects
Subprojects involving infrastructure investments will be screened to:
    a. determine eligibility for financing against the Exclusion List and the Project risk classification
       (no high-risk subprojects may be supported by WISE Project.
    b. identify key E&S risks and potential impacts and determine the appropriate E&S instruments
       for assessing and managing these risks.
Based on these screening outcomes, decisions will be made by the PCT with regard to the types and
scope of the assessment and instrument required for each subproject investment/activity.
Step 1: Subproject Info and Eligibility Screening
Key information on the subprojects will be provided as part of the Project’s annual workplan which
will need to be reviewed by the PCT E&S specialists. This information will inform the E&S eligibility and
technical screening process.
The Project’s Exclusion List (refer to Annex 1) will be used and disseminated by PCT to ensure ineligible
subprojects are not progressed and exclude activities with significant, complex, irreversible and/or
unprecedented adverse E&S impacts. Following this step, select subprojects which warrant further
technical screening will be identified to determine the required site-specific assessments and
management plans.
Step 2: Technical Screening and Instrument Determination
The PCT’s E&S Specialists, in collaboration with relevant technical specialists and/or focal points within
MTAI and WC, will perform E&S technical screening using a subproject screening tool (refer to Annex
2), to assess E&S risks and potential impacts and determine relevant risk management instruments to
be developed for a specific subproject.
Environmental and Social Risk Screening
E&S risk screening will be conducted to determine the level of assessment and planning required for
the subproject proportionate to the significance of associated risks and potential impacts. E&S risk
screening is a two-step process that begins with screening against the exclusion criteria followed by
screening of site-specific risks.



                                                                                                       41
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
The latter will take into account i) the type, location, sensitivity and scale of the subproject activities
being proposed; ii) the nature and magnitude of the potential E&S risks and impacts; iii) the capacity
of the responsible implementing entities to manage such risks and impacts in a manner consistent
with the ESSs; and iv) other areas of risk that may be relevant to the delivery of E&S mitigation
measures and outcomes, depending on the specific subproject and the context in which it is being
prepared.
The following criteria provide guidance for the PCT to determine subproject risk classification:
Table 6: Sub-Project Risk Classification
 Risk               Description                                               Description of Sector-specific
 Classification                                                               Examples

 High12             Wide range of significant adverse risks and impacts       Regulating        reservoirs     with
                    on human or environment health including i) long          significant livelihoods impacts, new
                    term, permanent and/or irreversible and                   irrigation canal development, major
                    impossible to avoid entirely due to the nature of         waste treatment plants.
                    the project; ii) high in magnitude and/or in spatial
                    extent; iii) significant adverse cumulative impacts
                    or transboundary impacts; and iv) a high
                    probability of serious adverse effects to human
                    health and/or the environment (e.g., due to
                    accidents,      toxic     waste     disposal,     etc.)
                    Some of the significant E&S risks and adverse
                    impacts of the Project cannot be mitigated or
                    specific mitigation measures require complex
                    and/or unproven mitigation, compensatory
                    measures or technology, or sophisticated social
                    analysis and implementation.
 Substantial        The Project may not be as complex as High-Risk            Regulating reservoirs with some
                    Projects, its E&S impacts may be smaller (large to        livelihoods impacts and some
                    medium), and the location may not be in such a            physical     displacement       (i.e.,
                    highly sensitive area, and some risks and impacts         agricultural land), canal re-
                    may be significant. This depends on whether the           alignment, installation of new WSS
                    risks and potential impacts have the majority or all      networks to serve underserved
                    of the following characteristics: i) mostly               areas.
                    temporary, predictable and/or reversible and the          Expanding and enhancing rural
                    nature of the project does not preclude the               WSSs may elevate nutrient and
                    possibility of avoiding or reversing them; ii) adverse    pollutant levels at discharge points,
                    social impacts may give rise to a limited degree of       affecting water quality, while
                    social conflict, harm or risk to human security; iii)     increased water extraction from
                    medium in magnitude and/or spatial extent; iv)            surface or groundwater sources
                    there is medium to low probability of serious             could disrupt ecosystems and create
                    adverse effects to human health and/or the                water-use      competition      with
                    environment (e.g., due to accidents, toxic waste          potential long-term impacts.
                    disposal, etc.), and there are known and reliable
                    mechanisms available to prevent or minimize such
                    incidents.
                    Mitigatory and/or compensatory measures may be
                    designed more readily and be more reliable than
                    those of high-risk sub projects.




12 High risk projects are expected to be screened out during eligibility screening process.


                                                                                                                  42
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
 Moderate           Potential risks and adverse impacts on human            Medium-scale canal and schemes
                    and/or environmental health are not likely to be        modernization (i.e., rehabilitation,
                    significant. This is because the Project is not         equipment refurbishment, lining
                    complex and/or large, does not involve activities       etc.), with insignificant livelihood
                    that have a high potential for harming people or        impact,       minor      alignment,
                    the environment, and is located away from               rehabilitation of the existing WSS
                    environmentally or socially sensitive areas. As such,   networks.
                    the potential risks and impacts and issues are likely
                    to have the following characteristics: i) predictable
                    and expected to be temporary and/or reversible; ii)
                    low in magnitude; iii) site-specific, without
                    likelihood of impacts beyond the actual footprint of
                    the Project; and iv) low probability of serious
                    adverse effects to human health and/or the
                    environment (e.g., do not involve use or disposal of
                    toxic materials, routine safety precautions are
                    expected to be sufficient to prevent accidents,
                    etc.).
                    The Project’s risks and impacts can be easily
                    mitigated in a predictable manner.

 Low                Potential adverse risks to and impacts on human         Minor rehabilitation of the irrigation
                    populations and/or the environment are likely to        canal and WSS networks with no
                    be minimal or negligible. These Projects, with few      land acquisition, and no major
                    or no adverse risks and impacts and issues, do not      disruption of services.
                    require further environment and social assessment
                    following the initial screening.


Site-specific ESIA with ESMP will be required for subprojects classified as substantial risk to address
potential risks and impacts and/or meet the national law requirements on environmental permitting.
Stand-alone ESMP will be prepared for moderate-risks subprojects unless a specific activity presents
distinct E&S risks that require an ESIA. ESCOP shall be adopted for subprojects with low and some
moderate E&S risks, unless renovation and/or rehabilitation activities raise specific E&S risks requiring
a site-specific ESMP.

Land Acquisition and Resettlement Screening
The screening process will include a comprehensive assessment of cadastral maps and field
verification to determine whether a subproject requires land acquisition and/or is likely to result in
physical and/or economic displacement of people currently using the proposed site. The verification
of cadastral maps will ensure that all land tenure records are up to date and accurately reflect the
ownership, usage, and rights of affected individuals. Copies of ownership certificates or any relevant
documentation indicating rights over the land will be attached to the screening reports and/or E&S
plans. If land acquisition or displacement is identified as a potential impact, an RP will be prepared, as
outlined in the RF for the project. The scale, level of detail, and consultations required for the RP will
be determined based on the scope and risks associated with the land acquisition. The RP will guide
the process for land acquisition and the compensation of affected persons, ensuring that all necessary
legal and social mitigation measures are in place. RP will focus on mitigation measures such as
compensation, land replacement, and livelihood restoration.
Dam Safety
For the new dams for water reservoirs under Component 3 of the project that could cause safety risks,
such as an unusually large flood-handling requirement, location in a zone of high seismicity,
foundations that are complex and difficult to prepare, or potential for significant downstream impacts,
the PCT will engage experienced and competent professionals for the supervision of the design and

                                                                                                                43
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
construction, and require the owner of the dam to adopt and implement dam safety measures during
the design, bid tendering, construction, operation, and maintenance of the dam and associated works.
According to ESS4, these dams will require (i) reviews by an independent panel of experts (the Panel)
of the investigation, design, and construction of the dam and the start of operations; (ii) preparation
and implementation of the following detailed plans:
    ●   a plan for construction supervision and quality assurance
    ●   an instrumentation plan
    ●   an operation and maintenance plan; and
    ●   an emergency preparedness plan.
(iii) prequalification of bidders during procurement and bid tendering; and (iv) periodic safety
inspections of the dam after completion, and implementation of measures required to address safety
deficiencies.
For any other new dams to be constructed under Component 3 of the project’s dam safety measures
designed by qualified engineers in accordance with GIIP will be adopted and implemented.
Cultural Heritage
In the event that the proposed ISs and WSS infrastructure could potentially affect known cultural
heritage:
    •   Designs of works in and around cultural heritage sites will be submitted for review and consent
        to the Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sports (MoESCS) to ensure that Project
        interventions do not affect adversely structural integrity of historic buildings, do not
        compromise their heritage value, or negatively revise their aesthetic appearance.
    •   If there are aspects of works that could affect religious buildings, property and/or user rights
        to which are held by the Apostolic Church of Armenia, will be submitted for review and
        consent to the Church. If works in or around a cultural heritage site poses a risk of physical
        damage to a heritage building or its individual elements, an adequate protective cover will be
        provided. Also, if r items placed in buildings interior pose a risk to safety and/or security of
        such items, a plan for their removal from the site and temporary safe-storage will be
        developed upfront (to be included as part of ESIA documentation) and implemented prior to
        mobilization of works contractor to the site.
    •   Cultural heritage management plan for such sites will be integrated into site-specific ESMPs.
    •   For any activities that may impact cultural heritage, including historical structures, cemeteries,
        sanctuaries, and other culturally significant sites, local communities will be consulted to
        ensure their perspectives are considered, and activities will be aligned accordingly. Chance
        finds: if a chance find is encountered during earth works, contractor will be obligated to take
        all activities on hold and immediately inform the PCT. The PCT will promptly communicate
        information to the MoESCS and seek formal guidance on the course of further action from the
        Ministry and inform the WB. Works will resume upon written notice from the MoESCS
        certifying that all urgent actions required for excavation and removal of artifacts and/or their
        on-site conservation are completed.
Waste Management
    •   Waste, including ACMs from replaced pipes and organic debris from canal rehabilitation, will
        be managed in compliance with national regulations, WBG EHS Guidelines, and European
        Union (EU) standards. Disposal will follow the ESMF procedures to ensure safe handling,
        transportation, and designated site disposal.
    •   Waste management plans (WMP) will be integrated into site-specific ESMPs, including
        mitigation measures to prevent soil and water contamination. Contractors will be responsible
        for implementation and obtaining the necessary permits.

                                                                                                       44
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
    •   Protective measures will be applied near sensitive receptors such as water bodies, agricultural
        land, or residential areas to mitigate pollution risks.
    •   If hazardous waste is discovered unexpectedly, contractors must halt work and inform the
        PCT, which will coordinate with authorities for proper management before resuming
        activities.


Biodiversity Management
If the proposed ISs and WSS infrastructure impact biodiversity:
    •   Biodiversity risks, including habitat disturbance from land clearing, vegetation removal, and
        infrastructure development near or within protective zones of modified, natural or critical
        habitat areas or buffers zones, and Ramsar sites, will be assessed through the E&S screening
        process. Species surveys will be conducted to prevent impacts on critical habitats, and
        exclusion criteria will be applied for construction near ecologically sensitive areas.
    •   Biodiversity Management Plans (BMPs) will be integrated into site-specific ESMPs, which will
        incorporate mitigation measures to protect biodiversity. A stand-alone BMP will be prepared
        if significant risks are identified through screening.
    •   Water abstraction activities will be evaluated through ESIAs to prevent depletion of natural
        water sources and minimize ecosystem disturbances. Mitigation measures will be integrated
        into project design to align with GIIP.




Step 3: Preparation of Instruments
Based on the above screening, the PCT will determine:
    ●   whether site-specific ESIA with ESMP (refer to Annex 3) shall be prepared to address relevant
        ESS provisions and/or national requirements. If necessary, the PCT will engage qualified and
        independent experts based on the scale and complexity of potential risks and impacts.
        OR
    ●   stand-alone ESMP shall be prepared to address relevant ESS provisions (refer to Annex 4 for
        a template);
        OR
    ●   ESCOP provided in Annex 5 shall be adopted for subprojects to address low and some
        moderate E&S risks.
    ●   If land acquisition is envisaged, an RP shall be prepared in line with the RF.
Potential E&S impacts at the subproject level will be assessed based on subproject design (including
operational parameters), baseline conditions and receptor sensitivity. Potential impacts will be
characterized according to i) type (direct or indirect; positive or negative); ii) duration/temporal scope
(permanent or temporary (short-term or long-term); iii) geographical extent (local, regional, or
national); and iv) significance (low, moderate, substantial). Proposed measures to avoid, reduce or
mitigate potential adverse impacts and to enhance benefits will be specified for design, construction,
and operation phases.
At the request of the Bank, subproject instruments may be reviewed and cleared by the WB.




                                                                                                       45
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
Step 4: Integrating ESHS into Procurement
The management measures outlined in the E&S instruments and/or ESCOP will inform ESHS
requirements of bidding documents in accordance with the WB’s Procurement Guidelines including:
    ●   Submission of ESHS Management Strategies and Implementation Plans (MSIPs) required to
        manage the key ESHS risks of the project as part of the bid/proposal;
    ●   Budgeting for ESHS outcomes included in the BoQs. If required, separate budgeting through
        provisional sums may be required for management of risks and impacts where budgeting
        cannot be determined during the bidding phase;
    ●   Key ESHS personal required to implement ESHS requirements; and
    ●   ESHS reporting matrices and requirements.
The ESMF includes standard ESHS provisions which will form part of the bidding documents. Draft
bidding documents, including ToR for planned works, will be reviewed by E&S Specialists of PCT.
The following steps (refer to Table 7) reflect key requirements that must be performed by E&S
Specialists of PCT, who will be responsible for integrating key provisions of ESMPs and/or ESCOPs and
technical recommendations for the management of E&S risks and impacts in the overall procurement
process and contract implementation.
Table 7: Actions for Integrating E&S Measures in Procurement for Civil Works
 Stage of Contractual   Actions by the PCT (Environmental and Social Specialists and Procurement
 Process                Specialists)
 Before bidding         ●   Ensure that ToRs clearly define the supervision engineer’s responsibilities
                            regarding oversight of, and reporting on, E&S aspects as required in the sub
                            project ESMP and/or ESCOP, LMP provisions and/or other technical design
                            considerations.
                        ●   Ensure the skill mix of the supervision engineer’s team as specified in ToRs
                            includes key staff qualified and experienced in managing similar projects, and
                            demonstrated capacity to manage E&S issues, including issues pertaining to CHS
                            and labor.

 Preparation of         ●   Review contract conditions included in bidding documents to:
 bidding documents
                            -   Ensure that the relevant mitigation measures in the ESMP, ESCOP and/or
                                other technical recommendations and general provisions in the LMP are
                                reflected and budgeted in the contract.
                            -   Ensure the ESMP, ESCOP and other relevant provisions in the technical
                                specifications form part of and is explicitly referred to in the bidding
                                documents.
                            -   Identify relevant provisions in the LMP (workers, camps, child and forced
                                labor, safety, grievance redress, etc.) regulating the contractor’s
                                responsibility and identify any gaps, inconsistencies or areas of concern
                                that could be addressed through additional provisions in the “particular
                                conditions of contract” and/or technical specifications.
                            -   Include a requirement that all workers sign ‘Codes of Conduct’ governing
                                behavior and identifying sanctions.
                            -   Clearly identify that training programs on SEA/SH, prevention of
                                communicable diseases, Codes of Conduct, etc. will be undertaken by the
                                contractor and relevant expertise will be hired to perform such activities.
                        ●   Ensure the contract conditions clearly specify what type of penalty the
                            contractor will face if the provisions of the ESMP, ESCOP, LMP and other
                            relevant provisions for contractors and Contractor’s ESMP (C-ESMP) are not
                                                                                                              46
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
 Stage of Contractual   Actions by the PCT (Environmental and Social Specialists and Procurement
 Process                Specialists)
                            adhered to—including by sub-contractors. This may include direct incentives to
                            contractors in the form of penalties for poor performance on E&S matters or
                            specific Performance Securities for C-ESMP compliance.
                        ●   Ensure bidding documents clarify the responsibilities of the contractor to
                            prepare and adhere to a C-ESMP based on the ESMP and/or ESCOP, LMP and
                            that no civil works will commence until the C-ESMP has been approved by the
                            supervision engineer.
                        ●   Ensure the bidding documents detail how the contractor and supervision
                            engineer will be required to monitor and report on the impacts on the local
                            community, issues related to labor influx and workers’ camps.
                        ●   Propose KPIs for Contract Management, reflecting issues and risks specific to
                            the contract and the monitoring plan.

 Bid evaluation         ●   Review and verify the recommended bidder that documents related to the
                            MSIPs (or management plans as equivalent), implementation capacity, and
                            other obligations of the contractor required to be submitted with the bid are
                            sufficiently detailed and cover the contractual requirements.
                        ●   Require the contractor’s representative or dedicated community liaison staff to
                            have the ability to communicate in local languages.
                        ●   Verify that the contract management framework identifies clearly lines of
                            communication and that these are formalized, and a consistent record is
                            provided.
                        ●   Ensure that the contractor meets the project’s OHS requirements for capability
                            and experience.

 After contract         ●   Prior to commencing works, the contractor submits site-specific C-ESMP(s) and
 signing                    potential workforce requirements which includes specific management plans
                            for: (i) work activities; (ii) traffic management; (iii) OHS; (iv) environmental
                            management; (v) social risk management; and (vi) labor influx.
                        ●   Supervision engineer reviews and approves the C-ESMP—with inputs from
                            appropriate PCT experts and other relevant government agencies—before any
                            works start.
                        ●   Set up a process for contract management that plans for regular meetings of
                            the parties to monitor the contractor’s performance in all areas.
                        ●   Ensure the C-ESMP and mitigation plans are updated promptly and re-disclosed
                            as appropriate to address new issues.
                        ●   Ensure that the following measures are fully documented for the WB’s review:
                            -   Training activities for workers on OHS, activities related to the Code of
                                Conduct, etc.
                            -   Performance of recommended specific management plans.
                            -   FGRM reports.
                            -   Other deliverables as specified in the contract including implementation of
                                site-specific community/SEP, if applicable.

Step 5: Review and Approval
All relevant site-specific ESMPs, RPs (where needed), and bidding documents, are subjected to internal
review by E&S Specialists of the PCT.

                                                                                                               47
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
The PCT will be responsible for ensuring final review and submission of E&S instruments and bidding
documents (subject to procurement requirements) to the relevant government authorities for
approval, as required, and to the WB for no objection.
Step 6: Implementation, Monitoring, and Reporting

Civil works: E&S impact mitigation and management measures outlined in the ESMPs, ESCOP, and C-
ESMPs will be supervised by supervision engineer and PCT’s E&S Specialists, as well as other experts
where required. Implementation of the required measures associated with the delivery of civil works
will be the responsibility of the selected contractors as per their contracts. E&S monitoring is required
to gather information to determine the effectiveness of implemented mitigation and management
measures and to ensure compliance of the contractor with the approved plans. E&S performance
indicators will be defined in these plans and measured from time-to-time to assess overall compliance.
Some activities may require monitoring beyond the construction phase or Project life to address
maintenance, closure, or rehabilitation issues and this will be determined in the design stage.
Bidding documents will confirm expected reporting intervals with contractors, who will be required to
submit regular reports on ESHS indicators and any incidents and/or accident that may have adversely
impacted on the environment arising from sub-projects. This will feed into periodic reports of the PCT
and substantiate semi-annual project monitoring reports to the WB.
Land Acquisition: Implementation of RPs where required will be monitored based on indicators as
specified in the each of the relevant plan, based on context-specific risks and impacts. The PCT social
specialists, assisted by relevant experts, will monitor, and input the status and progress of RP
implementation, including any emerging issues related to RP implementation and flag issues that
require high-level resolution. Lessons learnt obtained from the initial stage of RP implementation will
be used to improve the project’s implementation of the land acquisition planning, including required
training, budget planning and allocation and community facilitation support.


4.1.3 Management of Environment and Social Risks and Impacts for Associated
Facilities
E&S risk screening will also identify whether there are AF as defined in the ESMF. These includes
activities that are:
    •   directly and significantly related to the project;
    •   carried out, or planned to be carried out contemporaneously with the project; and
    •   necessary for the project to be viable and would not have been constructed, expanded or
        conducted if the project did not exist.
Such facilities are defined as “Associated Facilities” and the ESS provisions apply, to the extent that
the project’s implementing agency has control or influence over such AF.
If AF are identified, the PCT will engage with proponents/financiers to ensure compliance with the
relevant ESSs under the WISE project. If the PCT deems that it lacks the control or influence necessary
to enforce the relevant ESS provisions, the PCT shall formally notify the WB and seek a No-Objection
prior to commencing any works involving such associated facilities.
In line with the ESCP, the PCT shall prepare a quarterly report on the project-level E&S performance
and reflect the status as part of the bi-annual project’s progress reports. A relevant template can be
referenced in Annex 2.




                                                                                                      48
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

             CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT FOR
               ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
5.1 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT
The MTAI and the WC will have overall responsibility for the Program, with implementation managed
by an interim PCT under the WC. A Program Steering Committee, chaired by the DPM’s Office, will
oversee and monitor progress, with the Program Director reporting directly to the Committee. The
National Water Strategy, National Irrigation Strategy, and National WSS Strategy will be developed
under the DPM’s leadership and executed by MTAI and WC, ensuring active participation from all
stakeholders in Armenia’s water sector. Given the multi-stakeholder nature of E&S management,
MTAI and WC will lead efforts, while PCT coordinates implementation responsibilities to ensure
effective collaboration. Specific roles and responsibilities are outlined as follows:

5.1.1 Project Coordination Team
Overall responsibilities for the WISE Project implementation will be located within the MTAI and the
WC. Day-to-day implementation will be supported by the PCT within the WC. Implementation of
Components 1 - 3 will be conducted through the MTAI. A project Steering Committee will be
established at the level of the DPM’s office to oversee and monitor the overall progress of the project.
The project director will likely report directly to the Steering Committee. The development of the
National Water Strategy, the National Irrigation Strategy, and the National WSS Strategy will be carried
out under the leadership of the DPM’s office and executed by the MTAI’s and the WC with close
involvement of all stakeholders engaged in the water sector in Armenia, as well as other entities
involved in water sector development.
The PCT will be responsible for identifying subproject interventions for each component, developing
bidding documents, procuring consultancy services and subproject designs. The PCT will ensure LMP
are integrated into the bidding documents/ works contracts. Additionally, it will manage the
procurement of civil works and ensure technical supervision.
The PCT’s E&S specialists will ensure project implementation is in consistency with all relevant E&S
requirements. These requirements include adoption and implementation of framework E&S
management instruments as well as development and application of site-specific E&S management
tools, oversight on E&S performance, and reporting on the E&S impacts and outcomes of the project.
The E&S Specialists will ensure that the BoQ for the designs of subprojects under Components 2 and
3 include ESHS provisions and that the technical proposals submitted by bidders include a budget line
for ESHS implementation. The E&S Specialists will also contribute to the development of the ToR for
the TA, ensuring that ESMF requirements are incorporated.
The E&S specialists of the PCT will also carry out supervisory visits to the construction sites of
subprojects under Components 2 and 3 to ensure that the implemented works comply with the
requirements outlined in the ESMPs and ESCOP. If there is an RP developed for any of the subprojects,
the Social Specialist will monitor its implementation and will report to the WB. PCT will be responsible
for documenting E&S monitoring work by completing and storing field monitoring forms and
producing regular narrative reports on the outcomes of monitoring. These reports will summarize
findings of field work, analyze common issues encountered, explain the nature of remedial actions
worked out for addressing issues, and assess the status of remedial actions undertaken upon
recommendation issues under a previous report period. OHS aspects should be covered during
supervision and monitoring activities. That means observing whether the works providers adhere to
good OHS practices, whether all employees have received OHS training, whether there have been
incidents and accidents, checking the respective logs, and the availability and use of personal
protective equipment. Respectively, the E&S compliance section of the progress report should include
the statement indicating that the PCT has checked OHS issues and existing practices and if there have

                                                                                                     49
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
been any serious incidents or fatalities. Similarly, the PCT will ensure that the project operational
manual contains respective OHS provisions. Any incidents and accidents occurring at project sites or
within project-supported activities should be reported immediately, e.g. by the contractor to the
employer. All incidents and accidents should be reported to the WB no later than 48 hours from their
occurrence in line with ESCP.
Additional specialists will be hired during project implementation on a need basis and will be
reassessed during the initial year of project implementation. These specialists could potentially
include experts in OHS, gender, community outreach and stakeholder engagement.

 5.1.2 Technical Supervision Consultants
A technical supervision consultant will complement PCT’s in-house capacity for ESMF implementation.
The consultants' ToR will be agreed upon with the WB. The ToR will clearly outline the consultants'
tasks, including supervising the E&S performance of contractors, providing professional support and
guidance on ESHS, and reporting to the employer. Technical supervisors will be responsible for
promptly identifying any ESHS issues that may arise during project implementation and assisting
contractors in addressing them. If contractors fail to take timely and satisfactory corrective action,
technical supervisors will issue written notices to the contractors and follow up accordingly. In cases
where contractors persistently fail to implement corrective actions, technical supervisors must
escalate the matter to the employer and recommend appropriate managerial action to resolve the
issue.

5.1.3 Design and Construction Contractors
During the design phase, the design contractor will assist the PCT in obtaining all necessary permits
and agreements from the relevant state and local authorities.
During the construction phase, the contractor will be responsible for developing the Contractor's
ESMP, which must be implemented upon approval by the PCT and the WB. The contractor is also
responsible for obtaining all necessary permits and agreements related to the construction works.
The construction contractor shall implement all proposed E&S mitigation measures for the subproject.
Before submitting a bid for any works contract, the contractor must integrate the costs for
implementing requirements of the relevant ESMP, including the LMP. Where appropriate, the PCT
may withhold contractor’s payment until corrective action(s) is/are implemented on significant
noncompliance of the LMP for the WISE Project.

5.1.4 Supervising Agencies
The Environmental and Mining Inspection Body (EMIB) under GoA is responsible for inspecting the
implementation of provisions ruled through the environmental permits. The EMIB is also mandated
to inspect compliance with all aspects of environmental legislation. The Inspectorate has the authority
to impose sanctions in the areas of environmental protection, as well as the use and extraction of
subsoil and mineral resources.
Health and Լabor Inspection Body (HLIB) ensures compliance with legal requirements governing the
healthcare sector, as well as the labor legislation of the RoA and other regulatory legal acts related to
labor law. The inspection body is responsible for risk management related to employee H&S, as well
as for implementing preventive measures in these areas, with a focus on public health, workplace
safety, and labor relations.




                                                                                                      50
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
Table 8: Roles and Responsibilities

 Implementing Agencies          Roles and Responsibilities
 Ministry of Territorial        The main mandate of MTAI includes developing and implementing
 Administration and             Armenia's territorial policy, formulating State policy for community
 Infrastructures                services, ensuring balanced territorial development, overseeing social-
                                economic programs by governors, and quality assurance of territorial
                                bodies' performance. MTAI also monitors community budgets, addresses
                                citizen complaints about territorial and local self-government activities,
                                liaises with the media under its Public Information Policy, and develops
                                State policy for the National Archive.
                                All decisions regarding the identification, preparation, and implementation
                                of sub-projects under the WISE project will be fully coordinated with MTAI.
 Water Committee                The committee develops and implements the policy of the Government of
                                Alberta in managing and using state-owned water systems. As the WISE
                                Project execution agency, it will be responsible for all activities
                                implemented within the project.
 Project Management             The Project Management Structure will be established and will operate
 Structure                      under the WC. It will be responsible for day-to-day activities of the Project
                                including hiring consultants and contractors for
                                      -   development of a comprehensive national water strategy: a
                                          standalone ten-year national irrigation strategy, and a standalone
                                          rural drinking water and sanitation strategy; a national program of
                                          support and training for the existing WUA;
                                      -   elaboration of water systems (including irrigation as well as supply
                                          and sewage systems) rehabilitation and construction designs;
                                      -   implementation of civil works; and
                                      -   technical supervision of the construction works.
 Related Agencies               Roles and Responsibilities
 Ministry of Environment        At the national level, the MoE has the mandate for environmental
                                protection, the sustainable use and regeneration of natural resources and
                                the improvement of the environment. It issues permits for water use and
                                discharge. These functions are performed by the core body of the Ministry
                                as well as subordinated agencies including:
                                (i) “Environmental Impacts Expertise Center” SNCO is responsible for
                                      EIA and environmental permitting; designs of civil works to be
                                      implemented under the WISE Project may be subject to EIA and
                                      environmental classification by the MoE.
                                (ii) “Hydrometeorology and Monitoring Center” SNCO is responsible for
                                      monitoring water flow, water balance and water level fluctuations,
                                      research of environmental pollution and weather forecasting air as
                                      well as surface water quality monitoring.
                                It operates under the RoA GoA and performs the enforcement of laws and
 Environmental Protection
                                regulations pertaining to air and water pollution, land use, biodiversity
 and Mining Inspection Body
                                conservation and forest protection; exercises supervision and/or other
                                functions prescribed by laws. The Inspection Body may apply sanctions in
                                the field of environmental protection, as well as regarding the use and
                                reproduction of subsoil and mineral resources.
 Local Self-Governance Bodies   LSGB and local authorities assist the Project team with field studies,
                                organizing public consultations, and issuing permits for construction and
                                waste removal. They help resolve complaints and grievances and
                                participate in other necessary issues. Local authorities can also provide

                                                                                                                51
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                community lands for temporary or permanent use for Project activities
                                such as access roads, construction camps, and pipeline installations.
 Water User Associations        WUAs as direct stakeholders of rehabilitated canals take active role during
                                design preparation with selection of problematic sections of target canals
                                for rehabilitation. They provide key information required for economic
                                analysis on cultivated crops in the target area, the catchment area of the
                                canals, the size of irrigated and non-irrigated lands.

 5.1.5 The World Bank
The WB provides project implementation support to the Borrower throughout the project's lifecycle.
This includes reviewing and approving ToRs and bidding documents to ensure the proper
incorporation of ESHS aspects, site-specific E&S instruments for subprojects, quarterly monitoring
reports and biannual implementation progress reports for the WISE Project prepared by PCT, which
includes a chapter on ESHS performance. The WB will examine and evaluate the quality of E&S
supervision of subprojects as a part of its regular implementation support missions to WISE Project.
This would include a review of E&S monitoring reports submitted by PCT, as well as random field visits
to subproject implementation sites during WISE implementation support missions.




                                                                                                          52
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1


        CHAPTER 6. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT, INFORMATION
            DISCLOSURE AND GRIEVANCE MANAGEMENT
Stakeholder engagement is an inclusive process carried out throughout the project life cycle to build
strong, constructive, and responsive relationships. It aims to identify opportunities and risks both from
and to the project and is a core aspect of ESS 10. Participatory approach to framing E&S management
under WISE Project as well as for planning of E&S impact mitigation is essential to ensure the quality
and relevance of ESF instruments.

An SEP has been developed as a standalone document and will serve as the primary reference for
planning and implementing engagement activities with relevant stakeholders, including target
communities under all project components.

6.1 PUBLIC CONSULTATION
Public consultation meetings will be held in accordance with the requirements of ESS10 and the
respective legislation for the RA, and as specified in the Program SEP.
The Armenian laws regulating public consultation and coordination, as well as information availability
to the public are listed below:
    ▪   Fundamentals of the RA legislation on Nature Protection ensure citizen's right to request
        complete information concerning the environmental situation and obtain it on time.
    ▪   The Law on Environmental Impact Assessment and Expertise calls for mandatory disclosure of
        information on planned projects/programs, include information on their environmental
        implications, and requires solicitation of public feedback on the disclosed documentation.
    ▪   The Law on freedom of information ensures accessibility and transparency of information, as
        well as defines procedures for requesting and issuing of information by various types of legal
        bodies.
Detailed record of public consultation process will be kept. Minutes of all meetings held will be
produced to include the following information:
    ▪   What announcement was made on the meeting, through what media, and on what date?
    ▪   What was the time and venue of a meeting held?
    ▪   How many attendees were in the meeting?
    ▪   What was the agenda of the meeting?
    ▪   Who were key speakers and what aspects did they cover?
    ▪   What were the main types of questions asked by residents and how these questions were
        responded?
Minutes will be supported with photo material taken during consultation, with the consent of
participants, and lists of attendees with their contact information and original signatures.
This ESMF as well as site-specific ESMPs will be finalized with incorporation of feedback from the
stakeholders and re-disclosed along with the minutes of consultation meetings.
Public consultations will continue during the construction phase led by the PCT staff and construction
supervision contractors, and records of E&S issues raised, and complaints received during
consultations, field visits, informal discussions, formal letters, etc., will be followed up. The records
will be kept in the PCT office and be available for the WB upon request.

                                                                                                      53
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
More detailed information about stakeholder engagement and public disclosure are provided in the
SEP.

6.2 OUTREACH TO COMMUNITY AND VULNERABLE GROUPS

During the screening process, vulnerable segments of the affected community will be identified,
including but not limited to a significant number of women-headed households, ethnic minorities,
persons with disabilities, and extremely poor households. These groups require meaningful
consultation to ensure their perspectives and needs are adequately considered.

Stakeholder engagement will prioritize consultations, collaboration, empowerment, and two-way
communication. Targeted information and communication materials will be developed and
disseminated to these groups. Furthermore, focus group discussions, roundtable meetings, and
individual consultations with representatives or members of these groups will be conducted to
capture their perspectives, concerns, and specific requirements for inclusion in the project.

The concerns and recommendations raised will be duly considered in the development of detailed
designs to the greatest extent possible, and feedback will be provided to the relevant stakeholders.

The SEP prepared for the WISE Project provides details on outreach to community and vulnerable
groups.

6.3 INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
This draft ESMF will be disclosed through the WC’s web page and made available in print version at
the regional administrations in Armenian and English languages. Consultation on it will be undertaken
with relevant government and non-government institutions. ESIA reports for subprojects and/or Site-
specific ESMPs will also be disclosed in two languages on the WC’s web page, and hard copies in
Armenian will be delivered to the administrative centers closest to the subproject sites. Local
communities will be notified on the availability of these hard copies as well as on the means of
communicating their feedback on the documents under consideration. Public consultation meetings
with sub-project-affected people and relevant stakeholders will be held in the vicinity of subproject
sites selected to guarantee easy access of stakeholders.
The SEP prepared for the WISE Project provides details on how different stakeholders can be engaged
and informed of the Project.

6.4 FEEDBACK AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM
An FGRM will be established and maintained throughout the course of the Project. The GRM will
ensure that citizens can submit inquiries and grievances, and have their grievances redressed in a
timely and effective manner without directly addressing the court.
The Project will develop a separate Grievance Mechanism for direct and contract workers that will be
used to address complaints from workplace concerns and will be SEA/SH sensitive. The objective of
deployment of these measures is SEA/SH prevention and response to complaints. The details are
provided in the standalone LMP and the SEP.
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project or subproject
supported by the WB may also submit complaints to the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The
GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related
concerns. Project-affected communities and individuals may submit complaints to the WB’s
independent Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result
of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time

                                                                                                  54
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
after concerns have been brought directly to the WB’s attention, and Bank Management has been
given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the WB’s corporate
GRS,       please       visit     http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-
services/grievance-redress-service. For information on how to submit complaints to the WB
Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                                                               55
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

CHAPTER 7. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL CAPACITY BUILDING AND
TRAINING
In line with the project’s ESCP, the PCT will be responsible to prepare, and implement the capacity
building plan as part of the Project’s ESMF and Project Operations Manual (POM), including but not
limited to:
    •   training for PCT staff, relevant government stakeholders, WUAs, contractors, and supervision
        engineers on key E&S aspects of the project. This will cover but is not limited to subproject
        level ESIAs and ESMPs, OHS, safe management of hazardous wastes including ACMs, CHS,
        emergency preparedness and response, stakeholder engagement, prevention and
        management of SEA/SH, and grievance management.
    •   community engagement sessions and awareness programs on relevant E&S aspects of the
        project to promote safer project implementation and ensure affected communities
        understand their rights and available support systems.
To do so, the PCT shall establish and maintain an E&S team within the PCT that is tasked with E&S
management, covering subproject E&S assessment and instrument preparation, supervision, capacity
building and overall reporting. The team shall be equipped with qualified staff and resources to
effectively manage the ESHS aspects of the project. At a minimum, it shall include one environmental
specialist and one social specialist.
The PCT shall enter into cooperation with relevant government agencies both at the national and
subnational levels as well as non-government organizations to manage E&S risks and impacts of the
project.




                                                                                                  56
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

CHAPTER 8. BUDGET AND COST OF IMPLEMENTING ESMF
The costs associated with implementing the ESMF include expenses related to E&S impact
assessments, expert consultations, training, capacity-building activities, and mitigation measures.
Actual budget estimates for the various components of the WISE Project will be determined once
project activities are finalized. These estimates will be based on the specific nature of activities within
each component and will be incorporated into the design packages.
Table 9 provides an indicative cost for E&S assessments and capacity building activities for
implementation of ESMF (except E&S staff cost that are part of PCT staff budget).
Table 9: ESMF Implementation Budget
 ESMF implementation activities (incl. SEP)                 Unit Cost,        Q-ty        Total cost
                                                             (USD)                          (USD)
 Training/capacity building for PCT and involved             60,000          Lump          60,000
 agencies on ESF requirements during project                                  sum
 implementation
 ESIA/ESMPs and other assessment costs for                   150,000            6          900,000
 activities under Components 2 and 3
 For 6 years of implementation – 150,000 per year
 Capacity building for Project beneficiaries on              15,000             5          75,000
 thematic E&S areas

 E&S training for PCT staff, contractors’ staff and           5,000             5          25,000
 sub-contractors as well as supervision engineers
 (including on thematic capacity building)
 SEP implementation budget                                   110,000         Lump          110,000
                                                                              sum

 E&S staff                                                 TBD (part of     Monthly          TBD
                                                             the PCT
                                                             budget)
 Total                                                                                  1,170,000




                                                                                                        57
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

LIST OF ANNEXES
Annex 1 – Exclusion List
Annex 2 – Project-level Environmental and Social Reporting Template
Annex 3 – Environmental and Social Screening Form
Annex 4 – Outline of ESIA report
Annex 5 – Environmental and Social Management Plan Template
Annex 6 – Environmental and Social Codes of Practices
Annex 7 – Asbestos Management Guidance




                                                                            58
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

ANNEX 1. EXCLUSION LIST

Subprojects that include activities listed here are not eligible for financing.
    1. Subprojects involving major land acquisition through the use of eminent domain with
       significant impacts on livelihoods and/or result in physical displacement.
    2. Activities which will cause, or have the potential to result in, permanent and/or significant
       damage to non-replicable cultural heritage, such as irreplaceable cultural relics, historical
       buildings and/or archaeological sites.
    3. Activities that may cause or lead to forced labor or child abuse, child labor exploitation or
       human trafficking, or subprojects that employ or engage children, over the minimum age of
       14 and under the age of 18, in connection with the project in a manner that is likely to be
       hazardous or interfere with the child’s education or be harmful to the child’s health or
       physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or social development.
    4. Activities which will cause irreversible impacts on species of flora and fauna included in Red
       Books of RoA.
    5. Subprojects involving activities that have potential to cause any significant loss or degradation
       of critical habitats whether directly or indirectly, or which would lead to adverse impacts on
       natural habitats.
    6. Subprojects having significant impact on any ecosystems of importance (especially those
       supporting rare, threatened, or endangered species of flora and fauna).




                                                                                                     59
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

ANNEX 2. PROJECT-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL AND MONITORING TEMPLATE
This monitoring plan outlines key E&S indicators for compliance with WB ESSs relevant to the project.
In line with the ESCP, this report shall be submitted to the WB on a quarterly basis not later than 20
business days after the end of each reporting period and overall E&S project performance shall be
reflected in the project’s progress reports.
A. Status of E&S Management under the Project
        •    Component 1: Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening
             Summary of the project implementation status and Strategic SESA
        •    Component 2: Rural WSS Enhancement
             Summary of the feasibility studies, detailed design and infrastructure activities and site-specific
             ESIAs and ESMPs, and contractors’ E&S performance and emerging issues, including any incidents
             and/or accidents.
        •    Component 3: Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management
             Summary of the feasibility studies, detailed design and infrastructure activities and site-specific
             ESIAs and ESMPs, and contractors’ E&S performance and emerging issues, including any incidents
             and/or accidents.
B. Organizational Structure
    Status of the ESCP action:
        •    The PCT shall establish and maintain an E&S team responsible for E&S management, including
             assessment, supervision, capacity building, and reporting. The team shall consist of at least one
             environmental specialist and one social specialist.
        •    The PCT shall engage with relevant government agencies and non-government organizations to
             manage E&S risks and impacts.
        •    Monitoring Indicators:
              -   Recruitment of E&S specialists completed within 45 days of project effectiveness.
              -   Cooperation established with relevant government agencies and NGOs.


C. E&S Capacity Building Plan
    Status of the ESCP action:
         •    A capacity building plan will be prepared and implemented as part of the ESMF and POM. Training
              shall be provided for PCT staff, government agencies, WUAs, contractors, and supervision
              engineers on E&S impact assessment, OHS, CHS, SEA/SH prevention, and grievance management.
         •    Monitoring Indicators:
              -   Capacity building plan finalized within three months of project effectiveness.
              -   Training sessions conducted and documented.
D. E&S Supervision Status
Regular monitoring reports provided by the contractors and supervision engineers shall be analyzed to
understand the overall E&S compliance status for each sub-project activities. The same applies for the
implementation of the Component 1 that the PCT will need to monitor.
    •   Status of E&S document preparation and implementation.
    •   Stakeholder engagement activities.
    •   Complaints received and resolved through the grievance mechanism.
    •   Contractors’ and subcontractors’ E&S performance.
    •   Incidents and accidents
    •    E&S non-compliances with ESMPs and corrective actions.



                                                                                                             60
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
    a.   Contractors’ Monthly Reports
         Contractors and supervising firms will provide monthly monitoring reports on E&S performance,
         aligned with contract requirements.
         Monitoring Indicators:
         -   Monthly reports submitted for supervision engineers and PCT
         -   Quality of the reporting and data presented
         -   Non-performance and non-compliance issues
    b. Incidents and Accidents
         Significant project-related incidents or accidents must be reported to the Bank within 48 hours. An
         investigation will be conducted, and a Corrective Action Plan (CAP) will be implemented.
         Monitoring Indicators:
         -   Status of investigation
         -   Status of Corrective Action Plans (CAPs)
         -   Status of incident and/or accident closures


E. Environmental and Social Standards Monitoring
    Status of the implementation of the project according to each relevant ESSs as outlined in the project’s
    ESCP.
    a.   ESS1: Environmental and Social Assessment
    -    Status of SESA including key E&S issues and how measures will be integrated into regulatory reforms
         and strategy development, status of public consultations under Component 1
    -    Status of E&S screening at the sub-project level and respective site-specific ESIAs and ESMPs for
         Component 2 and 3
    b.   ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions
    -    Status of the implementation of the project’s LMP.
    -    Status of the workers’ GRM and records of any grievances and resolution
    c.   ESS3: Pollution Prevention and Waste Management
    -    Status of WMP implementation in respective ESMPs and C-ESMPs
    d.   ESS4: Community Health and Safety
    -    Status of CHS measures, including traffic safety and emergency response plans, incorporation of CHS
         into designs (esp. structural safety)
    -    Screening of dam safety requirements and implementation
    -    SEA/SH prevention measures
    e.   ESS5: Land Acquisition and Resettlement
    -    Screening of land acquisition and resettlement impacts for each scheme (irrigation and WSS)
    -    Status of preparation and implementation of RPs
    -    Grievances related to land acquisition and expropriation of assets
    f.   ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation
    -    Assessment of biodiversity risks and impacts screening and status of mitigation measures in site-specific
         ESMPs and C-ESMPs where applicable.
    g.   ESS8: Cultural Heritage
    -    Screening of cultural heritage risks and impacts for each sub-scheme (irrigation and WSSs) and
         implementation of mitigation measures (i.e., Cultural Heritage Management Plans) in site-specific
         ESMPs and C-ESMPs where applicable.
    -    Chance finds in project’s sites and implementation of chance finds procedures.
    h. ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure



                                                                                                               61
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
    -   Status of SEP implementation, including compliance with information disclosure requirements and
        public consultations
    -   Status of project FGRMs, including clearly established roles and responsibilities, FGRM publicization,
        uptake channels and SHA/SH referral pathways
    -   Grievance records and status of their resolution
F. Corrective Action Plans to Address Non-Compliances
G. E&S Workplan for the next quarter




                                                                                                           62
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

ANNEX 3. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING FORM
The environmental and social screening procedure consists of two stages: (1) Initial screening using
the Exclusion List in Annex 1; and (2) Screening proposed activities to identify the approach for E&S
risk management. This Screening Form is the second stage and is used for all subprojects. Completed
forms will be kept in the Project files and may be reviewed by the WB during project implementation.
1. Subproject Information:

 Subproject Title

 Subproject Location

 Implementing Agency

 Estimated Cost

 Start/Completion Date

 Brief Description of
 Subproject



2. Environmental and Social Screening Questionnaire

                                                           Answer
                        Questions                                                  Next Steps
                                                          Yes   No

 ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

 Is the subproject likely to have significant adverse                If “Yes”: Exclude from project.
 environmental impacts that are sensitive and
 unprecedented that trigger the ‘Ineligible Activities’
 in the exclusion list and/or classified as high risk?

 Are the risks and potential impacts associated with                 If “Yes”:
 subproject have the majority or all of the following                -    Prepare a site-specific ESIA with
 characteristics: i) mostly temporary, predictable                        ESMP for the proposed
 and/or reversible and the nature of the project does                     subproject, based on the
 not preclude the possibility of avoiding or reversing                    template in Annex 3.
 them; ii) adverse social impacts may give rise to a                 -    Include E&S risk management
 limited degree of social conflict, harm or risk to                       measures in bidding documents
 human security; iii) medium in magnitude and/or
 spatial extent; iv) there is medium to low probability
 of serious adverse effects to human health and/or
 the environment (e.g., due to accidents, toxic waste
 disposal, etc.), and are there known and reliable
 mechanisms available to prevent or minimize such
 incidents?


 Does the subproject involve construction of water                   If “Yes”:
 reservoirs?


                                                                                                              63
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                                                                -       Prepare a site-specific ESIA
                                                                                        with ESMP for the proposed
                                                                                        subproject, based on the
                                                                                        template in Annex 3.
                                                                                -       Include E&S risk management
                                                                                        measures in bidding
                                                                                        documents

 Does the subproject involve renovation or                                  If “Yes”:
 rehabilitation of any small-scale infrastructure of the
                                                                            -    Apply relevant measures based
 existing WSS and irrigation networks?
                                                                                 on the ESCOPs in Annex 5
                                                                                 (unless specific renovation and/or
                                                                                 rehabilitation raises specific
                                                                                 environmental and social risks
                                                                                 requiring     a site-specific
                                                                                 ESMP).
                                                                            -    Include E&S risk management
                                                                                 measures in bidding documents.

 Does the project lead to any risks and impacts on,                         If “Yes”: Apply relevant measures
 individuals or groups who, because of their particular                     described in the ESMF, RPF and SEP.
 circumstances, may be disadvantaged or
 vulnerable.13

 ESS2

 Does the subproject involve uses of goods and                              If “Yes”: Exclude from project.
 equipment involving forced labor, child labor, or
 other harmful or exploitative forms of labor?


 Does the subproject involve recruitment of                                 If “Yes”: Apply LMP
 workforce including direct, contracted, primary
 supply, and/or community workers?

 Will the workers be exposed to workplace hazards                           If “Yes”: Apply LMP
 that needs to be managed in accordance with local
 regulations and EHS Guidelines? Do workers need
 PPE relative to the potential risks and hazards
 associated with their work?



 Is there a risk that women and/or other category of                        If “Yes”: Apply LMP
 workers (i.e., sub-contractors’ workers, community
 workers) may be underpaid when compared to other
 categories of workers when working on the project
 construction?


13 “Disadvantaged or vulnerable” refers to those individuals or groups who, by virtue of, for example, their age,

gender, ethnicity, religion, physical, mental or other disability, social, civic or health status, sexual orientation,
gender identity, economic disadvantages or ethnic peoples status, and/or dependence on unique natural
resources, may be more likely to be adversely affected by the project impacts and/or more limited than others in
their ability to take advantage of a project’s benefits.



                                                                                                                   64
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1



 ESS3

 Is the project likely to generate solid or liquid waste           If “Yes”:
 that could adversely impact soils, vegetation, rivers,
                                                                   -    Prepare a site-specific ESMP for
 streams or groundwater, or nearby communities?
                                                                        the proposed subproject, based
                                                                        on the template in Annex 4 .
                                                                   -    Include E&S risk management
                                                                        measures in bidding documents.

 Do any of the construction works involve the removal              If “Yes”: Apply asbestos guidance
 of asbestos or other hazardous materials?                         provided      in Annex 6.

 Are works likely to cause significant negative impacts            If “Yes”:
 to air and / or water quality?
                                                                   -    Prepare a site-specific ESMP for
                                                                        proposed subproject, based on
                                                                        the template in Annex 4 .
                                                                   -    Include E&S risk management
                                                                        measures in bidding documents.

 Does the activity rely on existing infrastructure (such           If “Yes”:
 as discharge points) that is inadequate to prevent
                                                                   -    Prepare a site-specific ESMP for
 environmental impacts?
                                                                        the proposed subproject, based
                                                                        on the template in Annex 4 .
                                                                   -    Include E&S risk management
                                                                        measures in bidding documents.

 ESS4

 Is there a risk of increased community exposure to                If “Yes”: Apply LMP    and relevant
 communicable disease (HIV/AIDS, Malaria), or                      measures in SEP.
 increase in the risk of traffic related accidents?


 Is an influx of workers, from outside the community,              If “Yes”: Apply LMP
 expected? Would workers be expected to use health
 services of the community? Would they create
 pressures on existing community services (water,
 electricity, health, recreation, others?)

 Is there a risk that SEA/SH may increase as a result of           If “Yes”: Apply LMP
 project works?

 Will the subproject require the government to retain              If “Yes”: Prepare a site-specific ESMP
 workers to provide security to safeguard the                      for the proposed subproject, including
 subproject?                                                       an assessment of potential risks and
                                                                   mitigation measures of using security
                                                                   personnel.

 ESS5




                                                                                                           65
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

 Will the subproject require the involuntary                                 If “Yes”: Refer to and apply the project
 acquisition of new land (will the government use                            RF.
 eminent domain powers to acquire the land)?14

 Will the subproject lead to permanent physical                              If “Yes”: Exclude from project.
 displacement (including people without legal claims
 to land)?

 Will the subproject lead to economic displacement                           If “Yes”: Refer to and apply the project
 (such as loss of assets or livelihoods, or access to                        RF
 resources due to land acquisition or access
 restrictions)?

 Has the site of the subproject been acquired through                        If “Yes”: Refer to and apply the project
 eminent domain in the past 5 years, in anticipation of                      RF
 the subproject?

 Are there any AF needed for the subproject (such as                         If “Yes”: Refer to and apply the project
 access roads) that will require the involuntary                             RF
 acquisition of new land?

 Is private land required for the subproject activity                        If “Yes”: Refer to and apply the project
 being voluntarily donated to the project?15                                 RF

 ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources

 Does the subproject involve activities that have                            If “Yes”: Exclude from project.
 potential to cause any significant loss or degradation
 of critical habitats16 whether directly or indirectly, or
 which would lead to adverse impacts on natural
 habitats17?

 Is subproject site located in a designated natural                          If “Yes”:
 protected area?



14 ESS5, Footnote 10: “In some circumstances, it may be proposed that part or all of the land to be used by the

project is donated on a voluntary basis without payment of full compensation. Subject to prior Bank approval, this
may be acceptable providing the Borrower demonstrates that: (a) the potential donor or donors have been
appropriately informed and consulted about the project and the choices available to them; (b) potential donors are
aware that refusal is an option, and have confirmed in writing their willingness to proceed with the donation; (c) the
amount of land being donated is minor and will not reduce the donor’s remaining land area below that required to
maintain the donor’s livelihood at current levels; (d) no household relocation is involved; (e) the donor is expected
to benefit directly from the project; and (f) for community or collective land, donation can only occur with the consent
of individuals using or occupying the land. The Borrower will maintain a transparent record of all consultations and
agreements reached.”
15 See above footnote

16 ESS6, paragraph 23: “Critical habitat is defined as areas with high biodiversity importance or value, including (a)

Habitat of significant importance to Critically Endangered or Endangered species, as listed in the IUCN Red List of
threatened species or equivalent national approaches; (b) Habitat of significant importance to endemic or restricted-
range species; (c) Habitat supporting globally or nationally significant concentrations of migratory or congregatory
species; (d) Highly threatened or unique ecosystems; and (e) Ecological functions or characteristics that are
needed to maintain the viability of the biodiversity values described above in (a) to (d).”
17 ESS6, paragraph 21: “Natural habitats are areas composed of viable assemblages of plant and/or animal species

of largely native origin, and/or where human activity has not essentially modified an area’s primary ecological
functions and species composition.”



                                                                                                                     66
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
                                                                  -       Prepare a site-specific ESIA with
                                                                          ESMP for the proposed subproject,
                                                                          based on the template in Annex 3.
                                                                  -       Include E&S risk management
                                                                          measures in bidding documents.

 Will the project involve the conversion or degradation               If “Yes”:
 of non-critical natural habitats?
                                                                      -   Prepare a site-specific ESIA with
                                                                          ESMP     for the proposed
                                                                          subproject, based on the template
                                                                          in Annex 3.
                                                                      -   Include E&S risk management
                                                                          measures in bidding documents.

 Will the     activity require extensive clearance of                 If “Yes”:
 trees, including inland natural vegetation?
                                                                  -       Prepare a site-specific ESIA with
                                                                          ESMP     for the proposed
                                                                          subproject, based on the template
                                                                          in Annex 3.
                                                                  -       Include E&S risk management
                                                                          measures in bidding documents.

 Will there be any significant impact on any                          If “Yes”: Exclude from project.
 ecosystems of importance (especially those
 supporting rare, threatened, or endangered species
 of flora and fauna)?

 ESS8

 Is the subproject to be located adjacent to a sensitive              If “Yes”: Apply Chance Find
 site (historical or archaeological or culturally                     Procedures
 significant site) or facility?


 Is the subproject to be located near buildings, sacred               If “Yes”: Apply Chance Find
 trees or objects having spiritual values to local                    Procedures
 communities (e.g., memorials, graves, or stones), or
 require excavation near there?



3. Conclusion


Subproject is declined




Sub-project is accepted




                                                                                                           67
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1
Based on the screening outcome, applicable E&S risk management instruments are:

 ESIA including ESMP



 Stand-alone
 ESMP



 ESCOPs



 RAP




Name and title of person who conducted screening:
Date of screening:




                                                                                  68
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

ANNEX 4. OUTLINE OF ESIA REPORT
Executive Summary (not more than 5 pages)
Introduction
Environmental and Social Screening Outcome
Project Description
Analysis of Alternatives
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Methodology
Environmental and Social Baseline
Expected Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
Impact Mitigation
Environmental and Social Management Plan
CHAPTER 1. Introduction
CHAPTER 2. Legal and Policy Framework
CHAPTER 3. Technical, ESSs and Regulations
CHAPTER 4. Project Description
CHAPTER 5. Analysis of Alternatives
CHAPTER 6. Environmental and Social Screening
CHAPTER 7. ESIA Methodology
CHAPTER 8. Physical and Natural Environment
CHAPTER 9. Potential Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
CHAPTER 10. Impact Mitigation
CHAPTER 11. Environmental and Social Management Plan
(Institutional and reporting arrangements)
Annex 1 Environmental and Social Management Matrix (mitigation plan and monitoring plan)
Annex 2. Public Consultation
Annex 3. References
Annex 4. Maps, Graphs, Pictures
Annex 5. ESIA Team Composition




                                                                                           69
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

ANNEX 5: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
TEMPLATE
PART A: GENERAL PROJECT AND SITE INFORMATION


INSTITUTIONAL & ADMINISTRATIVE
Subproject title
Municipality,
community
Scope of site-specific
activity
Institutional                    Task Team Leader:                    Environmental Specialist:
arrangements (WB)                                                           Social Specialist:
Implementation              Implementing entity:        Works supervisor:           Works contractor:
arrangements (RoA)

SITE DESCRIPTION
       Address and site
               location
   Who owns the land?
     Who uses the land
     (formal/informal)?
 Description of physical
            and natural
  environment around
                the site
 Locations and distance
  for material sourcing,
  especially aggregates,
         water, stones?
LEGISLATION
        National & local
   legislation & permits
   that apply to project
                 activity
PUBLIC CONSULTATION
     When / where the
    public consultation
 process will take /took
                   place
ATTACHMENTS

                                                                                                        70
ESMF - Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Program (WISE) – Phase 1

Attachment 1: Site map/photo
Attachment 2: Records of Public Consultation Process
Attachment 3: Licenses/Permits/Agreements held by contractor




                                                                            71
PART B: SAFEGUARDS INFORMATION

 ENVIRONMENTAL /SOCIAL SCREENING
                              Activity/Issue                                                                   Status                               Triggered Actions

                                   1. Rehabilitation                                                           [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section A below
                                   2. New construction                                                         [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section A below
                                   3. Individual wastewater treatment system                                   [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section B below
 Will the site activity            4. Toxic or hazardous materials18                                           [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section C below
 include/involve any
 of the following?                 5. Impacts on forests and/or protected areas                                [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section D below
                                   6. Acquisition of land19                                                    [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section E below
                                   7. Traffic and Pedestrian Safety                                            [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section F below
                                   8. Community and labor health and safety                                    [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section G below
                                   9. Preservation of Cultural Heritage                                        [ ] Yes [ ] No                       See Section H below




18   Toxic / hazardous material includes but is not limited to asbestos, toxic paints, noxious solvents, removal of lead paint, etc.
19 Land acquisitions includes displacement of people, change of livelihood encroachment on private property this is to land that is purchased/transferred and affects people who are living and/or squatters and/or operate

a business (kiosks) on land that is being acquired.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        72
PART C: MITIGATION MEASURES



 ACTIVITY         PARAMETER           MITIGATION MEASURES CHECKLIST

 0. General        Notification and   (a) The public has been notified of the works through appropriate notification at each work site (including information on the
 Conditions         Worker Safety          company undertaking works and contact information).
                                      (b) All legally required permits for extraction of construction materials, disposal of waste, and others as relevant have been
                                           acquired for construction and/or rehabilitation.
                                      (c) All work will be carried out in a safe and disciplined manner designed to minimize impacts on neighboring residents and
                                           environment.
                                      (d) Workers’ PPE will comply with international good practice (always hardhats, as needed masks and safety glasses, harnesses
                                           and safety boots).
                                      (e) Appropriate signposting of the sites will inform workers of key rules and regulations to follow.
                                      (a) Use debris chutes during interior demolition above the first floor.
 A. General          Air Quality
                                      (b) Keep demolition debris in a controlled area and spray with water mist to reduce debris dust.
 Rehabilitation                       (c) Suppress during pneumatic drilling/wall destruction by ongoing water spraying and/or installing dust screen enclosures at
 and /or                                   site.
 Construction                         (d) Keep the surrounding environment (sidewalks, roads) free of debris to minimize dust.
 Activities                           (e) There will be no open burning of construction / waste material at the site.
                                      (f) There will be no excessive idling of construction vehicles at sites.
                                      (a) Limit construction noise to daytime working hours.
                        Noise
                                      (b) During operations the engine covers of generators, close air compressors and other powered mechanical equipment, and place
                                           equipment as far away from residential areas as possible.
                                      (a) Establish appropriate erosion and sediment control measures such as hay bales and / or silt fences to prevent sediment from
                    Water Quality
                                           moving off site and causing excessive turbidity in nearby streams and rivers.
                                      (b) Wash construction vehicles and machinery only in designated areas where runoff will not pollute natural surface water bodies.
                                      (a) Minimize amount of generated waste to the extent possible.
                  Waste management
                                      (b) Waste collection and disposal pathways and sites will be identified for all major waste types expected from demolition and
                                           construction activities.
                                      (c) Mineral construction and demolition wastes will be separated from general refuse, organic, liquid and chemical wastes by
                                           on-site sorting and stored in appropriate containers.
                                      (d) Allocate sites for temporary on-site storage of various types of waste. Do not allow accumulation of excessive amounts of
                                           waste on-site.


                                                                                                                                                                          73
                                        (e) Inert construction waste will be collected and disposed of properly by licensed collectors or by obtaining formal
                                              arrangements with municipal authorities to allocate a disposal site for inert construction waste.
                                        (f) Make timely arrangements for the disposal or hand-over of hazardous waste to licensed companies.
                                        (g) The records of waste disposal will be maintained as proof for proper management as designed.
                                        (h) Whenever feasible the contractor will reuse and recycle appropriate and viable materials (except asbestos)
                                        (a) Topsoil removal and temporary stockpiling for re-cultivation of the land.
                        Topsoil
                                        (b) To avoid the topsoil erosion, keep the height of its piles below 2 m and the inclination of the slope - below 45o.
                      Management        (c) Arrange water diversion channels along the perimeter of the topsoil fill and protect piles against the scattering by the wind
                                             blow.
                                        (d) In case of storing the topsoil for long, periodically loosen it or saw grass.
                                        (e) The contractor is responsible for handling topsoil in accordance with the requirements of Armenian legislation and the
                                             reinstatement plan (if any).
                                        (f) Temporary storage of excavated soil at determined places.
                                        (g) Backfilling of the excavated ground as needed and disposal of the excess mass to the places, approved in writing.
                                        (a) Use existing plants, quarries or borrow pits that have appropriate official approval or valid operating license.
                     Material supply
                                        (a) Obtain licenses for any new quarries and/or borrowing areas if their operation is required.
                                        (b) Reinstate used sections of quarries and/or borrowing areas as extraction proceeds on or properly close quarries if extraction
                                             is completed and the license expires.

                      Water Quality
                                        (a) The approach to handling sanitary wastes and wastewater from building sites (installation or reconstruction) must be
B. Individual
                                            approved by the local authorities.
wastewater                              (b) Before being discharged into receiving waters, effluents from individual wastewater systems must be treated in order to
treatment system                            meet the minimal quality criteria set out by national guidelines on effluent quality and wastewater treatment.
                                        (c) Monitoring of new wastewater systems (before/after) will be carried out.
C. Toxic/             Asbestos          (a) If asbestos is located on the project site, it shall be marked clearly as hazardous material.
hazardous            management         (b) When possible the asbestos will be appropriately contained and sealed to minimize exposure.
Materials                               (c) The asbestos prior to removal (if removal is necessary) will be treated with a wetting agent to minimize asbestos dust
                                        (d) Asbestos will be handled and disposed by skilled & experienced professionals.
                                        (e) If asbestos material is to be stored temporarily, the wastes should be securely enclosed inside closed containments and
                                            marked appropriately. Security measures will be taken against unauthorized removal from the site.
                                        (f) The removed asbestos should not be reused.

                    Toxic / hazardous   (a) Temporarily storage on site of all hazardous or toxic substances will be in safe containers labeled with details of composition,
                   waste management         properties and handling information.
                                        (b) The containers of hazardous substances shall be placed in a leak-proof container to prevent spillage and leaching.
                                        (c) The wastes shall be transported by specially licensed carriers and disposed in a licensed facility.
                                        (d) Paints with toxic ingredients or solvents or lead-based paints will not be used.
                                                                                                                                                                               74
                                          (e) All recognized natural habitats, wetlands and protected areas in the immediate vicinity of the activity will not be damaged or
D. Affected             Protection
                                              exploited, all staff will be strictly prohibited from hunting, foraging, logging or other damaging activities.
forests, wetlands                         (f) A survey and an inventory shall be made of large trees in the vicinity of the construction activity, large trees shall be marked
and/or protected                              and cordoned off with fencing, their root system protected, and any damage to the trees avoided.
areas                                     (g) Adjacent wetlands and streams shall be protected from construction site run-off with appropriate erosion and sediment
                                              control feature to include by not limited to hay bales and silt fences.
                                          (h) There will be no unlicensed borrow pits, quarries or waste dumps in adjacent areas, especially not in protected areas.

                                          (a) If expropriation of land was not expected but is required, or if loss of access or income of legal or illegal users of land was not
E. Unexpected         Private land
                                              expected but may occur, do not enter site and promptly notify the employer.
need for land        ownership/use        (b) Do not commence works requiring land take prior to official notice of employer on the completion of involuntary
take                                          resettlement and full provision of compensation to the affected people.

F. Traffic and      Direct or indirect    In compliance with national regulations, ensure that the construction site is properly secured, and construction-related traffic is
Pedestrian Safety   hazards to public     regulated. This includes but is not limited to:
                       traffic and             ▪ Signposting, warning signs, barriers, and traffic diversions: site will be clearly visible, and the public warned of all
                     pedestrians by               potential hazards.
                      construction             ▪ Traffic management system and staff training, especially for site access and near-site heavy traffic. Provision of safe
                                                  passages and crossings for pedestrians where construction traffic interferes.
                        activities
                                               ▪ Adjustment of working hours to local traffic patterns, e.g., avoiding major transport activities during rush hours or times
                                                  of livestock movement.
                                               ▪ Active traffic management by trained and visible staff at the site, if required for safe and convenient passage for the
                                                  public.
                                              ▪ Safe and continuous access to office facilities, shops, and residences during renovation activities, if the buildings stay
                                                  open for the public.

                                          (a) Assign local liaison person within Contractor’s team to be in charge of communication with and receiving requests/ complaints
G. Community        Public relationship
                                              from local population.
and labor health      management          (b) Consult local communities to identify and proactively manage potential conflicts between an external workforce and local
and safety                                    people.
                                          (c) Raise local community awareness about sexually transmitted disease risks associated with the presence of an external
                                              workforce and include local communities in awareness activities.
                                          (d) Inform the population about construction and work schedules, interruption of services, traffic detour routes and provisional
                                              bus routes, blasting and demolition, as appropriate.


                                                                                                                                                                                    75
                                          (e) Limit construction activities at night. When necessary, ensure that night work is carefully scheduled, and the community is
                                               properly informed, so they can take necessary measures.
                                          (f) At least five days in advance of any service interruption (including water, electricity, telephone, bus routes), advice community
                                               through postings at the work site, at bus stops, and in affected homes/businesses.
                                          (g) Address concerns raised through Grievance Redress Mechanism established by the Employer within the designated timeline
                                               within the scope of Contractor’s liability.
                                          (h) To the extent possible, do not locate work camps in close proximity to local communities.
                                          (i) Undertake siting and operation of worker camps in consultation with neighboring communities.
                                          (a) Recruit unskilled or semi-skilled workers from local communities to the extent possible. Where and when feasible, worker
                     Labor management
                                               skills training, should be provided to enhance participation of local people.
                                          (b) Provide adequate lavatory facilities (toilets and washing areas) in the work site with adequate supplies of hot and cold
                                               running water, soap, and hand drying devices. A temporary septic tank system should be established for any residential labor
                                               camp and without causing pollution of nearby watercourses.
                                          (c) Raise awareness of workers on overall relationship management with local population, establish the code of conduct in line
                                               with international practice and strictly enforce them, including the dismissal of workers and financial penalties of adequate
                                               scale.
                                          (d) Immediately inform technical supervisor of works and the employer on any OHS accidents/incidents at worksite, access roads,
                                               etc. involving contractor’s personnel, which have caused damage to human or/and environmental health.
                                          (a) FGRM is established and advertised at the local level. The Contractor is informed of his responsibility to register and
                           FGRM
                                               communicate to the PIU received verbal and non-verbal grievances.
                                          (b) FGRM contact information, including local focal points, has been posted at the construction site and the local community’s
                                               administrative office.
                                          (c) The Contractors' local liaison person receives and registers grievances from the population in the FGRM log and
                                               communicates the grievances to the PIU regularly.
                                          (a) Conduct SEA/SH awareness training for all workers, emphasizing appropriate workplace behavior, reporting mechanisms, and
                     SEA/SH preventive
                                               zero tolerance for harassment.
                          actions         (b) Ensure the availability of confidential and accessible reporting channels for SEA/SH-related grievances, including anonymous
                                               reporting options.
                                          (c) Establish and strictly enforce a code of conduct in line with international best practices, including specific provisions on
                                               SEA/SH prevention.
H. Preservation of                        (a) If an activity is implemented in the vicinity of cultural heritage sites/monuments or within their protective zones, a notification
                      Cultural Heritage
Cultural Heritage                              shall be made, and approvals/permits shall be obtained from local authorities. All construction activities must be planned and
                                               carried out in accordance with local and national legislation.




                                                                                                                                                                                    76
(b) It shall be ensured that provisions are put in place so that artifacts or other possible “chance finds” encountered in excavation
    or construction are noted and registered, responsible officials contacted, and works activities delayed or modified to account
    for such finds.




                                                                                                                                        77
PART D: MONITORING PLAN



                  What         Where           How                           Why           Who
                                                               When
                  (Is the      (Is the        (Is the                        (Is the        (Is
                                                             (Define the
     Activity   parameter    parameter      parameter                      parameter    responsible
                                                             frequency /
                   to be        to be          to be                         being          for
                                                                  or
                monitored?   monitored?     monitored?                     monitored?   monitoring?
                                                            continuous?)
                      )            )              )                              )           )

                                       CONSTRUCTION PHASE


1.

2.

…

n.

                                          OPERATION PHASE


1.

2.

…

n.




                                                                                                      78
   FIELD ENVIONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MONITROING CHECKLIST

Subproject number and title

Municipality, community

Name of technical supervisor

Name of works contractor

Date of site visit

Status of civil works
                                                                                  Status
Documents and activities to be examined                                                               Comments
                                                                     Yes   Partially       No   N/A
Contractor holds license for extraction of natural resources
Contractor holds permit for operating concrete/asphalt plant
Contractor holds agreement for final disposal of waste
Contractor holds agreement with service provider for removal of
household waste from site
Work site is fenced, and warning signs installed
Works do not impede pedestrian access and motor traffic, or
temporary alternative access is provided
Working hours are observed
Construction machinery and equipment is in standard technical
condition (no excessive exhaust and noise, no leakage of fuels and
lubricants)
Construction materials and waste are transported under the
                                                                                                                 79
covered hood
Construction site is watered in case of excessively dusty works
Contractor’s camp or work base is fenced; sites for temporary
storage of waste and for vehicle/equipment servicing are
designated
Contractor’s camp is supplied with water and sanitation is
provided
Contractor’s camp or work base is equipped with first medical aid
and fire-fighting kits
Workers wear uniforms and protective gear adequate for
technological processes (gloves, helmets, respirators, eyeglasses,
etc.)
Servicing and fuelling of vehicles and machinery is undertaken on
an impermeable surface in a confined space which can contain
operational and emergency spills
Vehicles and machinery are washed away from natural water
bodies in the way preventing direct discharge of runoff into the
water bodies
Construction waste is being disposed exclusively in the designated
locations
Extraction of natural construction material takes place strictly
under conditions specified in the license
Excess material and topsoil generated from soil excavation are
stored separately and used for backfilling / site reinstatement as
required
Works taken on hold if chance find encountered and
communication made to the State agencies responsible for cultural
heritage preservation


                                                                     80
Upon completion of physical activity on site, the site and
contractor’s camp/base cleared of any remaining left-over from
works and harmonized with surrounding landscape
Grievance redress information available and accessible to project
community (billboards, brochures, etc.)
Grievance log maintained; summary of grievances
Accidental damages caused by contractor have been restored
In the event of land acquisition/resettlement impacts,
compensation delivered before start of construction works




                                                                    81
ANNEX 6. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL CODES OF PRACTICES
To manage and mitigate potential negative environmental impacts, the project applies Environmental Codes of
Practice (ESCOPs); outlined in this document. The ESCOPs contain specific, detailed, and tangible measures that
would mitigate the potential impacts of each type of eligible subproject activity under the project. They are
marked as relevant for the planning phase, the implementation phase, or the post-implementation phase of
activities. They are intended to be simple risk mitigation and management measures, readily usable to the
Borrower and contractors. The ESCOPs consist of general ESCOP for infrastructure and specific ESCOPs for WSS
and irrigation rehabilitation sub-projects.
General ESCOP for Infrastructure Activities
    Issue                     Environmental Prevention/Mitigation Measures                       Responsible Party
 Noise                                       Planning Phase                                      Construction
 during                                                                                          contractor,
 construction   a)    Plan activities in consultation with communities so that noisiest          technical
                      activities are undertaken during periods that will result in least         supervision
                      disturbance.                                                               consultant, PCT
                                             Implementation Phase
                b)    Use when needed and feasible noise-control methods such as fences,
                      barriers, or deflectors (such as muffling devices for combustion engines
                      or planting of fast-growing trees).
                c)    Minimize project transportation through community areas. Maintain a
                      buffer zone (such as open spaces, row of trees or vegetated areas)
                      between the project site and residential areas to lessen the impact of
                      noise to the living quarters.
 Soil erosion                                       Planning Phase                                Construction
                 a)   Schedule construction during dry season to the extent possible.             contractor,
                 b) Design infrastructure so that it will create least impact.                    technical
                                            Implementation Phase                                  supervision
                 c) Contour and minimize length and steepness of slopes.                          consultant, PCT
                 d) Use mulch, grasses, or compacted soil to stabilize exposed areas.
                 e) Minimize use of heavy machinery.
                 f) Use erosion control measures such as hay bales and silt fencing.
                 g) Cover pile with plastic sheeting; prevent runoff with hay bales, or
                    similar measures.
                                          Post-Implementation Phase
                 h) Cover with topsoil and re-vegetate (plant grass, fast-growing
                    plants/bushes/trees) construction areas quickly once work is
                    completed.
                 i) Design channels and ditches for post-construction flows and line steep
                    channels/slopes (e.g., with palm frowns, jute mats, etc.).
 Air quality                              Implementation Phase                                   Construction
                 a) Minimize dust from exposed work sites by applying water on the               contractor,
                    ground regularly during dry season.                                          technical
                 b) Avoid burn site clearance debris (trees, undergrowth) or construction        supervision
                    waste materials.                                                             consultant, PCT
                 c) Keep stockpile of aggregate materials covered to avoid suspension or
                    dispersal of fine soil particles during windy days or disturbance from
                    stray animals.
                 d) Reduce the operation hours of generators /machines /equipment
                    /vehicles.

                                                                                                            82
               e)   Control vehicle speed when driving through community areas is
                    unavoidable so that dust dispersion from vehicle transport is
                    minimized. (Implementation phase)
Water                                     Implementation Phase                                       Construction
quality and                                                                                          contractor,
availability   a)   Activities should not affect the availability of water for drinking and          technical
                    hygienic purposes.                                                               supervision
               b)   No soiled materials, solid wastes, toxic or hazardous materials should           consultant, PCT
                    be stored in, poured into, or thrown into water bodies for dilution or
                    disposal.
               c)   Avoid the use of wastewater pools particularly without impermeable
                    liners.
               d)   Provision of toilets with temporary septic tank.
               e)   The flow of natural waters should not be obstructed or diverted to
                    another direction, which may lead to drying up of riverbeds or flooding
                    of settlements.
               f)   Separate concrete works in waterways and keep concrete mixing
                    separate from drainage leading to waterways.
Hazardous                                    Implementation Phase                                    Construction
and non-       a)   Segregate construction waste as recyclable, hazardous and non-                   contractor,
hazardous           hazardous waste.                                                                 technical
waste          b)   Collect, store and transport construction waste to appropriately                 supervision
                    designated/ controlled dump sites.                                               consultant, PCT
               c)   On-site storage of wastes prior to final disposal (including earth dug for
                    foundations) should be at least 300 metres from rivers, streams, lakes,
                    and wetlands.
               d)   Use secured area for refuelling and transfer of other toxic fluids distant
                    from settlement area (and at least 50 metres from drainage structures
                    and 100 metres from important water bodies); ideally on a hard/non-
                    porous surface.
               e)   Train workers on correct transfer and handling of fuels and other
                    substances and require the use of gloves, boots, aprons, eyewear, and
                    other protective equipment for protection in handling highly hazardous
                    materials.
               f)   Collect and properly dispose of small amount of maintenance materials
                    such as oily rags, oil filters, used oil, etc. Never dispose spent oils on the
                    ground and in water courses as it can contaminate soil and
                    groundwater (including drinking water aquifer).
                                         Post-Implementation Phase

               g)   After each construction site is decommissioned, all debris and waste
                    shall be cleared.
Asbestos                                   Implementation Phase                                      Construction
                                                                                                     contractor,
                    a) If asbestos or ACM are found at a construction site, they should be           technical
                       clearly marked as hazardous waste.                                            supervision
                    b) The asbestos should be appropriately contained and sealed to                  consultant, PCT
                       minimize exposure.
                    c) Prior to removal, if removal is necessary, ACM should be treated
                       with a wetting agent to minimize asbestos dust.
                    d) Asbestos will be handled and disposed by skilled & experienced
                       professionals.



                                                                                                                83
          e)   If ACM is to be stored temporarily, it should be securely placed
               inside closed containers and clearly labeled. Security measures will
               be taken against unauthorized removal from the site.
          f)   The removed asbestos should not be reused.
                                Post-Implementation Phase

     g)   Removed ACM must not be reused.

HS                                      Planning Phase                                   Construction
                                                                                         contractor,
     a)    When planning activities of each subproject, discuss steps to avoid           technical
           people getting hurt.                                                          supervision
           It is useful to consider:                                                     consultant, PCT
           ● Construction place: Are there any hazards that could be removed
                 or should warn people about?
           ● The people who will be taking part in construction: Do the
                 participants have adequate skill and physical fitness to perform
                 their works safely?
           ● The equipment: Are there checks you could do to make sure that
                 the equipment is in good working order? Do people need any
                 particular skills or knowledge to enable them to use it safely?
           ● Electricity Safety: Do any electricity good practices such as use of
                 safe extension cords, voltage regulators and circuit breakers, labels
                 on electrical wiring for safety measure, aware on identifying
                 burning smell from wires, etc. apply at site? Is the worksite stocked
                 with voltage detectors, clamp meters and receptacle testers?

                                 Implementation Phase

     b) Mandate the use of personal protective equipment for workers as
         necessary (gloves, dust masks, hard hats, boots, goggles).
     c) Follow the below measures for construction involve work at height
         (e.g., 2 meters above ground):
         ● Do as much work as possible from the ground.
         ● Do not allow people with the following personal risks to perform
              work at height tasks: eyesight/balance problem; certain chronic
              diseases – such as osteoporosis, diabetes, arthritis, or Parkinson’s
              disease; certain medications – sleeping pills, tranquillisers, blood
              pressure medication or antidepressants; recent history of falls –
              having had a fall within the last 12 months, etc.
         ● Only allow people with sufficient skills, knowledge, and experience
              to perform the task.
         ● Check that the place where work at height is to be undertaken is
              safe.
         ● Take precautions when working on or near fragile surfaces.
         ● Clean up oil, grease, paint, and dirt immediately to prevent
              slipping; and
         ● Provide fall protection measures e.g., safety hardness, simple
              scaffolding/guard rail for works over 4 meters from ground.
      d) Keep worksite clean and free of debris on daily basis.
      e) Provision of first aid kit with bandages, antibiotic cream, etc. or
          health care facilities and enough drinking water.
      f) Keep corrosive fluids and other toxic materials in properly sealed
          containers for collection and disposal in properly secured areas.

                                                                                                    84
         g) Ensure adequate toilet facilities for workers from outside of the
            community.
         h) Rope off construction area and secure materials stockpiles/ storage
            areas from the public and display warning signs including at unsafe
            locations. Entry should be restricted to unauthorized individuals,
            including children.
         i) Ensure structural openings are covered/protected adequately.
         j) Secure loose or light material that is stored on roofs or open floors.
         k) Keep hoses, power cords, welding leads, etc. from laying in heavily
            travelled walkways or areas.
         l) If school children are in the vicinity, include traffic safety personnel
            to direct traffic during school hours, if needed.
         m) Control driving speed of vehicles particularly when passing through
            community or nearby school, health centre or other sensitive areas.
         n) During heavy rains or emergencies of any kind, suspend all work.
                                Post-Implementation Phase

              o) Fill in all earth borrow-pits once construction is completed to avoid
                 standing water, water-borne diseases, and possible drowning. (Post-
                 Implementation phase)

Other                                   Planning Phase                                   Construction
                                                                                         contractor,
        a)     No cutting of trees or destruction of vegetation other than on
                                                                                         technical
               construction site. [Implementing agency] will procure locally sourced
                                                                                         supervision
               materials consistent with traditional construction practices in the
                                                                                         consultant, PCT
               communities.
                                     Implementation Phase

        a) No hunting, fishing, capture of wildlife or collection of plants.
        b) No use of unapproved toxic materials including lead-based paints, un-
           bonded asbestos, etc.
        c) No disturbance of cultural or historic sites.




                                                                                                    85
Specific ESCOPs for WSS and Irrigation Rehabilitation Activities
 Subproject        Environmental Prevention/Mitigation Measures                               Responsible
 Type                                                                                         Party
  Water Supply
  Shallow                                        Planning Phase
                                                                                              Construction
  Groundwater
                                                                                              Contractor,
  Wells              a)   Site wells so that appropriate zone of sanitary protection can be
                                                                                              Technical
                          established.
                                                                                              Supervision
                                             Implementation Phase                             Consultant,
                                                                                              Project
                    b) Equip with slab around the well for easy drainage, a crossbeam,        Control
                       and a pulley to support the use of only one rope and bucket for        Technician
                       collecting water. One rope and bucket is more hygienic for the
                       well and water.
                    c) Install steel steps/rungs (inside wall of a deep well) for
                       maintenance and in case of emergency.
                    d) A groundwater well usually has a wide-open water area. It is
                       necessary to provide a cover/roof/wire mesh on top to protect this
                       area from falling leaves or debris.
                    e) Wells should always be located upstream of the septic tank soak-
                       away. Build the soak-away as far away as possible from the well
                       (minimum 15 m/50 feet) as it can influence the quality of the
                       drinking water when it is too close. (Planning and implementation
                       phase)
                                            Post implementation phase

                     f) Before using a new water source, test water quality and when
                        intended for potable purposes ensure water meets the national
                        drinking water standard. Water quality should also be monitored in
                        the case of all well rehabilitation.
  Spring                                       Implementation Phase                           Construction
                                                                                              contractor,
                    a) Every spring capture should be equipped with a filter and a sand
                                                                                              technical
                       trap. Add a wall between the inflow and the outlet pipe to create
                                                                                              supervision
                       chamber for settling out sand; build the wall with a notch (lowered
                                                                                              consultant,
                       section) for controlled flow. Sand must be cleaned out periodically
                                                                                              PCT
                       (operation and maintenance). (Implementation and post-
                       implementation phases)
                    b) Collection basin for spring capture needs to have a perforated PVC
                       pipe (holes diameter 2mm) to be used as a screen for the water
                       intake. Alternatively, a short pipe with wire mesh (screen) around
                       the open end should be provided.
                    c) Collection basin needs to have a fence to protect the spring from
                       public access and risk of contamination; and a roof/cover over the
                       spring to prevent leaves or other debris from entering the basin.
  Rainwater                                 Implementation Phase                              Construction
  harvesting                                                                                  contractor,




                                                                                                             86
Subproject       Environmental Prevention/Mitigation Measures                                 Responsible
Type                                                                                          Party
                  a)Rainwater storage reservoir should be intact, connected to roof           technical
                    gutter system, with all faucets and piping intact.                        supervision
                 b) If distribution pipes are attached into the storage reservoir, install    consultant,
                    the distribution pipes 10cm above the storage/tank bottom for             PCT
                    better use of the storage capacity.
                 c) Cover must be fitted tightly onto the top of the storage reservoir
                    to avoid overheating and growth of algae (from direct sunlight),
                    and to prevent insects, solid debris and leaves from entering the
                    storage tank.
                 d) A ventilation pipe with fly screen should be placed in the cover to
                    help aerate the tank/reservoir which is necessary for good water
                    quality.
                 e) Reservoir tanks need an overflow so that in time of       heavy rain,
                    the excess water can drain away. The overflow should be designed
                    to prevent backflow and stop vermin/rodents/insects entering the
                    system. A good design will allow the main storage tank to overflow
                    at least twice a year to remove built up of floating sediment on the
                    top of the stored water and maintain good water quality. (Planning
                    and implementation phases)
                                       Post-Implementation Phase

                 f)    Roof gutters need to be cleared regularly, as bird and animal feces
                       and leaf litter on roofs or guttering can pose a health risk if they
                       are washed into the reservoir tank.
Installation /                             Implementation Phase                               Construction
Rehabilitation                                                                                contractor,
of pipelines     Preventing contamination at water sources:                                   technical
                 a) Build a structure with roof over the water source to prevent leaves       supervision
                     or other debris from entering into the basin.                            consultant,
                 b) A fence is needed to protect the water sources (springs                   PCT
                     particularly) from public access and risk of contamination.
                 c) The sand/gravel filter traps sediment before the spring flow enters
                     the collection chamber and has to be changed during periodical
                     maintenance. (Implementation and post-implementation phases)
                 Pipe Laying:
                 a) PVC water transmission and distribution piping need to be buried
                     underground (coverage 50cm minimum) to prevent pipe against
                     external damage (e.g., passing vehicles, solar UV radiation, etc.).
                     Exposing PVC pipe to UV radiation causes the plasticizer in the PVC
                     pipe to evaporate causing loss of integrity and brittleness.
                 b) Pipe shall be laid in a straight line, over a constantly falling slope.
                 c) When conditions do not allow piping to be buried (i.e., pipe is used
                     above ground), then metal pipe must be used, and
                     supported/braced as excessive movement may lead to leaks and
                     breaks.
                 d) Outlet pipes and fittings from water storage/basin shall not be PVC
                     pipe due to exposure to solar UV/sunlight. Metal piping and
                     fittings are preferred.
                 e) When the distribution pipes are laying via forest area, the
                     following considerations are needed (Planning and
                     implementation phases):

                                                                                                            87
Subproject       Environmental Prevention/Mitigation Measures                                Responsible
Type                                                                                         Party
                       ●   The route must be considered with minimum effects of
                           changing the existing situations of the forest as well as the
                           least habitats area of the animals
                  f)   Setbacks distances from important natural features (e.g. mineral
                       licks, wildlife features such as nest, leks, dens, staging areas,
                       lambing areas, calving areas) to conserve wildlife values should be
                       kept, if necessary.
Wastewater Systems
Wastewater                               Implementation Phase                            Construction
sewerage and    a) Septic tanks must have a vent pipe to prevent the build-up of gas         contractor,
treatment           inside the chamber and shall have a ‘manhole’ that provides              technical
                    access inside the tank if needed.                                        supervision
                b) Ensure that the septic tanks have two chambers: first chamber is          consultant,
                   for settling of sludge, and the second chamber is for aerobic             PCT
                   treatment. These chambers will generally treat wastewater better.
                   Partially treated septic tank effluent can pollute groundwater and
                   surface water.
                c) Do not discharge septic tank effluent to an open drain or other
                   surface water. The effluents need to be treated before final
                   disposal. This may be achieved through: (i) an underground leach
                   field, (ii) a vegetated leach field, or (iii) a pit for soaking away.
                Community awareness should be raised so that the community
                   inspects the septic tanks periodically and ensures that the septic
                   tanks are emptied every few years for the tank to continue to
                   function properly. (Implementation and post-implementation
                   phases)
Solid Waste                              Implementation Phase
                                                                                              Construction
Management
                                                                                              contractor,
                a) Solid waste depots/disposal need to be located on hard-standing
                                                                                              technical
                    areas that prevent waste entering surface or groundwater.
                                                                                              supervisor,
                    (Implementation phase)
                                                                                              PCT
                b) Waste depots/storage/disposal should be contained, sealed
                    and/or roofed/covered to prevent storm water contamination.
                    Wastes need to be emptied regularly. (Implementation phase)




                                                                                                             88
     ANNEX 7. ASBESTOS MANAGEMENT GUIDANCE

    a) Applicability
The Asbestos Management Guidance (AMG) applies to all project construction or reconstruction
sites and any related areas. Contractors employed by Project are legally responsible for their
construction sites and related areas and must follow the provisions of the Project AMG within those
locations. Specifically, this procedure must be used to ensure the safe handling, removal and
disposal of any and all ACM from those areas.

   b) Immediate Action
On discovering ACM on a Project site the contractor must:
 • Stop all work within a 5 m radius of the ACM and evacuate all personnel from this area;
 • Delimit the 5 m radius with secure fencing posts, warning tape and easily visible signs warning
    of the presence of asbestos;
 • If the site is in an inhabited area, place a security guard at the edge of the site with instructions
    to keep the general public away;
 • Notify the PCT Environmental Specialist and arrange an immediate site inspection.

     c) Equipment
To remove asbestos from a construction site, contractors must provide the following equipment:
 • Warning tape, sturdy fence posts and warning notices;
 • Shovels;
 • Water supply and hose, fitted with a garden-type spray attachment;
 • Bucket of water and rags;
 • Sacks of clear, strong polythene that can be tied to close;
 • Asbestos waste containers (empty, clean, sealable metal drums, clearly labelled as
          containing asbestos).
     d) PPE
All personnel involved in handling ACM must wear the following equipment, provided by the
contractor:
 • Disposable overalls fitted with a hood;
 • Boots without laces;
 • New, strong rubber gloves;
 • A respirator is not normally required if there are only a few pieces of ACM in a small area, and
      if the ACM is damp;
 • There must be no smoking, eating or drinking on a site containing ACM.

     e) Decontamination Procedure 1: Removing small pieces of ACM
 •    Identify the location of all visible ACM and spray each lightly but thoroughly with water;
 •    Once the ACM is damp, pick up all visible ACM with shovels and place in a clear plastic bag;
 •    If ACM debris is partially buried in soil, remove it from the soil using a shovel and place it in the
      plastic bag;
 •     Insert a large label inside each plastic bag stating clearly that the contents contain asbestos and
      are dangerous to human health and must not be handled;
 •    Tie the plastic bags securely and place them into labelled asbestos waste containers (clean
          metal drums) and seal each drum;
 •    Soil that contained ACM debris must not be used for backfill and must instead be shovelled by

                                                                                                        89
      hand into asbestos waste containers;
•     At the end of the operation, clean all shovels and any other equipment with wet rags and
         place the rags into plastic disposal bags inside asbestos waste containers.

  f) Decontamination Procedure 2: Removing ACM-contaminated backfill
•  If soil containing ACM debris has inadvertently been used for backfill this must be sprayed
       lightly with water and shovelled out by hand to a depth of 300 mm and placed directly into
       asbestos waste containers (i.e. not stored temporarily beside the trench);
• Any ACM uncovered during the hand shovelling must be placed in a clear plastic bag;
• Once the trench has been re-excavated to 300 mm, if there is no visible ACM remaining,
       the trench may be refilled by excavator using imported clean topsoil.

 g) Disposal
•  ACM should be disposed of safely at a site approved by local municipality after making prior
   arrangement for safe storage with the site operator.
• The Contractor must arrange for the disposal site operator to collect the sealed asbestos
   waste containers as soon as possible and store them undisturbed at the disposal site.
• At the end of construction Contractors must arrange for the disposal site operator to bury all
   ACM containers in a separate, suitably-sized pit, covered with a layer of clay that is at least 250
   mm deep.

     h) Personal Decontamination
    • At the end of each day, all personnel involved in handling ACM must comply with the
        following decontamination procedure:
    • At the end of the decontamination operation, clean the boots thoroughly with damp rags;
    • Peel off the disposable overalls and plastic gloves so that they are inside-out and place them
        in a plastic sack with the rags used to clean the boots;
    • If a disposable respirator has been used, place that in the plastic sack, seal the sack and place
        it in an asbestos waste container;
    • All personnel should wash thoroughly before leaving the site, and the washing area must be
        cleaned with damp rags afterwards, which are placed in plastic sacks as above.

     i) Clearance and Checking-Off
       • The decontamination exercise must be supervised by site supervisors (engineering or
         environmental).
       • After successful completion of the decontamination and disposal, the Contractor should
         visually inspect the area and sign-off the operation if the site has been cleaned
         satisfactorily.

      •   The contractor should send a copy of the completion notice to the PCT, with
          photographs of the operation in progress and the site on completion.




                                                                                                     90
