Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         The World Bank
                                                                         Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)




                                                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized          Public Disclosure Authorized




                       _For Official Use Only_
                                                                                     Program Information Document (PID)

                                                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2025 | Report No: PIDDA00167




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                       First Sustainable and Inclusive Growth Development
                          Kyrgyz Republic                P508608
                                                                                       Policy Operation
                          Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
                          EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                           Macroeconomics, Trade         Development Policy
                                                         16-Jun-2025
                          ASIA                                                         and Investment                Financing (DPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency




_For Official Use Only_
                          Kyrgyz Republic                Ministry of Finance

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The development objective of DPO is to support the government to ensure sustainable and equitable energy supply;
                          enhance social service delivery and climate resilience; and strengthen fiscal sustainability and improve the business
                          environment.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          Financing (US$, Millions)


                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Financing                                                                                              101.50

                          DETAILS
                            Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             101.50
                              World Bank Lending                                                                                         101.50

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
                          Decision
                          The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                                                                                                                                              Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)



                           Explanation
                           Based on the comments received and the discussion at the meeting, the chair instructed the team to proceed with
                           expansion of the country context, enhancing the discussion on the macro-framework, streamlining the program
                           design, securing a date for the ROC decision review and ensuring that the project is ready to go to Board in June 2025.




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context




_For Official Use Only_
                          1.      This proposed Development Policy Operation (DPO) of US$101.5 million in IDA credit aims to support the
                          Government of the Kyrgyz Republic (GoKR) with the implementation of reforms and policy priorities highlighted in the
                          National Strategy for Development (NSD) for 2018-40. This DPO is the first in a series of two operations that is central to
                          the World Bank Group’s (WBG) engagement in the country, as outlined in the 2024-2028 Country Partnership Framework
                          (CPF). The DPO series will support structural reforms across three areas: (i) ensuring sustainable and equitable energy
                          supply, including financial viability, transparency and accountability in the energy sector; (ii) enhancing social service
                          delivery and climate resilience; and (iii) strengthening fiscal sustainability and promoting a more competitive and private
                          sector driven economy.
                          2.       Despite a recent period of rapid growth, the Kyrgyz Republic still faces persistent barriers to private sector
                          investment and job creation. At Atlas US$1,760 per capita in 2023, the Kyrgyz Republic is the second poorest country in
                          the Europe and Centra Asia (ECA) region with 7.2 million population growing at 2 percent per annum. The Kyrgyz Republic
                          was one of the first among the Commonwealth of Independent States to liberalize prices, open its economy to trade and
                          foreign investment, and to join the WTO. Based on these reforms, growth accelerated in the 2000s. However, since then
                          the Kyrgyz Republic has experienced a slowdown in the pace of reforms, thereby risking the sustainability of economic
                          growth, and hindering the creation of productive jobs. Although the Kyrgyz Republic has seen a surge in economic activity
                          in recent years, partly due to a large increase in trade-related economic activity, translating this high growth into
                          sustainable job creation is constrained by a difficult business environment, weak competition, high but inefficient social
                          spending, barriers to trade and poor infrastructure, including energy supply. Without reforms to raise the economy’s
                          supply potential, this growth acceleration may be short-lived.
                          3.       In this context the government is taking action to establish strong foundations for growth and jobs by
                          establishing affordable, reliable energy, efficient social services targeted at the vulnerable, and a stronger business
                          environment. The proposed DPO series and the planned Kambarata 1 Hydro Power Plant (K1 HPP), (currently under
                          preparation with possible Board presentation in H1 FY26) are two complementary pillars of the WBG support for this
                          national strategy. The K1 HPP is a transformational export-oriented energy project which, once completed, will bring
                          significant clean, reliable and sustainable energy supply and increased export revenues in the Kyrgyz Republic, and
                          contribute to the decarbonization of regional power grids in Central Asia (CA). The Kyrgyz Republic already generates
                          around 90 percent of its electricity from hydro-power but suffers from insufficient and unreliable generation. Further
                          investment in renewable energy generation will help meet fast-growing domestic and regional energy demand. As the


                                                                                                                                                 Page 2



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)


                          flagship project of this new clean energy investment drive, the K1 HPP is also expected to improve water resources
                          management, alleviate winter energy deficits, displace fossil-fuel generation, and strengthen regional cooperation in
                          Central Asia.
                          4.      The proposed DPO series will support reforms to advance the broad GoKR reform agenda, including to maximize
                          the benefits from the K1 HPP. First, the DPO series will support policies to improve financial viability, transparency and
                          accountability in the energy sector as well as to promote private sector investment in the energy sector. Furthermore, it
                          will support reforms to help establish effective systems through which future benefits of K1 HPP and other large scale
                          investments will benefit the population, including the most vulnerable.
                          5.      The Kyrgyz Republic’s macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the proposed operation. The Kyrgyz
                          Republic has achieved rapid growth while achieving a fiscal surplus and lowering public debt. While a fiscal deficit is
                          expected to reemerge from 2025 onwards, fiscal sustainability risks are expected to remain limited. Monetary policy has
                          remained sufficiently prudent to bring inflation to the target in 2024, following a series of shocks, although continued
                          vigilance in the face of an overheating economic remains important. In 2024, the economy posted the third year of very




_For Official Use Only_
                          strong economic growth, driven by continued acceleration in exports, consumption and investment. Real GDP grew by 9
                          percent, maintaining the same rate as in the past two years. This has led to overheating of the economy as growth has
                          been exceeding the estimated potential output growth of 4.9 percent. Exports, private consumption and investment all
                          provided substantial contributions to growth. Exports are estimated to have grown by 42.7 percent,1 driven by gold and
                          re-exports. Investment is estimated to have increased by 33.7.
                          6.      The government’s fiscal position strengthened slightly in 2024, with an estimated surplus of 1.8 percent of GDP,
                          compared to a surplus of 1.6 percent in 2023. The higher fiscal balance was due to strong performance of both tax and
                          non-tax revenue collections, which rose by 0.5 and 0.6 percentage points of GDP, respectively. Higher taxes were driven
                          by a simplified small business tax, customs duties, and corporate income tax which, together, accounted for 63 percent of
                          the total tax increase. Non-tax revenue was higher largely due to the transfer of the NBKR’s profit to the budget. Overall
                          expenditures amounted to 33.3 percent of GDP in 2024, up from 32.9 percent in 2023. This was due to increases in
                          spending on goods and services by 1.2 percentage points, social benefits by 0.4 percentage points, and capital spending
                          by 0.2 percentage points, while spending on wages and compensation declined by 1.4 percentage points of GDP. The
                          government injected equity funds equivalent to 10 percent of GDP into electricity SOEs in 2024 which the SOEs used to
                          repay outstanding debt to the government. Therefore, there was no net effect on the budget. The debt-to-GDP ratio fell
                          to 37.5 percent in 2024, from 42.0 percent in 2023.
                              Relationship to CPF

                          7.       The proposed DPO is aligned with the World Bank’s 2024-2028 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the
                          Kyrgyz Republic. The CPF supports the Kyrgyz Republic to deliver jobs-rich, private-sector driven growth, improve the
                          livelihoods of vulnerable populations across the country, and strengthen resilience. The DPO supports each high-level
                          outcome of CPF defined as: (i) increased private sector-led job creation; (ii) improved access to sustainably managed
                          natural resources; and (iii) enhanced human capital and empowerment of vulnerable populations. The operation is
                          informed by government’s priorities set out in the long-term National Strategy for Development (NSD) for 2018-2040, the
                          medium-term National Program for Development (NPD) for 2021-2026, and the Green Economy Strategy for 2024-2028.
                          The operation is designed to support 4 of the 6 pillars in the government’s NPD, namely: (i) the enabling environment for


                          1
                              All data in this paragraph are based on value-added, constant price series.

                                                                                                                                                Page 3



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)


                          development, including the investment and business climate, skills development and employment, and access to
                          sustainable water services; (ii) sectoral development, including green and renewable energy generation; (iii) social
                          development including economic inclusion programs; and (iv) special development priorities, including regional and green
                          economic development.


                              C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                              The development objective of DPO is to support the government to ensure sustainable and equitable energy supply;
                              enhance social service delivery and climate resilience; and strengthen fiscal sustainability and improve the business
                              environment.

                           Key Results
                          8.      The proposed operation has three pillars. The first pillar supports reforms to ensure financially sustainable,




_For Official Use Only_
                          equitable and more transparent energy sector, as a foundation for the Kyrgyz Republic’s sustainable and inclusive
                          economic transformation. The second pillar supports key reforms that seek to broaden the benefits of the Kyrgyz
                          Republic’s economic transformation agenda. Specifically, the reforms target improved efficiency and quality of social
                          sectors for poor households and to enhance equity through inter-budgetary transfers targeted to address local
                          development priorities, and reforms to strengthen climate resilience through the adoption of a green taxonomy and
                          improving water resource management. The third pillar supports foundational reforms that unlock opportunities for
                          private sector participation in the Kyrgyz Republic’s fast-growing economy. Specifically, these reforms target fiscal
                          sustainability, public procurement policy and the investment framework.

                            D. Project Description
                          This operation will be organized as Programmatic DPO, consisting of two operations focusing on 3 pillars. Pillar I focuses
                          on ensuring sustainable and equitable energy supply, supporting reforms to improve the financial performance and
                          financial sustainability of the energy sector. In this regard, this operation supports three reforms including increasing
                          electricity and heating tariffs by 11-30 and 25-380 percent,2 respectively, in 2024, while strengthening the subsidized
                          (lifeline) tariffs with a commitment to reach cost recovery; support to transparent and inclusive distribution of energy
                          sector revenues through the revision of the escrow account provisions; and promoting private investments into the
                          clean/renewable energy sector through PPP arrangements. Pillar II focuses on enhancing social service delivery and
                          climate resilience supporting reforms to improve efficiency of spending in the social sectors, including by increasing the
                          education system to have 12 years of compulsory education. The pillar also focuses on improving livelihood opportunities
                          for the poor through increased financial resources for specific ‘Social Contract’ program participants, which comprise poor
                          and vulnerable families, to invest in income-generating activities, and better targeting the main poverty targeted social
                          assistance program as well as reducing spatial disparities in poverty through Socio-Economic Development Planning
                          (SEDP). Additionally, this pillar will support: local-level inclusive and climate resilient development priorities and climate
                          legislation, the National Green Taxonomy, and the Water Code. Pillar III focuses on strengthening fiscal sustainability and
                          improving the business environment supporting reforms to strengthen the foundations of fiscal sustainability and a
                          stronger business environment. The pillar supports the new law on investment; fiscal sustainability through amendments

                          2
                           The range for electricity tariff increase shows the difference between residential and industrial (11%), and commercial (30%)
                          consumers and for heating sector – the difference between residential customers below lifeline (25%) and other consumers.

                                                                                                                                                           Page 4



                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)


                          to the public-private partnerships (PPP) law; and improvements in quality and transparency of public procurement, in
                          particular in the health sector.

                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          The Ministry of Finance (MoF) is responsible for coordinating and evaluating the result indicators for this operation
                          along with the Ministry of Economy and Commerce (MoEC). The main implementing agency, the MoF, is tasked by the
                          Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers to coordinate with other government agencies the overall implementation of the
                          operation. A designated Deputy MoF is tasked to carry on this function with the help of the International Cooperation
                          Department of MoF. The Presidential Administration also plays an important role in overseeing the preparation of
                          programs and delivery of reforms especially when it requires decision making by the country’s leadership. The MoF will




_For Official Use Only_
                          work with the relevant government entities and other institutions to collect the data necessary to assess implementation
                          progress and evaluate the results. The technical capacity of these institutions is adequate to perform regular monitoring
                          of the indicators and outcome measures.



                           F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

                           Poverty and Social Impacts
                          The reforms supported by this operation are expected to have mostly positive or neutral impacts on welfare, and are
                          not anticipated to have significantly adverse poverty, social or distributional impacts. Only the energy tariff reform could
                          potentially have adverse effects, but its overall impacts on the poor are estimated to be insignificant due to a combination
                          of the lifeline tariff and households’ low energy expenditure shares. The expansion of the ‘Social Contract’ program is
                          designed to help households improve their livelihoods. Cash flow management and audit of the energy sector is not
                          expected to directly impact welfare. Education reforms are expected to improve equity in learning. The National Green
                          Taxonomy classification will allow firms in green sectors to access low-interest financing, which will have indirect benefits
                          in reducing air pollution and other environmental damages experienced by the population. Enhanced budgets to local self-
                          government bodies will enable them to implement their Social and Economic Development Plans (SEDPs) more effectively,
                          addressing community-level poverty reduction priorities. Improvements to the business environment are expected to
                          stimulate investment, generating indirect benefits in terms of growth and employment in the medium term.

                           Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

                          Overall, the policy reforms supported by this DPO operation are expected to have a positive impact on the Kyrgyz
                          Republic’s environment, forests, and other natural resources. The reforms on promoting private investments in the
                          renewable energy sector are envisioned to lead to a reduction of GHG emissions, decrease in air and water pollution and
                          enhancing energy security. This reform is expected to have significantly positive effects on the country’s environment. The
                          reform on greater efficiency in the use and management of water resources is expected to have a positive impact on water
                          resources. The reform on financing of climate related activities and a national green taxonomy, is also expected to have
                          positive environmental impacts. Collectively, these reforms are also expected to encourage the growth of a green


                                                                                                                                                   Page 5



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)


                          economy, reduce air pollution, and provide new opportunities for private sector involvement and investment in renewable
                          energy. In the event negative environmental effects arise, the Kyrgyz’s Republic’s environmental laws and regulations
                          incorporate necessary mitigation measures. The 2010 Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic provides the basis for protecting
                          and managing the environment and use of natural resources in the country. In addition, the requirements and procedures
                          in the Kyrgyz Republic’s environmental protection law (1999) and environmental impact assessment (2015), contain
                          principles of environmental impact assessment with regulations, policies, laws and practices, and enforcement
                          mechanisms that can mitigate the envisaged adverse impacts to acceptable level.

                              G. Risks and Mitigation

                          The overall risk to this operation is substantial.3 The categories of political and governance, institutional capacity for
                          implementation and sustainability, sector strategies and policies, and stakeholders risks are deemed substantial. Political
                          risks stem from a history of frequent changes in government, which may lead to changes in policy in relation to areas of
                          the supported government program. The governance risks arise from political-business ties, weak institutions, and




_For Official Use Only_
                          deficiencies in the investment environment that may potentially derail timely implementation of the reforms. These risks
                          are partially mitigated by the fact that the reforms supported by this operation are broadly recognized to be highly
                          important and are supported by the private sector, civil society, and the general population. The government has well-
                          elaborated policies and strategies in the water and energy sectors. However, the strategic vision in other reform areas,
                          including public procurement and targeted social assistance, is less clear. Therefore risks related to sectoral strategies and
                          policies are deemed substantial. By supporting the government’s reform efforts in these sectors, the current operation
                          will help to address these risks by assisting the authorities to improve policy design and strategic vision. The technical
                          capacity of the implementing agencies is limited and subject to high staff turnover. This challenge is compounded by the
                          centralization of much of the GoKR reform implementation effort. While institutional volatility has led to some policy
                          implementation delays in the past, the coordination function across government agencies has been improving, but reform
                          processes will need complementary capacity-building.




                              @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                              CONTACT POINT

                              World Bank




                          3
                           There are allegations of forced labor in the production of solar panels and components. This DPO focuses on policies and institutional
                          reforms in the Kyrgyz Republic. DPO proceeds are not earmarked to any specific purpose, including the manufacture or procurement
                          of solar panels or components.


                                                                                                                                                            Page 6



                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)


                           Gohar Gyulumyan
                           Senior Economist

                           Bakyt Dubashov
                           Senior Economist

                           Tazeen Fasih
                           Lead Economist, Program Leader

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Kyrgyz Republic
                           Altynbek Kudaiberdiev
                           Deputy Minister
                           a.kudaiberdiev@minfin.kg




_For Official Use Only_
                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Finance
                           Nurbek Akjolov
                           Head of Department
                           nakzholov@gmail.com

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                   Gohar Gyulumyan, Bakyt Dubashov, Tazeen Fasih

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:              Antonio Nucifora                    08-Apr-2025

                          Country Director:




                                                                                                                           Page 7



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                          The World Bank
                          Development Policy Operation for the Kyrgyz Republic (P508608)




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                   Page 8



                                                                                           Official Use Only
