Public Disclosure Authorized




                                           Islamic Republic of Pakistan




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                     Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (PICP)
                                Local Government & Community Development
                                   Department, Government of the Punjab




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               September 2025




                               Punjab Municipal Development Fund Company (PMDFC)




                                                        0


                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                    Acronyms
BoR          Board of Revenue
EPPCD        Environmental Protection and Climate Change Department
ESF          Environmental and Social Framework
ESCP         Environment and Social Commitment Plan
ESMP         Environment and Social Management Plan
ESS          Environmental and Social Standard
FGD          Focus Group Discussion
FWMC         Faisalabad Waste Management Company
GCC          Grievance Complaint Cell
GM           Grievance Mechanism
GRM          Grievance Redressal Mechanism
GoPunjab     Government of Punjab
HUD & PHED   Housing, Urban Development and Public Health Engineering Department
IDPs         Internally Displaced Persons
IPF          Investment Project Financing
LG&CDD       Local Government and Community Development Department
NDC          Nationally Determined Contributions
NAP          National Adaptation Plan
OSH          Occupational Safety and Health
PEECA        Punjab Energy Efficiency & Conservation Agency
P for R      Program for Results
PICP         Punjab Inclusive Cities Program
PID          Punjab Industry Department
PCP          Punjab Cities Program
PDMA         Provincial Disaster Management Authority
PMDFC        Punjab Municipal Development Fund Company
POM          Project Operations Manual
RA           Result Area
SEA          Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SH           Sexual Harassment
SWM          Solid Waste Management
TA           Technical Assistance
ULG          Urban Local Government


                                         1


                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                                         Table of Contents
1      Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 2
    1.1      Program Description ................................................................................................ 2
2      Objective/Description of SEP.............................................................................................. 4
3      Stakeholder Engagement within the context of PICP ........................................................ 4
    3.1     Principles for Effective Stakeholder’s Consultation ................................................. 4
4      Stakeholder Identification, Mapping and Analysis ............................................................. 5
    4.1     Methodology ............................................................................................................ 5
    4.2         Stakeholders Identification ...................................................................................... 6
    4.2.1 Affected Parties ............................................................................................................ 6
    4.2.2 Other Interested Parties ............................................................................................... 6
    4.2.3 Disadvantaged / Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ...................................................... 7
    4.3         Stakeholder Power and Interest Analysis ................................................................ 8
5      Stakeholder Engagement Program .................................................................................... 9
    5.1     Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure ...................................................... 14
    5.2     Summary of program stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for
    stakeholder engagement..................................................................................................... 15
    5.3         Description of Engagement Methods .................................................................... 16
    5.4         Proposed strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups ....................... 19
    5.5         Timelines ................................................................................................................ 19
    5.6         Review of Comments ............................................................................................. 19
6      Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement ..................19
    6.1     Implementation Arrangements and Resources ..................................................... 19
7      Grievance Mechanism ......................................................................................................20
    7.1      Description of Grievance Mechanism (GRM)........................................................ 20
8      Monitoring and Reporting ................................................................................................25
    8.1     Monitoring of SEP .................................................................................................. 25
    8.2         Reporting back to stakeholder groups ................................................................... 25


Annexes

Annex 1: Template for Feedback during Consultation Meetings ............................................ 28
Annex 2 : SEP Indicative Annual Budget for first year ............................................................. 29
Annex 3: Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP ........................................................... 30
Annex 4: Complaint Form ........................................................................................................ 32

List of Tables
Table 1: Power and Interest Analysis Matrix.............................................................................. 8
Table 2: Consultations with Institutional Stakeholders ........................................................... 10
Table 3: Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure .......................................................... 14
Table 4: Summary of Stakeholder Engagement Activities and Responsibilities...................... 17
Table 5: GRM Steps.................................................................................................................. 22

                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
1       Introduction
The proposed Punjab Inclusive Cities Program (PICP) aims to provide inclusive and sustainable
WASH services in selected cities. The Program will support participating urban local
governments (ULGs) in 16 secondary cities of the Punjab Province to provide water supply,
sewerage (including wastewater treatment), and stormwater drainage services. Collectively,
these interventions aim to benefit an estimated 4.5 million residents of the 16 secondary
cities. In addition, the program will also support the development of a sanitary landfill site and
material recovery facility (MRF) as well as the closure of an existing dumpsite in tehsil Jhang.
In addition to physical infrastructure development, the Program will provide institutional
support and capacity-building to strengthen the performance of participating ULGs. These
efforts are expected to enhance urban resilience to climate change through improved
drainage and flood management systems, while also promoting inclusive development
through increased revenue mobilization. This includes reforms in tariff structures and
improvements in real estate revenues collection.
PICP forms part of a broader World Bank regional initiative that aims to expand access to
WASH services for 100 million people across South Asia by 2035. Building on the Government
of Punjab’s (GoPunjab) previous experience with the Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument,
which was successfully implemented under the Punjab Cities Program (PCP). PICP will leverage
this mechanism to manage conditional transfers and reinforce institutional capacity and
country systems. To further support implementation, the Program will include an Investment
Project Financing (IPF)component to deliver targeted technical assistance and capacity
development to key implementing agencies.
The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is a participatory tool designed to provide guidance
on how the various agencies involved in the PICP program would identify, map/categorize,
engage, and maintain a responsive and transparent communication line with their
stakeholders. The SEP is crucial to the overall program goal because the role of every
stakeholder is important to the successful implementation of the program. This SEP provides
guidelines for stakeholder engagement during preparation and implementation of the
program under the IPF component. It would also guide the disclosure process for the entire
PICP.
This SEP is a living document and will be updated throughout the program lifecycle. It will be
the strategic tool for all program related engagements and will be:
        •   Disclosed prior to program commencement;
        •   Periodically updated and changes validated during program implementation; and
        •   Monitored and its effectiveness evaluated towards the end of the program.
This SEP has been prepared in compliance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Standard 10 (ESS10) on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure. It outlines the
approach to engaging with stakeholders throughout the program lifecycle to ensure their
informed participation, manage expectations, and minimize risks related to exclusion and
grievances.
1.1      Program Description
The PICP supports the government of Punjab’s key priorities, the sustainable improvement of
water, sanitation, and drainage outcomes in Punjab. PICP builds on the achievements of the




                                               2


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
  earlier initiatives,1 including the ongoing Punjab Cities Program (PCP; US$200 million) which
  incentivized improved planning, resource management, transparency, and urban governance.
  PCP has delivered improved WASH services to 4.75 million citizens, operationalized new
  municipal e-governance systems, significantly enhanced own-source revenues in 16 ULGs, and
  commissioned wastewater treatment plants in 11 cities, among other investments. PICP will
  draw from global experience in strengthening urban governance, financing, institutional and
  service delivery systems, environment and social management. The PICP will build upon the
  robust learning agenda proposed in Phase 1 by enabling learning across provinces on water
  service provider reforms and hygiene behavioral change. The Program will be implemented
  over a period of five years between 2025 and 2030.
  The proposed Program will be financed through hybrid of Program for Results (PforR) and
  Investment Project Financing (IPF) instruments through a US$400 million credit from the
  World Bank. The larger part of the operation will be financed through the PforR instrument.
  IPF will be used to fund a range of institutional strengthening and capacity development
  activities.
  Overall, the proposed Program activities for the hybrid of PforR and IPF instruments will be
  delivered under two results areas (RAs):
  RA1: Safely managed water, sanitation, drainage and basic hygiene service: Access to safely
  managed WSS has considerable public health and environmental benefits by decreasing the
  incidence of water-related diseases - thereby contributing to reduced stunting incidence in
  selected areas. Interventions under this RA will encourage participating cities to prepare and
  provide safely managed WSS, drainage and solid waste, by supporting:
i.     Provision of new or rehabilitated water supply schemes, sewerage lines and connection
       points, drainage and wastewater treatment plants that meet quality standards in 16
       participating ULGs

ii.    Increased sustainability of solid waste management systems by incentivizing cost
       recovery monitoring and waste minimization and recovery, as well as developing
       modern disposal capacity in Jhang. While there are E&S risks associated with the
       demonstration landfill site, criteria will be applied to ensure the exclusion of high-risk
       E&S activities.


  The investments to be supported under the Program will be detailed in the POM, and can
  include new or rehabilitated water supply schemes, sewerage lines and connection points,
  and wastewater treatment plants that meet quality standards. Investments will also finance
  the greenfield development of a modern disposal site, plus two years of operation post
  commissioning to ensure proper asset management, the reclamation and closure of an
  existing dumpsite. The Program includes solarization to cut emissions and support Pakistan’s
  NDC and NAP goals. It also features climate-resilient infrastructure—designed to mitigate the
  impact of floods, with stormwater and potential wastewater reuse—to adapt to shifting water
  availability and reduce groundwater reliance. The planned investments are climate-resilient
  (e.g., designed to withstand urban floods). The experience gained, and lessons learnt from
  RA1 will assist GoPunjab replicate similar sites across the province.




  1
    The Punjab Municipal Services Improvement Project (US$ 50m IPF; 2006-2013), the Punjab Cities Governance Improvement
  Project (US$ 200m IPF with DLIs; 2012-2017); and the ongoing Punjab Cities Program (PCP).

                                                           3


                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
RA2: Institutional Strengthening and Financial Sustainability: Ensuring efficient and
sustainable service delivery will require ULGs to ensure financing for future operation and
maintenance of the infrastructure investments supported by the PforR.
Activities under this component will include program management, the hiring of an
independent verification agency by LG&CDD, design and supervision consultants,
development of communication and awareness campaigns, a provincial MIS system, results
monitoring and impact evaluation, and additional studies on cost recovery and tariffs, etc. as
required. A package of capacity building and technical assistance interventions will also be
provided to participate in ULGs to ensure they have the requisite capacities and systems to
deliver their mandates and meet the DLIs.
This SEP covers activities financed through the IPF Window for RA2 as per the World Bank
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).
2         Objective/Description of SEP
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including
public information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire program cycle. The SEP
outlines the ways in which the local government will communicate with stakeholders and
includes a mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make
complaints about the program and any activities related to the program. The SEP emphasizes
methods to engage groups considered most vulnerable and that are at risk of being excluded
from program benefits. The SEP seeks to:
      •   Identify all stakeholders affected by or interested in the program.
      •   Outline a strategy for continuous and inclusive engagement throughout the program
          lifecycle.
      •   Provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, and accessible information.
      •   Establish a structured approach to handle concerns and grievances.
      •   Build trust and support for program interventions, particularly among vulnerable
          and marginalized groups.
SEP provides an opportunity for an all-inclusive approach in program preparation, planning,
implementation, and monitoring processes. It is geared toward ensuring meaningful and a
wide consultative process guided by World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF),
particularly ESS-10.
3         Stakeholder Engagement within the context of PICP
The program’s stakeholder’s engagement aims at creating a “social licence” and will depend
on mutual trust, respect, and transparent communication between PICP and its stakeholders.
It will thereby improve decision-making and environment and social performance. This could
lead to managing costs and risks, enhancing reputation, avoiding conflict, improving corporate
policy, identifying, monitoring and reporting on impacts, and managing stakeholder
expectations.
3.1       Principles for Effective Stakeholder’s Consultation
The underlying principle of stakeholder engagement for the program will be that engagement
shall be a) free of manipulation, b) free of interference, coercion, and intimidation, and
conducted based on timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible information, in a
culturally appropriate format. It will entail interactions between program’s stakeholders and
provide them with an opportunity to raise their concerns and opinions and shall ensures that


                                                4


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
this information is taken into consideration when designing the program and making
decisions.
Openness and life-cycle approach: public consultations for the Program will be arranged during
the whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation,
interference, coercion or intimidation;
Informed participation and feedback: information will be provided to and widely
distributed among all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for
communicating stakeholders’ feedback, for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns;
Inclusiveness and sensitivity: stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
communication and build effective relationships. The participation process for the program
is inclusive. All stakeholders at all times are encouraged to be involved in the consultation
process. Equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to
stakeholders’ needs is the key principle underlying the selection of engagement methods.
Special attention is given to vulnerable groups, in particular women, internally displaced
persons (IDPs), persons with disabilities, youth, elderly and the cultural sensitivities of diverse
ethnic and religious minority groups, and those living in remote or inaccessible areas.
4       Stakeholder Identification, Mapping and Analysis
To achieve a meaningful and substantive engagement, it is necessary to determine who the
stakeholders are and understand their needs and expectations for engagement, as well as
their priorities and objectives in relation to the Program. This information will then be
used to tailor engagement to each type of stakeholder. As part of this process, it is
particularly important to understand how each stakeholder may be affected or perceives
they may be affected, so that engagement can be modified accordingly.
4.1     Methodology
The Program intends to utilize various methods of engagement that will be used as part of its
continuous interaction with Program stakeholders. For the engagement process to be
effective and meaningful, a range of various techniques need to be applied that are
specifically tailored to the identified stakeholder groups. In accordance with the best practice
approaches, the Program will apply the following principles for stakeholder engagement:
These categories of stakeholders as per the ESS 10 are outlined below.
a. Affected Parties – persons, groups and other entities within the Program Area of Influence
   (PAI) that are directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the Program and/or have been
   identified as most susceptible to change associated with the Program, and who need
   to be closely engaged in identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-
   making on mitigation and management measures;
b. Other Interested Parties – individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct
   impacts from the Program but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected
   by the Program and/or who could affect the Program and the process of its implementation
   in some way; and
c. Vulnerable Groups – persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further
   disadvantaged by the Program as compared with any other groups due to their
   vulnerable status, and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure their equal
   representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated with the
   Program.




                                                5


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
4.2        Stakeholders Identification
In the context of the PICP, effective stakeholder engagement is critical to the successful
implementation of the program’s initiatives. Given the diverse roles, interests, and potential
influence of various stakeholders, a structured approach to their involvement is necessary to
promote collaboration, enhance transparency, and reduce the risk of conflict. For the IPF
component, key stakeholders have been identified and categorized as affected parties
(outlined in Section 4.2.1), other interested parties (outlined in Section 4.2.2), and
disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals and groups (outlined in Section 4.2.3).
The stakeholders within these three categories will be refined and targeted lists will emerge
when the TORs for the TA outputs are developed.
4.2.1 Affected Parties
ESS 10 refers to Identifying individuals, groups, and other parties that may be directly or
indirectly affected by the Program, positively or negatively. Affected Parties include local
communities and organizations, community members and other parties that may be subject
to direct impacts from the Program. The SEP focuses particularly on those directly affected,
positively or adversely by the Program activities. The following have been identified as directly
affected parties under this category. The list is indicative and will be expanded as further
stakeholders are identified during the initiation and implementation of IPF activities.
      a. Urban residents in the Program targeted cities
      b. Informal settlers and low-income households
      c. Vendors and businesses in program areas
      d. Persons with disabilities, elderly, and women
      e. Communities in the vicinity of the Program’s planned activities and neighboring
         local governments
      f.   Community-based groups/Organizations
4.2.2 Other Interested Parties
These groups may not be directly affected by the Program, they may have a role in the
Program preparation or have a broader concern including for, but not limited to, information
dissemination, awareness raising, community mobilization, and feedback. Interested parties
under this category may be identified as:
      a. Targeted Urban Local Governments institutions (ULGs)
      b. Punjab Local Government & Community Development Department (LG&CDD)
      c. Faisalabad Waste Management Company (FWMC)
      d. District/Tehsil administration departments
      e. Provincial Environment Protection Department and District Offices
      f.   Planning and Development Board, Punjab
      g. Punjab Finance Department
      h. Board of Revenue (BoR)
      i.   Women Development Department, Punjab
      j.   Social Welfare & Bait-ul-Mall Department
      k. Labor and Human Resource Department

                                               6


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
    l.   Water and Sanitation Agencies
    m. Civil society groups and NGOs on the regional, national and local levels that pursue
       environmental and socio-economic interests and may become partners of the
       program. Organizations within this group are likely to be located outside the
       program’s Direct Area of Influence will be identified during implementation.
    n. Housing, Urban Development and Public Health Engineering Department (HUD &
       PHED)
    o. Irrigation Department
    p. The Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA)
    q. Punjab Energy Efficiency & Conservation Agency (PEECA)
    r.   Public Health and Engineering Department (PH&ED)
    s. Rescue 1122
    t.   Agricultural Department
    u. Punjab Industry Department (PID)
    v. Forest, Wildlife and Fisheries Department
    w. Health and Education Department
    x. Business community
    y. Mass media and associated interest groups, including local, regional and national
       printed and broadcasting media, digital/web-based entities, and their associations.
    z. Academic institutions and think tanks
The list of interested parties will be further refined, and a more targeted list will emerge once
the implementation begins. The SEP process will include conducting consultations with
representatives of each of these groups and defining a strategy for continual engagement with
each of them throughout the program life.
4.2.3 Disadvantaged / Vulnerable Individuals or Groups
It is particularly important to understand whether Program impacts may disproportionately
fall on disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups, who often do not have a voice to
express their concerns or understand the impact of a Program. In the case of the TA outputs, it
would be critical to ensure that awareness raising, and stakeholder engagement takes
place with relevant disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups to take into account
their views on proposed schemes under PICP. The vulnerability may stem from a person’s
origin, gender, age, health condition, literacy levels, economic deficiency, and financial
insecurity, disadvantaged status in the community (e.g. religious and ethnic minorities or
fringe groups), dependence on other individuals or natural resources, especially those living
in remote, insecure or inaccessible areas, etc. Engagement with the vulnerable groups and
individuals often requires the application of specific measures and assistance aimed at the
facilitation of their participation in the Program - related decision making so that their
awareness of and input into the overall process are commensurate to those of the other
stakeholders.
For the program, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include, but are not limited to
the following:
a. Differently abled citizens
b. Elderly-headed households

                                               7


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
c. Female-headed households or single mothers with underage children
d. Low-income families dependent on Benazir Income Support Program (BISP)
e. Religious and ethnic minorities
f.    Transgender people
g. Residents of informal settlements
Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the program will be further confirmed
and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate. A description of the methods of
engagement that will be undertaken by the program is provided in the following sections.
4.3      Stakeholder Power and Interest Analysis
This matrix categorizes stakeholders of the PICP based on their level of power (ability to
influence the project) and their level of interest (degree of concern or involvement in the
project). This helps prioritize stakeholders for communication and engagement as provided in
Table 1.
Table 1: Power and Interest Analysis Matrix
 Stakeholder Group         Power       Interest       Position in Matrix   Engagement Strategy
 Urban residents in Medium             High           High    Interest/ Keep informed and
 program cities                                       Medium Power      involved in decision-
                                                                        making
 Informal settlers and Low             High           High Interest/ Low Empower         through
 low-income                                           Power              outreach            and
 households                                                              participation
 Vendors           and Medium          High           High    Interest/ Consult regularly and
 businesses          in                               Medium Power      consider feedback
 program areas
 Persons          with Low             High           High Interest/ Low Engage with tailored
 disabilities, elderly,                               Power              strategies
 and women
 Communities near Medium               High           High    Interest/ Community meetings
 project areas and                                    Medium Power      and feedback channels
 ULGs
 Community-based           Medium      High           High    Interest/ Involve in participatory
 organizations                                        Medium Power      planning
 Local     government High             High           High Interest/ High Actively manage and
 institutions                                         Power               collaborate
 LG&CDD                    Very High   High           High Interest/ Very Partner and coordinate
                                                      High Power          consistently
 FWMC                      High        High           High Interest/ High Actively manage and
                                                      Power               collaborate
 District/Tehsil           High        Medium         Medium Interest/ Keep satisfied       with
 administrations                                      High Power       periodic updates
 Environment               High        Medium         Medium Interest/ Manage expectations
 Protection                                           High Power       and regulatory input

                                                  8


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
 Department
 Planning         & Very High       High         High Interest/ Very Strategic engagement
 Development Board                               High Power          and regular briefings
 Punjab     Finance High            Medium       Medium Interest/ Keep satisfied and
 Department                                      High Power       aligned with financial
                                                                  goals
 Board of Revenue       High        Medium       Medium Interest/ Inform      on      land
                                                 High Power       acquisition and policy
 Women                  Medium      High         High    Interest/ Consult and include in
 Development                                     Medium Power      program design
 Department
 Water and Sanitation High          High         High Interest/ High Coordinate            for
 Agencies                                        Power               infrastructure delivery
 Civil society    and Medium        High         High    Interest/ Engage for advocacy
 NGOs                                            Medium Power      and outreach
 Rescue 1122            Medium      Medium       Medium Interest/ Inform and plan for
                                                 Medium Power     emergencies
 Differently     abled Low          High         High Interest/ Low Facilitate involvement
 citizens                                        Power              with access measures
 Female-headed          Low         High         High Interest/ Low Support         through
 households                                      Power              inclusive programming
 Low-income      BISP Low           High         High Interest/ Low Prioritize through pro-
 families                                        Power              poor interventions
 Religious and ethnic Low           High         High Interest/ Low Ensure representation
 minorities                                      Power              and voice
 Transgender people     Low         High         High Interest/ Low Provide           tailored
                                                 Power              engagement             and
                                                                    inclusion


5       Stakeholder Engagement Program
The stakeholder engagement program aims to establish a systematic and inclusive approach to
stakeholder engagement; build and maintain a constructive relationship with stakeholders;
incorporate stakeholders’ views and concerns into design/implementation; mitigate possible
negative social and environmental downstream impacts; and enhance program acceptance
and socio-environmental sustainability. Stakeholder engagement may be divided into two
phases:
Phase-I (Program Preparation): Since the TA component primarily focuses on capacity
development of ULGs, Faisalabad Waste Management Company, and other departments,
stakeholder engagement during this phase focused on representatives of ULGs and other
Government Departments. The purpose of stakeholder engagement during this phase was
to ascertain institutional needs, improve Program design, create synergies and enhance the
socio-environmental sustainability of the TA component of the Program.



                                             9


                                                                                              Official Use Only
In January 2025, the PMDFC E&S team conducted institutional stakeholders’ consultations,
including ULGs and District administration. Institutional stakeholder were consulted to
document their concerns and suggestions with respect to the formulation of the Program,
their specific roles in the implementation of the Program, and their capacity assessment.
These engagements facilitated discussions on environmental and social impacts, program
design, planned activities, and implementation arrangements. Feedback from stakeholders
played a critical role in designing and revising the Program Action Plan, indicators, and
Program Operations Manuals, and appraisal documents by providing data and details on the
existing situation, management status and priorities for the WASH sector in various ULGs.
Table 2 shows the ULGs and Government Departments visited, issues discussed, and feedback
provided by these stakeholder institutions.
Phase-II (Program Implementation): Stakeholder engagement will be carried out during this
phase with relevant groups and interested parties. Section 5.2 provides a list of topics for
stakeholder engagement during this phase along with the corresponding tools and
techniques for conducting them. These will be further refined during TA implementation.
Table 2: Consultations with Institutional Stakeholders

         Department                          Issues Discussed and Feedback Provided
 Consultations with ULGs      The main issues and concerns raised during meetings were as follows:
 Sadiqabad, Mandi             1. ULGs expressed that in Punjab they have limited experience and
 Bahuddin, Chiniot, Jatoi,       capacity in land acquisition processes. They play a crucial role in
 Gujrat)                         coordinating with the Board of Revenue (BoR), which is the primary
                                 authority responsible for land acquisition under the Land Acquisition
 ULGs of selected cities in
                                 Act, 1894. Their responsibilities include preparing justifications for
 Punjab operate under the
                                 land acquisition for public use, submitting acquisition requirements
 framework of the PLGA 2022
                                 to the District Collector, and providing technical assistance such as
 and primarily deal with
                                 site maps and utility layouts. However, ULGs rely heavily on
 urban local governance.
                                 provincial authorities, including the BoR and District Administration,
 Consultation meetings were
                                 for legal procedures, making the process slow and cumbersome.
 held with Chief Officers,
 MOIs, MOPs and other staff   2. One of the major challenges mentioned by ULGs is managing
 members.                        displacement and resettlement, particularly in urban areas where
                                 informal settlers, shopkeepers, and other affected persons need to
                                 be relocated. The absence of clear municipal guidelines for managing
                                 informal occupiers or addressing gender-specific impacts of land
                                 acquisition further complicates the process. Additionally, there is
                                 often reluctance to compensate occupants without formal
                                 ownership due to fears of legal repercussions. These gaps in policy
                                 and practice result in delays, disputes, and resistance from affected
                                 communities.
                              3. ULGs also expressed that they struggle with capacity constraints,
                                 particularly a lack of expertise in participatory methodologies,
                                 conflict resolution, and the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans
                                 (RAPs) or socio-economic surveys. Securing funds for compensation
                                 or the development of resettlement sites is another significant
                                 challenge, with delays in payments leading to dissatisfaction among
                                 landowners and affected persons. Furthermore, resistance from local
                                 communities due to dissatisfaction with compensation packages and
                                 distrust in municipal processes often leads to prolonged disputes and
                                 frequent litigation, further delaying program timelines.
                              4. Addressing these challenges requires strengthening institutional
                                 capacity, improving financial and legal mechanisms, and developing
                                 clear municipal guidelines for managing land acquisition and

                                              10


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                 resettlement. A more transparent and participatory approach,
                                 combined with timely compensation and conflict resolution
                                 strategies, can help ULGs ensure a smoother and more equitable land
                                 acquisition process.
Consultations with Line       1. BOR mentioned the bureaucratic delays in land acquisition under the
Departments                      Land Acquisition Act, 1894 as one of the major issues. Delays in
                                 notification, valuation disputes due to outdated pricing mechanisms,
                                 and inadequate compensation often result in resistance from
Board of Revenue (BoR)           landowners and informal occupants. In donor-funded projects,
                                 aligning acquisition processes with international frameworks such as
primary land administration
                                 the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards (ESS 5) remains
authority, overseeing land
                                 a challenge. Additionally, identifying taxable properties is difficult as
acquisition,       revenue
                                 landowners frequently underreport landholdings or evade taxes,
collection, and regulatory
                                 further straining revenue collection.
enforcement
                              2. BOR also mentioned that despite digitalization initiatives like the
                                 Land Records Management Information System (LRMIS),
                                 dependence on outdated manual records continues to hamper
                                 efficiency. Many areas still lack updated land title records, leading to
                                 disputes and encroachments. Resistance to change and limited
                                 technical expertise further slows the transition to digital land
                                 administration and e-services. Weak enforcement mechanisms also
                                 contribute to unchecked encroachments on state and communal
                                 land, while prolonged adjudication processes for land disputes erode
                                 public trust in revenue and judicial forums.
                              3. Another pressing concern emphasized by BOR is the difficulty in
                                 addressing the compensation issues of occupants without formal
                                 land titles, particularly in urban and peri-urban areas. The BoR also
                                 struggles with a shortage of adequately trained personnel for land
                                 administration, valuation, and dispute resolution. Furthermore,
                                 delays in adopting international E&S requirements, especially in
                                 projects supported by the World Bank, create procedural conflicts
                                 between national land governance frameworks and provincial
                                 systems.
Labor Department              Below is a detailed overview of the department's main concerns:
(Responsible for regulating   1. A significant portion of the workforce, particularly in the informal
labor relations, ensuring        sector, remains unregistered, limiting their access to legal
workers' rights, and             protections.
improving labor welfare)
                              2. Limited capacity to monitor compliance due to insufficient labor
                                 inspectors and outdated mechanisms.
                              3. Many workplaces, especially construction sites, fail to provide
                                 adequate safety measures, leading to accidents and injuries.
                              4. Employers and workers often lack awareness of occupational safety
                                 and health (OSH) standards.
                              5. OSH enforcement remains weak, especially in the informal sector,
                                 exposing workers to health hazards.
                              6. Many workers, particularly in informal employment, earn less than
                                 the legally mandated minimum wage.
                              7. Women workers face wage gaps, lack of workplace protections, and
                                 limited employment opportunities.




                                               11


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                             8. Workers are often hesitant to raise grievances due to fear of
                                retaliation or lack of legal knowledge.
                             9. Limited unionization and lack of support for collective bargaining
                                hinder workers’ ability to advocate for fair treatment.
                             10. Persistent issues with child labor and bonded labor, especially in
                                 brick kilns, agriculture, and domestic work.
                             11. The Labor Department collaborates with ULGs to enhance the living
                                 and working conditions of laborers, ensure compliance with labor
                                 laws, and promote workers' rights at the local government level.
The Social Welfare           Below are some key concerns:
Department
                             1.   Face challenges in identifying and reaching these vulnerable
(Responsible for promoting        populations, especially in rural or underserved areas.
social welfare, providing
                             2.   Inadequate funding to meet the needs of vulnerable groups, and the
care and support for
                                  delivery of welfare services such as shelters, healthcare, and
vulnerable groups, and
                                  educational opportunities.
ensuring their integration
into society)                3.   Inadequate staffing levels and limited professional training for social
                                  workers and welfare officers, limiting the impact of initiatives and
                                  support programs.
                             4.   Limited support systems or rehabilitative services to combat issues
                                  related to domestic violence, harassment, or sexual assault,
                                  including shelter, legal assistance, and rehabilitation services
                             5.   Difficulties in implementing programs due to overlapping mandates
                                  between multiple social service entities, delays in policy approvals,
                                  and gaps in coordination with local governments and other
                                  agencies.
                             6.   Lack of widespread awareness of the available social welfare
                                  services, making it harder for the target groups to access support
                                  and a lack of robust community outreach, particularly in
                                  underserved areas.
                             7.   Poor enforcement of child protection laws in some areas to prevent
                                  child labor and protect children from abuse and exploitation.
                             8.   Limited opportunities for people with disabilities in the workforce,
                                  resulting in their continued dependence on social welfare programs
                                  rather than becoming self-sufficient.
                             9.   Limited government funding and reliance on ad-hoc financial
                                  support can create challenges in sustaining long-term social welfare
                                  programs.
                             10. Lack of consistency in welfare policies due to change of
                                 governments.
                             11. Lack of coordination between the Social Welfare Department and
                                 other organizations such as local governments, NGOs, healthcare
                                 providers, and police, especially when addressing complex social
                                 issues.
Environmental Protection     1.   As per EPCCD, the ULGs will have to require an NOC from the
and Climate Change                department for the water and sanitation and sanitary landfill
Department (EPCCD)                projects under the Program. These projects will include water
                                  supply schemes and treatment plants (submission of IEE for total
                                  cost less than Rs. 50 million, and EIA for cost above Rs. 50 million),
                                  wastewater channels/sewerage system schemes, wastewater

                                              12


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                  treatment plants with treatment capacity greater than 100
                                  m3/hour, and landfill sites (submission of EIA). There will be no
                                  objection from the department to constructing stormwater
                                  drainage at the median of the roads.
                             2.   The Department mentioned that they always face problems with
                                  respect to the quality of the IEE/EIA reports received from the
                                  clients. Most of the times key technical information is not described
                                  in the report. The consultants who prepare the reports only mention
                                  those aspects of the project under which they have command
                                  whereas the other aspects, where their knowledge is limited, are
                                  generally ignored. Project land is already purchased by the
                                  proponent before submitting the IEE/EIA reports, therefore, this
                                  land is justified to be the right land by presenting the biased site
                                  alternative analysis.
                             3.   The capacity of EPCCD head office is satisfactory for processing
                                  complex projects, and it is moderate for the teams based in district
                                  offices.
Housing,           Urban          1.   As per HUD & PHED, the district level laboratories of the
Development and Public                 department are available to test the water quality of the
Health        Engineering              districts.
Department (HUD & PHED)
                                  2.   Consultants are hired to conduct IEE/EIA of the water and
                                       sanitation projects under PHED.
                                  3.   The Department mentioned that they follow local government
                                       laws for the E&S aspects of the projects.
                                  4.   Community consultation is always carried out during the
                                       designing and implementation of water and sanitation projects
                                       in any area.
The Provincial Disaster           1.   As per PDMA, the flood prone areas of the Punjab province are
Management Authority                   mapped, and this information is available to the public.
(PDMA)
                                  2.   The cities are affected by different types of floods including
                                       riverine, urban, and sheet. Authority has its presence at district
                                       and tehsil level to cope with the disasters.
                                  3.   PDMA district/tehsil level offices are in close coordination with
                                       Rescue 1122, Civil Defense, District Governments and Police for
                                       immediate rescue and rehabilitation operations.
                                  4.   PDMA’s major functions are the early warning of the natural
                                       hazards to the communities, managing and response to
                                       disaster and calamities, and rescue and evacuation of the
                                       affected people in case of disaster. All the machinery to
                                       respond to the disaster, is available with the local agencies. In
                                       case of a shortage of these machineries, PDMA manages to
                                       provide it to the agency concerned.
Punjab Industry Department        1.   During the consultation, PID mentioned that contaminated
(PID)                                  wastewater is not allowed to be discharged in any of the water
                                       courses.
                                  2.   Treated wastewater is allowed to be discharged into the water
                                       courses after acquiring NOC from the concerned district office.
                                       There are also certain charges to be paid to the department for
                                       this activity.




                                              13


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
 Punjab Forest Department          1.    PFD emphasized that cutting trees along roadsides is not
 (PFD)                                   allowed for water and sanitation projects.

                                   2.    No project activity is allowed at the forest land unless NOC is
                                         granted by the District Forest Office to the concerned MC.
 Punjab Energy Efficiency &        1.    As per PEECA, there is no requirement by the authority for the
 Conservation Agency                     installation of energy efficient pumps, motors and other
 (PEECA)                                 equipment related with the water and sanitation projects by
                                         the ULGs.
                                   2.    Authority has not worked on the energy efficiency project with
                                         any MC in the past.




5.1     Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure
Based on consultations with the local government and Government Departments and
following World Bank disclosure protocol, the following Table 3 provides an initial outline of
the information to be disclosed at the preparation stage.
Table 3: Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure
 program stage     Target stakeholders            Information to be       Methods and timelines
                                                      disclosed           proposed
 Preparation       PMDFC, affected parties,   Appraisal stage ESCP        ✓ PMDFC website
                   interested groups,         and SEP including GRM       ✓ Print and electronic
                   public at large, ULGs,     and women                     media
                   FWMC, Vulnerable           empowerment                 ✓ One-on-one
                   Groups                     initiatives                   Consultation
                                                                            meetings
                                                                          ✓ Workshops
 Implementation    Relevant Government        Program Information,        ✓ PMDFC website
                   Institutions (Line         National and Provincial     ✓ Print and electronic
                   Departments)               E&S obligations, WB E&S       media
                                              protocols and standards,    ✓ One-on-one
                                              Consultation process,         Consultation
                                              Appraisal stage ESCP          meetings
                                              and SEP including GRM       ✓ Workshops
                                              and women                   ✓ Newsletter
                                              empowerment
                                              initiatives




                                                14


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                  Vulnerable groups             Regular updates on            ✓ Outreach through
                  (including Differently        Program activities and          local community
                  abled citizens, Elderly-      specific initiatives of the     organizations
                  headed households,            Program for vulnerable        ✓ Public notices and
                  female-headed                 groups through SEP and          Press releases in the
                  households or single          GRM procedures.                 local media
                  mothers with underage                                       ✓ Program website
                  children, low-income                                        ✓ Airing of key
                  families, dependent on                                        messages through
                  state support, religious                                      programs by
                  and ethnic minorities                                         electronic and print
                                                                                media
                  transgender people,
                                                                              ✓ One-on-one
                  unemployed persons                                            consultation
                  and,                                                          meetings
                                                                              ✓ Workshops
                  residents of informal
                  settlements), local
                  community

                  PMDFC, Regional               Program overview,             ✓ PMDFC website
                  offices, and other            Progress reports,             ✓ Print and electronic
                  relevant Government           Updated SEP and GRM,            media
                  Departments, Private          E&S obligations, ESCF         ✓ One-on-one
                  Institutions, Civil Society   implementation, SOPs            Consultation
                  Organizations, ULGs           for health and safety,          meetings
                                                GRM, women facilities         ✓ Workshops
                                                and concerns at MC            ✓ Newsletter
                                                level, ARAP/RAP, E&S
                                                instruments.
                  NGOs, Academia, Media         Program overview,             ✓ PMDFC website
                  representatives, General      opportunities for
                                                                              ✓ Bi-Annual Program
                  Public                        collaboration, updated
                                                                                Dissemination
                                                SEP and GRM, E&S
                                                                                Workshops
                                                obligations, ESCF
                                                implementation, SOPs          ✓ Newsletter
                                                for health and safety,
                                                GRM, women facilities
                                                and concerns at MC
                                                level, ARAP/RAP.


5.2    Summary of program stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for
stakeholder engagement
Informed citizen and community engagement are preconditions for the effectiveness of the
program. Accordingly, different tools, techniques and methods will be used for engagement
to cover different needs of the stakeholders. Given the nature of the program, the strategy
for stakeholder engagement is heavily focused on on-going information disclosure and
dissemination that is efficient, transparent, and addresses the needs of different
stakeholders.
In this regard, the program will utilize various methods of engagement that will be used by
the implementing agencies as part of their continuous interaction with the stakeholders. For
the engagement process to be effective and meaningful, a range of techniques need to be
applied that are specifically tailored to the identified stakeholder groups. Methods used for
consulting with Government officials may be different from a format of liaising with the local
                                                 15


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
communities (e.g. focus group discussions, displays, and visuals with a lesser emphasis on
technical aspects).
The format of every engagement activity should meet general requirements on accessibility,
i.e., should be held at venues that are easily reachable and do not require long commute,
entrance fee or preliminary access authorization, cultural appropriateness (i.e., with due
respect to the local customs and norms), and inclusivity, i.e., engaging all segments of the
project affected parties including the vulnerable individuals. If necessary, logistical assistance
should be provided to enable participants from the remote areas, persons with limited
physical abilities and those with insufficient financial or transportation means to attend public
meetings scheduled by the program.
Ensuring the participation of vulnerable individuals and groups in program consultations may
require the implementation of tailored techniques. The vulnerable groups identified by the
program include the rural population, people living with disabilities, women, and
disadvantaged youth. Attention will be given to the vulnerable groups to ensure that they are
not denied program information and benefits. This will be done by focus group discussions,
monitoring participation rates, undertaking beneficiary assessments, using online platforms
to allow access to otherwise disadvantaged groups, and ensuring that at least 30 percent of
participant trainees are females.
Information that is communicated in advance of public consultations primarily includes an
announcement thereof in the public media – local, regional and provincial, as well as the
distribution of invitations and full details of the forthcoming meeting well in advance,
including the agenda. It is crucial that this information is widely available, readily accessible,
clearly outlined, and reaches all areas and segments of the stakeholders. These parameters
can be achieved through the following approaches:
Advance public notification of an upcoming consultation meeting follows the same
fundamental principles of communication. That is, it should be made available via publicly
accessible locations and channels. The primary means of notification may include mass media
and the dissemination of posters/ advertisements in public places. The program keeps proof
of the publication (e.g. a copy of the newspaper announcement) for accountability and
reporting purposes. Existing notice boards in the implementing agencies, the ULGs’ offices
and FWMC may be particularly useful for distributing the announcements. When the
notifications are placed on public boards in open air, it should be remembered that the
posters are exposed to weather, may be removed by by-passers or covered by other
advertisements. The program’s staff will, therefore, maintain regular checks to ensure that
the notifications provided on the public boards remain in place and legible.
 Another critical aspect of the meeting preparation process is selecting the methods of
communication that reaches the potential audience with lower levels of literacy or those who
are not well-versed in the technical aspects of the program. Oral communication is an option
that enables the information to be readily conveyed to such persons. This includes involving
the selected stakeholder representatives and institutional heads to relay up-to-date
information on the program and consultation meetings to the various target audiences.
5.3     Description of Engagement Methods
International standards increasingly emphasize the importance of a consultation being ‘free,
prior and informed’, which implies an accessible and unconstrained process that is
accompanied by the timely provision of relevant and understandable information. To fulfil
this requirement, a range of consultation methods are applied.
A summary description of the engagement methods and techniques that will be applied by
the PMU is provided in Table 2 below. The summary presents a variety of approaches to

                                               16


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
facilitate the processes of information provision, information feedback as well as participation
and consultation.
An attendance list should be made available at the commencement of all engagement
activities to record all participants who are present at the meeting. Wherever possible,
attendees’ signatures should be obtained as a proof of their participation. Details of the
attendees who were not initially on the list (e.g. those participating in place of somebody else,
or public) should be included in addition to those who have registered for the meeting in
advance.
In most cases and as a general practice, the introductory initial part of the meeting should be
delivered in a format that is readily understandable to the audience not literate and should
be free of excessive technical jargon. If necessary, preference should be given, whenever
possible, to oral and visual methods of communication (including presentations, pictorials,
illustrations, graphics and animation) accompanied by hand-out materials imparting the
relevant information in understandable terms rather than as text laden with technical
intricacies.
For consultations with different stakeholders, vulnerable individuals and groups, the following
are some considerations for selecting channels of communication:
a. Diversify means of communication and rely more on social media. Where possible and
   appropriate, create dedicated online platforms and chatgroups appropriate for the
   purpose, based on the type and category of stakeholders;

b. Employ channels of communications (TV, newspaper, radio, dedicated phone lines, and
   mail) in conveying relevant information to stakeholders, and allow them to provide their
   feedback and suggestions. Each of the proposed channels of engagement should clearly
   specify how feedback and suggestions can be provided by stakeholders.

c. Government Departments/NGOs/Civil Society who are directly involved in program
   activities will be consulted by using structured interview tools such as questionnaires (to
   gather quantitative data) and key informant interviews or consultative workshops (for
   qualitative information).

d. Vulnerable groups will be consulted in-person through multiple methods e.g., Focus
   Group Discussions (FGD), individual interviews of physically challenged people, elderly
   people and transgender.
The Stakeholder Engagement Plan outlines the engagement process, methods, including
sequencing, topics of consultations and target stakeholders. The detailed consultations will
suggest the modes of communication and frequency of future engagements, suitable for each
type of stakeholder. Summary of Stakeholder Engagement Activities and Responsibilities is
provided in Table 4.
Table 4: Summary of Stakeholder Engagement Activities and Responsibilities
   Program        Target        Topics of       Method Used       Responsibilities    Frequency
    Stage      Stakeholder     Consultation                                          and Timeline
                    s
               Affected      • Program          • Virtual         PMDFC with         At
               parties         objectives and     meetings        input from         appraisal
 Preparation
               including       design             providing       other              stage
  (Program     ULGs and                           background      implementing
   Design)     FWMC          • Need for the       information     departments
                               program                            and
                                                • One-on-

                                                17


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                            • E&S principles,       one                   organizations
                              risk and              meetings
                              impact,               and FGDs
                              management
                                                  • Phone
                            • Grievance
                              Redress
                                                  • Emails
                              mechanisms          • Appropriate
                              (GRM)                 adjustments
                              including             were made to
                              GBV/SEA/SH            take into
                                                    account the
                            • Women
                                                    need for social
                              empowerment
                                                    distancing (use
                              at MC level and
                                                    of audio-visual
                              provision of
                                                    materials,
                              gender
                                                    technologies
                              sensitive
                                                    such as
                              facilities
                                                    telephone calls,
                            • Appraisal stage       SMS, emails,
                              ESCP, SEP,            etc.)
                              ARAP/RAP
                                                  • Workshops

              Other         • Program             • Virtual meetings      PMDFC with       At
              interested      Description           providing             input from       appraisal
              groups                                background            other            stage
                            • E&S principles,       information           implementing
                              risk and                                    departments
                              impact,             • One-on-one            and
                              management            meetings and          organizations
                                                    FGDs
                            • Grievance
                              Redress             • Phone
                              Mechanisms
                              (GRM)               • Emails
                                                    Appropriate
                            • Women
                                                    adjustments were
                              empowerment
                                                    made to take into
                              at MC level
                                                    account the need
                            • Role of               for social
                              interested            distancing (use of
                              departments in        audio-visual
                              the program           materials,
                                                    technologies such
                                                    as telephone calls,
                                                    SMS, emails, etc.)

                                                  • Workshops
             All affected   • Progress on TA       • Program              PMDFC with      Program
             parties,         activities/target      progress Reports     the support     implementatio
Implementati
             other            s and outputs                               from ULGs and   n phase –
on
             interested     • SEP & GBV            • Emails, Meetings     FWMC            quarterly
             groups           implementatio        • Electronic
                              n                      publications as
                                                     well as
                            • Environmental
                                                     dissemination
                              and social
                                                     of hard copies
                              concerns and
                              monitoring and       • Informatio
                              Evaluation Plan        n resource
                                                     portal on


                                                  18


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                                the PMDFC
                                                website



5.4       Proposed strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups
Vulnerable stakeholders are not a homogenous group. Some may be receptive to immediate
and direct contact with a government department and may be vocal about their concerns. On
the other hand, there may be some groups who are reluctant to be contacted at all, perhaps
because of their vulnerable status or any other reason. Consultations using FGD as a tool, will
be carried out with representatives of disabled citizens, women, minorities, transgenders and
accordingly engagement mechanisms and frequencies, will be designed and customized for
vulnerable people. This will continue throughout the program cycle.
5.5       Timelines
The frequency of stakeholder engagement will vary across the program activities
depending on the nature/pace of activity design/implementation, its social and
environmental risk and impact and its relevance to the stakeholders. The Program will
review its stakeholder engagement against the SEP bi-annually, and this review will be
a part of the progress report that will be shared with the World Bank.
5.6       Review of Comments
All stakeholder engagement activities will be recorded and transcribed and made available
to stakeholders as per the template provided as Annex 1. Comments provided by
stakeholders will be collated and reviewed following each engagement activity. These
comments will be analyzed and formulated into a report which will be shared with PMDC and
the relevant stakeholders for further action. Stakeholders will be kept informed throughout
the program life cycle. The modes and frequency of reporting to stakeholders will be
determined by the Team during the first quarter of program implementation after
conducting initial consultations with the stakeholders.
6         Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement
6.1       Implementation Arrangements and Resources
The implementation of all ESF instruments, including the SEP, will be financed from the overall
program budget. The indicative annual budget to implement the SEP is estimated at PKR 26.0
million per annum (US$ 92,857). This budget encompasses all costs associated with ongoing
engagement with stakeholders, information disclosure, grievance redress, and other activities
described in the SEP. The breakup is attached as Annex 2. However, the budget for SEP in
indicative and will be finalized once the activity plans for the program components are
finalized.
Under the PICP, the following institutional arrangements will be implemented. These
arrangements aim to create a structured governance framework, ensuring efficient
coordination, monitoring, and financial accountability across all levels. This multi-tiered
approach aims to build institutional resilience, foster improved municipal governance, and
deliver sustainable urban infrastructure and services across Punjab's intermediate cities.
      •   A Program Steering Committee will be established to ensure efficient cooperation and
          strategic oversight under the Program. The PSC will be chaired by the Chairman
          Planning Board, and will include leadership from LG&CDD, PMDFC, and departments
          of Excise and Taxation, Finance, Public Health and Engineering, and Planning and
          Development.



                                              19


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
      •       The LG&CDD, with assistance from the PMDFC, will have overall responsibility for
              Program reporting, administering the Independent Verification Agency (IVA) contract,
              results monitoring and evaluation, regulation setting, and coordination. The LG&CDD
              will also be responsible for ensuring coordination with the PHED, which is tasked with
              water and sanitation improvements in larger cities through a set of existing and newly
              established WASAs.

      •       A Program Management Unit will be established in the PMDFC, as the lead technical
              agency to provide capacity-building support and technical assistance to selected
              Urban Local Government (ULGs). Its tasks will include: Capacity-building and technical
              assistance to ULGs to ensure effective program implementation and the achievement
              results, management and oversight of investment design, as well as supervision
              during implementation, monitoring and reporting, including grievance resolution
              mechanisms, managing, and overseeing environmental and social safeguards, provide
              technical expertise to improve service delivery standards and enhance own-source
              revenue mobilization strategies, assist in preparing comprehensive mid-year and
              annual reports ensuring that stakeholders are regularly updated on Program
              milestones and deliverables, assist in program coordination through ongoing
              collaboration with key stakeholders, ensuring smooth communication, timely issue
              resolution, and effective delivery of Program interventions.
PMDFC will house the requisite technical specialists and systems and will implement the
SEP. The program will be administered as per the POM.
7             Grievance Mechanism
In compliance with applicable local and national laws and essentially the World Bank’s ESS10,
a program specific mechanism is set up to handle complaints and issues. This process would
be specially designed to collect, collate, review and redress stakeholders’ concerns,
complaints and grievances. This process will be carried out using dedicated communication
materials (specifically, a GRM brochure or pamphlet) which will be developed to help
stakeholders become familiar with the grievance redress channels and procedures. Locked
suggestion/complaint boxes will be installed in each implementing agency and ULGs, and
they will maintain a grievance register to capture and track grievances from submission to
resolution and communication with complainants. Project website (and that of the
implementing agencies) will include clear information on how feedback, questions,
comments, concerns, and grievances can be submitted by any stakeholder. It will also
provide information on the way grievances will be handled, both in terms of process and
deadlines.
The main objective of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be to assist in resolving
complaints and grievances in a timely, effective and efficient manner that satisfies all
parties involved. Specifically, it provides a transparent and credible process for fair,
effective and lasting outcomes. It also builds trust and cooperation as an integral
component of broader community consultation that facilitates corrective actions.
Specifically, the GRM:
          •    Provides affected people with avenues for making a complaint or resolving any
               dispute that may arise during the course of the implementation of the program.
          •    Ensure that appropriate and mutually acceptable redress actions are identified and
               implemented to the satisfaction of complainants.
7.1           Description of Grievance Mechanism (GRM)
The GRM is a vital component of citizen-centric governance, designed to ensure

                                                   20


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
transparency, accountability, and responsiveness in public service delivery. Its core objective
is to assist citizens and local governments in effectively managing the registration, tracking,
and resolution of complaints in a timely and efficient manner. The GRM enables structured,
two-way communication between the public and local government institutions, allowing
grievances to be addressed systematically and fairly.
PMDFC has developed and implemented a well-structured GRM in PCP. In order to maximize
accessibility, a multi-channel approach has been adopted. Citizens can submit complaints
through the Baldia Shikayaat mobile application via text or voice messages or by physically
visiting designated complaint cells established at local government offices and ULGs.
Complaints can also be lodged through telephone calls, written letters, and the online forms
available on the websites of the local governments. To improve transparency and ensure
accountability, the system is equipped with automated SMS alerts and notifications, allowing
complainants to track the status of their grievances in real time. The GRM system has been
successfully implemented in PCP local governments and is currently active. As part of the
long-term sustainability plan, the system is proposed to be replicated and further
strengthened for PICP local governments through digital upgrades, improved integration,
and capacity-building of staff.
A designated GRM Focal Person is responsible for managing the centralized grievance
database, which ensures a systematic record of all submitted complaints. This database logs
critical information including the complainant’s name or organization, the date and nature
of the grievance, actions taken by relevant stakeholders, and the final outcome. The
database also documents how and when the resolution was communicated back to the
complainant. These processes help ensure transparency, improve service quality, and foster
a responsive environment where citizens feel empowered to raise their concerns and receive
timely redress. Table 5 provides GRM steps and the online complaint form is attached as
Annex 4.




                                               21


                                                                                                  Official Use Only
Table 5: GRM Steps
Step                                                                Timeframe         Responsibility

GM                 PMDFC have a dedicated grievance redress         Within one        PMDFC/ULGs
implementation     mechanism developed under PCP and will           months of
structure          be adopted in PICP with upgradation              Effectiveness
                   through digital upgrades, improved               thereafter
                   integration, and capacity-building of staff. A   maintain and
                   formal Grievance Redress Committees              operate it
                   (GRC) with members nominated by                  throughout
                   ULG//PMDFC will be established. The focal        Program
                   person of Grievance complaint cell (GCC), to     implementation.
                   be established at each ULG, will be
                   responsible for receiving, tracking and
                   recording and updating status of all
                   grievances received. An electronic database
                   of all grievances will also be maintained at
                   the PMDFC level.
                   GRM Process will include receiving the
                   Complaint/Grievance, Initial Review of
                   Grievance, Resolution or Escalation of
                   Grievances, Monitoring, Review, and
                   Grievance Records & Documentation. The
                   details of GRM process are given in
                   subsequent steps.

Grievance uptake   Grievance uptake will take place at multiple     Within one        PMDFC/ULGs
                   levels through a broad range of channels.        months of
                                                                    Effectiveness
                   ✓ GRM app (Baldia Shikayaat) developed
                                                                    thereafter
                     under PCP at local level. The same
                                                                    maintain and
                     system will be adopted in PICP.
                                                                    operate it
                   ✓ Voice message at local levels                  throughout
                                                                    Program
                   ✓ WhatsApp
                                                                    implementation.
                   ✓ E. Mail
                   ✓ Trough posting a letter
                   ✓ Walk in: Complaint cell has been
                     established at ULG offices with
                     designated complaint cell in charge.
                     complainants can visit the MC office and
                     submit the written complaints to GRM
                     focal person.
                   ✓ Regular telephonic call
                   ✓ MC Website: Online form is available.
                   ✓ Grievances and suggestion boxes are
                     available at website and in the app.
                   Citizen can easily download the GRM app
                   from google play store and can register
                   complain through cell No./email etc.
                   Link:



                                                22


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Step                                                               Timeframe         Responsibility

                  https://play.google.com/store/apps/detail
                  s?id=baldiashikayaat.pmdfc.org.pk&hl=en

Sorting,          Complaint received through any channel           Upon receipt of   Complaint cell
processing        (WhatsApp, app, walk in, message, website,       complaint         In-charge at
                  Telephone/) will have unique code to allow                         MC level/CO
                  for easy tracking. Once a grievance is
                  recorded, the code will be shared with the
                  complainant, as well as a tentative timeline
                  for its resolution. This would be taking place
                  on the same day the grievance is received.
                  The focal person of GCC will track the
                  complaint on dashboard and will forward
                  the complaint to GRC who will then conduct
                  an inquiry into the grievance to identify its
                  root cause, and subsequent resolution
                  measures. The administration of local
                  government (head & Chief Officer) is
                  provided with the dashboard facility to
                  actively monitor the progress. The
                  escalated complaints are popped up on the
                  dashboard as an alert for the local
                  government administration for their timely
                  disposal.

Acknowledgement   Once the complaint is registered, the            Upon receipt of   Auto
and follow-up     system sends auto generated email and            complaint         generated
                  SMS/ alert messages with code for
                  acknowledgement of the received
                  complaints and in app notifications.

Verification,     The complaint received will be forwarded to      Within 10 days    GRC/PMDFC
investigation,    GRC committee for investigation. Each            depending upon    E&S
action            targeted MC will notify a GRC committee,         the nature of     team/Complai
                  consisting of three to four members and          complaint         nt cell In-
                  one chairman/women from MC. At least                               charge at ULG
                  one member of the GRC must be a female.
                  GRC members will devise a methodology to
                  solve grievance and conduct an inquiry of
                  the grievance to identify its root cause, and
                  subsequent resolution measures as per
                  devised methodology.
                  In case the issue is unresolvable at MC GRC
                  level, the GRC shall forward it to the head of
                  Local Government and the complainant
                  shall be notified, and an updated resolution
                  timeline shall be communicated to the
                  complainant.




                                               23


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Step                                                                   Timeframe         Responsibility

Monitoring     and     Separate log-ins have been created for all      Daily basis       Focal person
evaluation             the relevant officers to review the status of                     of GCC at ULG
                       complaints. In addition, reports on the
                       status of complaints will be submitted to
                       the Chief Officer of ULGs on periodic basis
                       and on need basis.
                       The GCC focal person will also update the
                       status of complaint in GRM dashboard, and
                       the citizens receive periodic updates on
                       complaint progress through SMS and Emails
                       accordingly. For grievances that are
                       resolved, the details of the resolution will
                       be entered into the database, and the
                       decision will be communicated to the
                       complainant.
                       To monitor the effectiveness of grievance
                       mechanism, appropriate measures will
                       include monthly reporting on the number
                       of grievances received, resolved and
                       outstanding. This will be undertaken by the
                       GCC focal person at MC level. A biannual
                       sex-disaggregated review of a sample of
                       complaints processed will also be
                       conducted to assess the overall efficacy of
                       GRM system.

Provision         of   The resolved grievance shall also be flagged    Within 15 days    GRC
feedback               for follow-up, and the relevant GRC will        after complaint
                       check in on the complainant’s level of          resolution
                       satisfaction with the resolution within 15
                       days. This feedback from the complainant
                       shall also be added to the database.

Training               Training needs are:                             During the        PMDFC,    PIU,
                                                                       program           ULGs,
                       1.   Environment & Social Management of
                                                                       implementation
                            Infrastructure Projects
                       2.   Grievance & Complaint handling
                       3.   Performance & Accountability
                       4.   Operation & Maintenance of
                            Municipal Services
                       5.   IT related trainings

If relevant,           As per decisions of GRC and rules and           01 day to one     ULGC/ PMDFC
payment of             regulations, the process will be completed.     month
reparations                                                            depending upon
following                                                              the nature of
complaint                                                              complaint
resolution

Appeals process        If the complainant will not satisfy with the
                       decision of GRC committee and program
                       steering committee, he has the provision to

                                                    24


                                                                                                          Official Use Only
Step                                                               Timeframe      Responsibility

                    submit his grievances against that
                    complaint and appeal for further action.
                    Appeal rules (2017) are also available as an
                    alternate forum for the redressal of
                    complaint.


The GRM will be responsive to SEA/SH and workplace harassment and complaints. A code of
conduct for workers and training of staff to address SEA/SH concerns will also be conducted.

8       Monitoring and Reporting


8.1     Monitoring of SEP
The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary during program implementation
to ensure that the information presented herein is consistent and is the most recent, and that
the identified stakeholders and methods of engagement remain appropriate and effective in
relation to the program context and specific stages of the implementation. Any significant
modifications to the program activities or its schedule will be appropriately documented in
the SEP.
The SEP will be monitored based on both qualitative reporting (based on progress reports)
and quantitative reporting linked to results indicators on stakeholder engagement and
grievance performance. SEP reporting will include the following:
(i)     Progress reporting on the Stakeholder Engagement commitments under the ESCP
(ii)    Cumulative qualitative reporting on the feedback received during SEP activities, in
        particular (a) issues that have been raised that can be addressed through changes in
        program scope and design, and reflected in the basic documentation such as the
        program Appraisal Document, Environmental and Social Assessment, Resettlement
        Plan (b) issues that have been raised and can be addressed during program
        implementation; (c) issues that have been raised that are beyond the scope of the
        program and are better addressed through alternative projects, programs or
        initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by the program due to technical,
        jurisdictional or excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes of meetings summarizing
        the views of the attendees will also be annexed to the monitoring reports.
(iii)    Quantitative reporting based on the indicators included in the SEP. An illustrative set
of indicators for monitoring and reporting is included in Annex 3.
8.2     Reporting back to stakeholder groups
It is critical to follow up with stakeholders at different stages of the program cycle. Once
consultations have taken place, stakeholders will want to know which of their suggestions will
be used, what risk or impact mitigation measures will be put in place to address their
concerns, and how. This follow-up can include meetings/forums, brochures, and
consultative committees. Other means such as short message service (SMS), radio,
television, social media handles, website of PMDFC may also be employed to share updated
information with stakeholders.
ULGs will provide PMDFC with monthly summaries and internal reports on public grievances,
enquiries and related incidents, together with the status of implementation of associated

                                                25


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
corrective/preventative actions will be collated by responsible staff and referred to the
senior management of the Program. The monthly summaries will provide a mechanism for
assessing both the number and the nature of complaints and requests for information, along
with the Program’s ability to address those in a timely and effective manner. Information on
public engagement activities undertaken by the Program during the year may be conveyed
to the stakeholders in two possible ways:
     •   Publication of a standalone annual report on program’s interaction with the
         stakeholders.
     •   A number of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will also be monitored by the
         program on a regular basis, including the following parameters:
                o Number of public hearings, consultation meetings and other public
                    discussions/forums conducted within a reporting period (e.g. monthly,
                    quarterly, or annually);
                o Frequency of public engagement activities;
                o Geographical coverage of public engagement activities – number of
                    locations within ULGs covered by the consultation process;
                o Number and details of vulnerable individuals involved in consultation
                    meetings;
                o Number of public grievances received within a reporting period (e.g.
                    monthly, quarterly, or
                o annually) and number of those grievances resolved within the prescribed
                    timeline;
                o Type of public grievances received;
 The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary during the course of
 program implementation to ensure that the information presented herein is consistent
 and is the most recent, and that the identified methods of engagement remain
 appropriate and effective in relation to the program context and specific phases of the
 development.
 Any major changes to the Program related activities and to its schedule will be duly
 reflected in the SEP. Monthly summaries and internal reports on public grievances,
 enquiries and related incidents, together with the status of implementation of associated
 actions will be collated by responsible staff and referred to the senior management of the
 program. The monthly summaries will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number
 and the nature of complaints and requests for information, along with the program’s ability
 to address those in a timely and effective manner. Information on public engagement
 activities undertaken by the program during the year may be conveyed to the stakeholders
 in two possible ways:
     •   Publication of a standalone annual report on program interaction with the
         stakeholders.
     •   A number of KPIs will also be monitored by the program on a regular basis. Based
         on the data collected regularly, these indicators are:
                   •   Number of consultation meetings (virtual) and other public
                       discussions/forums conducted monthly, quarterly, and annually;
                   •   Frequency of public engagement activities;
                   •   Number of public grievances received (monthly, quarterly, and
                       annually) and number of those resolved within the prescribed
                       timeline.


                                             26


                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                Annexes
Annex 1. Template for minutes/records of consultation meetings
Annex 2. Tentative SEP Budget Table
Annex 3. Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP
Annex 4. Complaint Form




                                      27


                                                                 Official Use Only
Annex 1: Template for Feedback during Consultation Meetings


 Date and Location      Stakeholder           Summary    Response of      Follow-up
 (Institution/Community (Group or             of         Program          Action/Next
 and City)              Individual)           Feedback   Implementation   Steps
                                                         Team




                                         28


                                                                                        Official Use Only
Annex 2 : SEP Indicative Annual Budget for first year
Budget categories                               Times/Years       Lump sum costs Remarks
                                                (Yearly)          Million
1. Estimated Staff salaries* and related expenses
The salaries of social staff at the PMDFC level will be included in the overall PCIP budget.
2. Consultations/ Participatory Planning, Decision-Making Meetings
2a. program launch meetings                                                 5
2b. Organization of focus groups                                            3.3
3. Communication campaigns
3a. Posters, flyers and social media campaign                               1
4. Trainings
4a. Training on TA components including                                      4
Gender-Based Violence (GBV)
5. Beneficiary surveys
5a. Perception survey                                                       4
6. Grievance Mechanism
6a. GRM operational costs                                                   6
6b. Training of GRM committees                                              2
6c. Suggestion boxes at ULGs                                                0.2
6d. GM communication materials                                              0.5
TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:                                        26
*Note: These initial costs are indicative and will be updated during implementation.




                                                   29


                                                                                               Official Use Only
Annex 3: Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP
 Key evaluation     Specific  Evaluation      Potential Indicators           Data Collection Methods
 questions          questions
 Grievance          •   Are program-          •    Usage of GM and/or        Records from the ULGs
 Mechanism:             affected parties           feedback                  and database of PMDFC
                        raising issues and         mechanisms
  To what extent
                        grievances?
 have Program -                               •    Requests            for
 affected parties   •   How                        information       from
 been provided          quickly/effectively        ULGs.
 with accessible        are the grievances
 and inclusive                                •    Use of suggestion
                        resolved?
 means to raise                                    boxes placed at
 issues and                                        ULGs.
 grievances?                                  •    Number of
                                                   grievances raised,
                                                   resolved within a
 Have the ULGs                                     specified time frame.
 responded to
 and managed                                  •    Number of Sexual
 such grievances?                                  Exploitation, and
                                                   Abuse/Sexual
                                                   Harassment (SEA/SH)
                                                   cases reported in the
                                                   program areas, which
                                                   were referred for
                                                   health, social, legal
                                                   and security support
                                                   according to the
                                                   referral process in
                                                   place.
                                              •    Number of
                                                   grievances that have
                                                   been (i) opened, (ii)
                                                   opened for 30 days,
                                                   (iii) resolved, (iv)
                                                   closed, and (v)
                                                   number of responses
                                                   that satisfied the
                                                   complainants, during
                                                   the reporting period
                                                   disaggregated by
                                                   category of
                                                   grievance, gender,
                                                   age, and location of
                                                   complainant.
 Stakeholder        •   Was there             •    Active participation      Stakeholder Consultation
 engagement             interest and               of stakeholders in        Attendance
 impact on              support for the            activities                Sheets/Minutes
 Program design         Program?
                                              •    Number of actions
 and
                    •   Were there any             taken in a timely         Evaluation forms
 implementation
                        adjustments                manner in response
                        made during                to feedback received
                        Program design             during consultation       Structured surveys
                        and                        sessions with

                                                  30


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
How have                implementation          Program affected
engagement              based on the            parties.
                                                                        Social media/traditional
activities made a       feedback
                                           •    Number of               media entries on the
difference in           received?
                                                consultation            Program results
Program design
                    •   Was priority            meetings and public
and
                        information             discussions where
implementation.
                        disclosed to            the feedback and
                        relevant parties        recommendation
                        throughout the          received is reflected
                        Program cycle?          in Program design
                                                and implementation.
                                           •    Number of
                                                disaggregated
                                                engagement sessions
                                                held, focused on at-
                                                risk groups in the
                                                Program.
Implementation      •   Were the           •    Percentage of SEP       Communication Strategy
effectiveness.          activities              activities
Were                    implemented as          implemented.
stakeholder             planned? Why or                                 Periodic Focus Group
                                           •    Key barriers to
engagement              why not?                                        Discussions
                                                participation
activities
                    •   Was the                 identified with
effective      in
                        stakeholder             stakeholder             Face-to-face meetings
implementation.
                        engagement              representatives.        and/or Focus Group
                        approach
                                           •    Number of               discussions with
                        inclusive of                                    Vulnerable Groups or their
                                                adjustments made in
                        disaggregated                                   representatives
                                                the stakeholder
                        groups? Why or
                                                engagement
                        why not?
                                                approach to improve
                                                program’ outreach,
                                                inclusion and
                                                effectiveness.




                                               31


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Annex 4: Complaint Form




                          32


                               Official Use Only
