Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               RA MINISTY OF TERRITORIAL ADMINISTRATION AND
                                                                            INFRASTRUCTURE




                               WATER AND IRRIGATION SERVICES
                                  ENHANCEMENT PROJECT



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  FRASTRUCTURE
                               IMPROVEMENT PROJECT



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  RESETTLEMENT
                                   FRAMEWORK




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                           1
            RESETTLEMENT POLICY FRAMEWORK (RPF)
                (Simplified for Low or Moderate Risk Projects)



                   RESETTLEMENT FRAMEWORK
                                  FOR THE


   WATER AND IRRIGATION SERVICES ENHANCEMENT PROJECT
                           (WISE – P508124)


                               PREPARED BY


                         WATER COMMITTEE
                                     of
Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure of Armenia




              DRAFT FOR PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS (March 2025)
Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... 2
   1.1 Project Objectives and Description ............................................................................................... 2
   1.2 Objective and Rationale ................................................................................................................ 3
   1.3 Scope and Approach ..................................................................................................................... 4
   1.4 Key Principles ................................................................................................................................ 6
CHAPTER 2: LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK ............................................................................ 8
   2.1 Comparison of National Law with World Bank ESS5 .................................................................... 8
   2.2 Identified Gaps and Proposed Approaches ................................................................................ 10
CHAPTER 3: Resettlement Plan ............................................................................................................. 12
   3.1 Land Acquisition Scenario ........................................................................................................... 12
   3.2 Preparation of RPs ...................................................................................................................... 13
       3.2.1 Sub-project Identification and Screening ............................................................... 13
       3.2.2 Scoping & Baseline Studies .................................................................................... 13
       3.2.3 Stakeholder Engagement & Consultation ............................................................... 14
       3.2.4 Preparation of Resettlement Plans (RPs)................................................................. 14
       3.2.5 Approval & Disclosure ........................................................................................... 15
   3.3 Cut-off Date................................................................................................................................. 15
   3.4 Implementation of RPs ............................................................................................................... 15
   3.5 Disclosure and Consultations ...................................................................................................... 16
   3.6 Monitoring and Evaluation ......................................................................................................... 17
CHAPTER 4: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT ....................................................................................... 18
   4.1 Water Committee of Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructures ...................... 18
   4.2 Ministry of Finance ..................................................................................................................... 18
   4.3 Cadaster Committee ................................................................................................................... 18
   4.4 Regional and Local Authorities ................................................................................................... 18
CHAPTER 5: FEEDBACK AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM ........................................................ 22
   5.1 Objective ..................................................................................................................................... 22
   5.2 Steps ........................................................................................................................................... 22
   5.3 Appeal ......................................................................................................................................... 23
   5.4 Closure of Grievances ................................................................................................................. 23
   5.5 Grievance Records and Documentation ..................................................................................... 24
   5.6 FGRM Focal Point Contact Information ...................................................................................... 24
ACRONYMS
AFD        Agence Française de Développement
ESIA       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESF        Environmental and Social Framework
ESMP       Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESS        Environmental and Social Standards
GoA        Government of Armenia
FGRM       Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
FM         Financial Management
GM         Grievance Mechanism
GRC        Grievance Redress Commission
HLIB       Health and Labor Inspection Body
HMC        Hydrometeorology and Monitoring Center
H&S        Health and Safety
IA         Implementation Agency
IBRD       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
I&D        Irrigation and Drainage
IEC        Information, Education and Communication
ILCS       Integrated Living Conditions Survey
ILO        International Labor Organization
IPF        Investment Project Financing
IPF-PBC    Investment Project Financing with Performance-Based Conditions
IWPC       Integrated Water and Planning Centre
LMP        Labor Management Procedures
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
MoE        Ministry of Economy
MP         Monitoring Plan
MTAI       Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructures
NRW        Non-Revenue water
O&M        Operations and maintenance
OHS        Occupational Health and Safety
PAP        Project Affected Person
PDO        Project Development Objective
PEA        Project Execution Agency
PCT        Project Coordination Team
RA         Republic of Armenia
PBC        Performance-Based Conditions
RF         Resettlement Framework
RP         Resettlement Policy
RWSS       Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Services
SCADA   Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SEF     Stakeholder Engagement Framework
SEP     Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SNCO    State Non-Commercial Organization
WB      World Bank
WUA     Water User Association
WC      Water Committee
WSA     Water Supply Agency
                                                  CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this Resettlement Framework (RF) document is to establish terms of agreement between
relevant authorities in the Government of the Republic of Armenia and the World Bank regarding principles and
procedures to be used in subsequent preparation of Resettlement Plans (RPs)1 for sub-project activities
involving physical or economic displacement as a result of land acquisition and/or restrictions on land use. The
World Bank’s approval of RPs is required prior to initiation of a procurement process for any sub-projects where
such potential impacts are envisaged.
The RPF is intended to avoid or minimize any adverse impacts associated with physical or economic
displacement, and to ensure arrangements are in place to mitigate any adverse impacts that may occur. The
Government of Armenia (GoA) hereby agrees to apply the principles, procedures, and standards incorporated
in ESS5 of the World Bank ESF in obtaining any sites for the project where economic displacement2 or physical
displacement3 are envisaged.
This RPF is intended to utilize the existing legal and policy framework of Armenia, incorporating any
supplementary measures necessary to achieve consistency with ESS5 principles and standards4.
Water and Irrigation Services Enhancement Project (or hereafter WISE Project) is being prepared to enhance
climate resilient access, efficiency, and financial sustainability of irrigation and rural water supply and sanitation
(RWSS) services in project affected areas. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared to guide
relevant stakeholder engagement activities both during the project preparation and implementation.


   1.1 Project Objectives and Description
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide improved access to efficient and financially sustainable
irrigation and rural WSS services in selected areas of Armenia. The project is part of a 10-year Multi-phase
Development Approach (MPA) that aims to improve the delivery of irrigation and rural WSS services across
Armenia. Phase 1 is designed to enhance climate-resilient irrigation and WSS services. It will equip six Water
User WUAs with modern irrigation systems and enhance irrigation service efficiency through upgrades to
primary, secondary and tertiary networks in selected schemes to boost climate resilience towards drought,
floods and extreme heat. Phase 1 will also improve access to sustainable WSS services by developing rural WSS
investment plans and upgrading water supply infrastructure. It will also prepare FSs, designs, and bidding
documents for Phase 2 investments. Further, Phase 1 will also include Performance-based Conditions (PBCs) to
support policy, legal and institutional reforms as well as a learning program that documents insights to guide
implementation through research, data analysis and policy development. The project implementation period of
Phase 1 will be six years.
Phase 1 of the project includes four components, including one component with PBCs, as follows:
     a. Component 1. Water Sector Reform and Institutional Strengthening supports MTAI and the Water
        Committee (WC) in key priority areas, including the development of national strategies for water,
        irrigation, and rural drinking water and sanitation; revision of irrigation tariffs based on land use and
        water consumption; establishment of an Asset Maintenance Fund and Plan for modernized irrigation
        schemes; creation of Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) units with defined agreements,
        performance indicators, and monitoring systems; and the launch of a National Irrigation Water
        Accounting and Adaptation Center (IWAAC) to enhance water management and adaptation efforts.)
        with PBCs. This component will also include two PBCs that seek to support institutional capacity building
        within MTAI, WC and WUAs.

1 To ensure that the relevant authority is aware of its obligations, it is recommended that the RPF be accompanied by a provision of a transmittal letter,

signed by the chief executive (or similar relevant authority) of the implementing agency.
2
  As described in ESS5, Paras. 33–36.
3 As described in ESS5, Paras. 26–32.
4 The RPF does not supersede provisions of ESS5 or the ESF, and the World Bank remains solely responsible for determining what is required to achieve

consistency with those requirements throughout the course of project implementation.



                                                                            2
     b. Component 2. Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Enhancement will focus on providing improved
        access to efficient and financially sustainable rural WSS services in selected areas of Armenia. This
        includes a combination of institutional strengthening, capacity building as well as regulatory reforms,
        FS and infrastructure assessments. This subcomponent will support FSs and detailed engineering
        designs for high-priority Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) investments to enhance resilience against
        climate-induced droughts, floods, and extreme heat under both phases of the MPA. Based on an agreed
        investment plan with the Government of Armenia (GoA), it will implement ‘no-regret’ infrastructure
        and service improvements in the most critical unserved settlements, considering technical, economic,
        socio-political, and institutional factors.
     c. Component 3. Modernizing Irrigation Infrastructure & System Management will finance rehabilitation
        and modernization of selected irrigation systems at main, secondary, and tertiary canal levels currently
        managed jointly by WSA at the large main canal and reservoirs level and by WUAs at the secondary and
        tertiary distributary level. The total command area of the irrigation systems under consideration is
        about 39,580 ha which will be selected based on hydrological, technical, economic, and agricultural
        parameters, under a Framework Approach5. Similarly, for Phase 2 a total of additional 4 irrigation
        schemes were short-listed for consideration under this phase.
     d. Component 4: Project Management. An interim WISE Project Coordination Team (PCT) will be housed
        within the Water Committee and will assume primary responsibility for project implementation,
        including implementation of civil works and related procurement and financial management (FM),
        compliance with agreed E&S management measures, and project monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
        This component will finance staff costs; coordination of the project-financed activities with other
        ongoing International Financial Institution (IFI) projects in the water sector; design, implementation,
        and reporting of baseline and project completion surveys; and the preparation of assessment studies
        (e.g., pre-feasibility and FSs), detailed engineering designs, and construction supervision. The
        component will also include capacity building support for the PCT, including citizen engagement training
        skills for the staff of the PCT.
Overall responsibilities for the project implementation will be located within the Ministry of Territorial
Administration and Infrastructures (MTAI) and the Water Committee (WC). Day-to-day implementation will be
supported by the Project Coordination Team (PCT) within the WC. Implementation of Components 1 - 3 will be
conducted through the MTAI. A project Steering Committee will be established at the level of the Deputy Prime
Minister’s (DPM) office to oversee and monitor the overall progress of the project. The project director will likely
report directly to the Steering Committee. The development of the National Water Strategy, the National
Irrigation Strategy, and the National WSS Strategy will be carried out under the leadership of the DPM’s Deputy
Prime Minister’s office and executed by the MTAI’s and the WC with close involvement of all stakeholders
engaged in the water sector in Armenia, as well as other entities involved in water sector development. The
project’s Environmental and Social specialists will be hosted under the PCT.


    1.2 Objective and Rationale

At this stage of the Project preparation the project does not have clear information on the extent and scope of
resettlement impacts that might occur as a result of the proposed project activities. Such information will only
be available once detailed engineering designs for the sub-projects, particularly under Components 2 and 3 has
been produced during the project implementation.




5
 This is an indicative number based on the assumption that all short-listed schemes will qualify for project investment upon
completion of the preliminary and detailed design studies. This number is considered as a ‘high scenario’ and the final project areas
may be reduced after selection of I&D schemes for the project rehabilitation program, which also has implications for the total
beneficiaries under the project.


                                                                   3
Hence, a framework approach has been adopted for the project to guide relevant E&S assessments and
preparation of the management plans at the sub-project level.
The Resettlement Framework (RF) is necessary to ensure that the project’s social and environmental risks,
particularly those related to displacement and livelihood impacts, are effectively identified, managed, and
mitigated and to achieve the objective of the ESS5 on Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary
Resettlement. The RF seeks to avoid displacement where possible and minimize adverse social and economic
impacts. Specifically, the RF serves the following purposes:
    •   Guiding principles for land acquisition and management of resettlement impacts, including
        compensation and other forms of livelihood support. the RF provides a structured approach to
        addressing resettlement-related risks by establishing clear principles, rules, and guidelines. It ensures
        that all land acquisition, resettlement and management of restrictions on land use where applicable
        align with the ESS5 and RoA’s legal framework. The framework provides guidance for the preparation
        of Resettlement Plans (RPs) for sub-projects where impacts envisaged under the ESS5 are anticipated.
    •   Integration with Environmental and Social Risk Management: since the broader Environmental and
        Social Management Framework (ESMF) assesses risks and impacts of project activities, the RF
        complements it by specifically focusing on resettlement-related risks. It ensures that screening criteria
        are applied to identify activities requiring resettlement interventions and that appropriate mitigation
        measures are in place.
    •   Comprehensive mitigation measures: the RPF provides a framework for implementing mitigation
        measures at all stages of the project, from identification and selection to design, implementation,
        monitoring, and evaluation. This proactive approach ensures that displacement and livelihood
        disruptions are minimized and that affected persons receive fair compensation and support.
    •   Institutional Responsibilities and Capacity Assessment: by outlining the roles and responsibilities of
        agencies involved in addressing social risks, the RF ensures that entities tasked with resettlement
        management have the necessary capacity to implement mitigation measures effectively, including
        relevant coordination with authorized agencies to execute land acquisition and resettlement activities
        under the RoA’s legal framework. The framework also clarifies the government’s commitments for the
        implementation of the RF during the project implementation.


  1.3 Scope and Approach
The physical construction works financed under Components 2 and 3 may have potential negative impacts on
communities due to involuntary land acquisition, restrictions on land use, and the permanent or temporary loss
of land, assets, crops, or trees. Additionally, these works could disrupt access and affect businesses operating
on or attached to the affected land or properties.
The project will invest in linear infrastructure, such as irrigation canals, where informal land use may exist along
the canal banks. These areas could be affected by modernization, widening, or re-alignment works. Additionally,
the project may support the establishment of small-scale regulating reservoirs, which could lead to land
inundation. While the government will prioritize the use of state-owned land, the RF will apply wherever private
land use, whether formal or informal, is impacted.
The project aims to prevent physical displacement and minimize any significant impact on the livelihoods and
income of Project-Affected Persons (PAPs). The design process will ensure that detailed engineering plans
incorporate measures to achieve this objective, including the exploration and implementation of alternative
solutions.


In line with the ESS5, the RF applies to permanent or temporary physical and economic displacement resulting
from the following types of land acquisition or restrictions on land use undertaken or imposed in connection



                                                         4
with the project’s activities and/or Associated Facilities as further elaborated in the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF):
     a. Land rights or land use rights acquired or restricted through expropriation or other compulsory
        procedures in accordance with national law.
     b. Land rights or land use rights acquired or restricted through negotiated settlements with property
        owners or those with legal rights to the land, if failure to reach settlement would have resulted in
        expropriation or other compulsory procedures.
     c. Restrictions on land use and access to natural resources that cause a community or groups within a
        community to lose access to resource usage where they have traditional or customary tenure, or
        recognizable usage rights. This may include situations where legally designated protected areas, forests,
        biodiversity areas, or buffer zones are established in connection with the project.
     d. Relocation of people without formal, traditional, or recognizable usage rights, who are occupying or
        utilizing land prior to a project-specific cut-off date.
     e. Displacement of people as a result of project impacts that render their land unusable or inaccessible.
     f.   Restriction on access to land or use of other resources including communal property and natural
          resources such grazing and cropping areas.
     g. Land rights or claims to land or resources relinquished by individuals or communities without full
        payment of compensation.
     h. Land acquisition or land use restrictions occurring prior to the project, but which were undertaken or
        initiated in anticipation of, or in preparation for, the project.
In line with the project’s approach to minimize livelihoods impacts, under the RF, the project will adopt the
following approaches:
     a. Prioritizing Negotiated Settlements – the project will seek to engage property owners and individuals
        with legal rights to the land through negotiated agreements. Additionally, alternative engineering
        solutions will be explored to avoid involuntary land acquisition. Expropriation will only be considered as
        a last resort when no technically feasible design alternatives exist, or when such alternatives pose public
        safety concerns.
     b. Handling Land Disputes and Compensation – in cases of disputes over land claims or compensation
        payments, escrow arrangements may be considered. However, this will only be done if the project
        determines that such an approach will not cause significant livelihood impacts and if the property
        owners and/or claimants agree to allow construction works to proceed while disputes are resolved
        through the country’s legal system.
     c. Prohibition of Evictions6 – No evictions will be permitted under this project, as further detailed in the
        principles outlined.
     d. Mitigating Impacts on Informal Land Occupants – in cases of informal land occupation, any
        expropriation of livelihood-generating assets or restrictions on land use will prioritize design solutions
        that minimize livelihood impacts. Additionally, the project will provide support to restore affected
        individuals' livelihoods and living standards to either their pre-displacement levels or the levels
        prevailing before project implementation—whichever is higher.


6 “Forced eviction” is defined as the permanent or temporary removal against the will of individuals, families, and/or communities from

the homes and/or land which they occupy without the provision of, and access to, appropriate forms of legal and other protection,
including all applicable procedures and principles in the ESS5. The exercise of eminent domain, compulsory acquisition or similar powers
by a Borrower will not be considered to be forced eviction providing it complies with the requirements of national law and the provisions
of this ESS, and is conducted in a manner consistent with basic principles of due process (including provision of adequate advance notice,
meaningful opportunities to lodge grievances and appeals, and avoidance of the use of unnecessary, disproportionate, or excessive
force).


                                                                    5
The RF covers the following categories of displaced people:
     a. People who have formal legal rights to land or assets.
     b. People who do not have formal legal rights to land or assets, but have a claim to land or assets that is
        recognized or recognizable under national law or
     c. People who have no recognizable legal right or claim to the land or assets they occupy or use.
The term displaced people incorporates all potential categories of persons affected by land acquisition and
associated impacts; all of those adversely affected are considered “displaced” under this definition regardless
of whether any relocation is necessary.
The census for the development of RPs described in Chapter 3 will establish the status of the affected persons.


    1.4 Key Principles
The project is required to take all feasible measures to avoid or minimize adverse impacts from land acquisition
and restrictions on land use associated with project development. The fundamental objective of ESS5 is to
ensure that, if physical or economic displacement cannot be avoided, displaced persons (as defined below) are
compensated at the replacement cost for land and other assets, and otherwise assisted as necessary to improve
or at least restore their incomes and living standards.
The other ESS5 objectives include:
     a) To avoid forced eviction7
     b) To improve living conditions of poor or vulnerable persons who are physically displaced, through
        provision of adequate housing, access to services and facilities, and security of tenure8
     c) To conceive and execute resettlement activities as sustainable development programs, providing
        sufficient investment resources to enable displaced persons to benefit directly from the project, as the
        nature of the project warrants
     d) To ensure that resettlement activities are planned and implemented with appropriate disclosure of
        information, meaningful consultation, and the informed participation of those affected.
Replacement cost (ESS5, Para. 2) is defined as a method of valuation yielding compensation sufficient to replace
assets, plus necessary transaction costs associated with asset replacement. Where functioning markets exist,
replacement cost is the market value as established through independent and competent real estate valuation,
plus transaction costs. Where functioning markets do not exist, replacement cost may be determined through
alternative means, such as calculation of output value for land or productive assets, or the undepreciated value
of replacement materials and labor for construction of structures or other fixed assets, plus all transaction costs
associated with asset replacement. In all instances where physical displacement results in loss of substandard
shelter, replacement cost must at least be sufficient to enable purchase or construction of housing that meets
minimum community standards of quality and safety.
ESS5 also establishes key principles to be followed in resettlement planning and implementation. These include:
     a) All displaced persons are entitled to compensation for land and attached assets, or to alternative but
        equivalent forms of assistance in lieu of compensation; lack of legal rights to the assets lost will not bar
        displaced persons from entitlement to such compensation or alternative forms of assistance.
     b) Compensation rates refer to amounts to be paid in full to the eligible owner(s) or user(s) of the lost
        asset, without depreciation or deduction for fees, taxes, or any other purpose.



7
  Defined as the removal against the will of individuals, families, and/or communities from the homes and/or land which they occupy without the provision
of, and access to, appropriate forms of legal and other protection, including all applicable procedures in ESS5.
8 Security of tenure means that displaced persons are resettled to a site that they can legally occupy, where they are protected from the risk of eviction

and where the tenure rights provided to them are at least as robust as those they had prior to displacement.


                                                                            6
     c) Compensation for land, structures, unharvested crops, and all other fixed assets should be paid prior to
        the time of impact or dispossession.
     d) When cultivated land is to be taken for project purposes, the [name of implementing agency] seeks to
        provide replacement land of equivalent productive value if that is the preference of the displaced
        persons.
     e) Community services and facilities will be repaired or restored if affected by the project.
     f)    Displaced persons should be consulted during preparation of the RP, so that their preferences are
           solicited and considered.
     g) The RP (in draft and final versions) is publicly disclosed in a manner accessible to displaced persons.
     h) A grievance mechanism by which displaced persons can pursue grievances will be established and
        operated in a responsive manner.
     i)    Negotiated settlement processes are acceptable as an alternative for legal expropriation if appropriately
           implemented and documented.9
     j)    Land donation is acceptable only if conducted in a wholly voluntary manner and appropriately
           documented.10
     k) The Water Committee of the RA MTAI bears official responsibility for meeting all costs associated with
        obtaining project sites, including compensation and other considerations due displaced persons. The RP
        includes an estimated budget for all costs, including contingencies for price inflation and unforeseen
        costs, as well as organizational arrangements for meeting financial contingencies.
     l)    Monitoring arrangements will be specified in the RP, to assess the status and effectiveness of RP
           implementation.




9
  Appropriate principles for negotiated settlement transactions include (a) intended project sites are screened to identify competing claims to ownership
or use, or other encumbrances that would impede two-party negotiations; (b) if the site is collectively or communally owned or used, the negotiation
process includes those individuals or households who directly occupy or use it; (c) prior to negotiations, owners or users are informed by project
authorities of their intent to obtain relevant land (and other assets) for project use; (d) owners or users are informed of their rights and options to pursue
legal remedies or other actions, and sign a declaration indicating willingness to negotiate; (e) at the onset of negotiations, project negotiators present the
owner or user with a proposed package of compensation or other beneficial considerations, along with an explanation as to the basis of this initial offer;
(f) owners or users are informed that they may make counterproposals as they may see fit; (g) negotiations are conducted without resort to coercion or
intimidation in any form; (h) an agreement establishing payment amounts or other agreed considerations is written, signed, and recorded; (i) payment of
compensation and provision of any other agreed considerations is completed prior to taking possession for project use; and (j) owners or users retain the
right of access to the grievance mechanism if they have complaints regarding any aspect of the negotiated settlement process.
10 Any land or asset donation for project use will be consistent with these principles: (a) the potential donor is informed that refusal is an option, and that

right of refusal is specified in the donation document the donor will sign; (b) donation occurs without coercion, manipulation, or other pressure on the
part of public or traditional authorities; (c) the donor may negotiate for some form of payment, partial use rights, or alternative benefits as a condition
for donation; (d) donation of land is unacceptable unless provision is made to mitigate any significant impacts on incomes or living standards of those
involved; (e) donation of land cannot occur if it were to necessitate any household relocation; (f) for community or collective land, donation can only
occur with the consent of individuals directly using or occupying the land; (g) the land to be donated is free of encumbrances or encroachment by others
who may be adversely affected; (h) any donated land that is not used for its agreed purpose by the project is returned to the donor in a timely manner;
and (i) each instance of land donation is documented, including a statement identifying the land or assets donated and terms of donation, which is signed
by each owner or user. Persons donating land or assets for project use may use the project grievance mechanism to raise complaints regarding any aspect
of the donation process.


                                                                              7
                     CHAPTER 2: LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

The RA legal framework for land takings and resettlement issues mainly consist of the following laws, regulations and
legal acts:
    •    The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (adopted in 1995, amended, last amended in 2015);
    •    The Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia (adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force from 01.01.1999, last
         amended in 2023);
    •    The Land Code of the Republic of Armenia (adopted on 02.05.2001, entered into force from 15.06.2001, last
         amended in 2022);
    •    The Law # 185-N on Alienation of Property for Public Needs and State Purposes (adopted on 27.11.2006,
         entered into force from 30.12.2006, last amended in 2018 with the edited name "On Expropriation of
         Property for Public Interests”;
    •    The Law on Real Estate Valuation Activity (adopted on 04.10.2005, entered into force from 26.11.2005, last
         amended in 2021);
    •    The RA Law on State Registration of Rights on Real Estate (adopted on 17.06.1998, entered into force on
         01.01.1999, last updated in 2023).


  2.1 Comparison of National Law with World Bank ESS5
The Table 1 compares the RA legislation and the WB ESS5, makes conclusions on the gaps and suggests actions
to address the gaps.
                                  Table 1: Comparison of RA Legislation and WB ESS5
                                                 WB ESS5 – Land
     Legislation of the Republic of          Acquisition, Restrictions                                 Actions to Address
                                                                            Conclusion on Gaps
                Armenia                         on Land Use and                                              Gaps
                                            Involuntary Resettlement
 1. Eligibility
 a) Persons having documented               a) Persons who have           The National Law only       To address this gap,
 ownership over the property (land,         formal legal rights to land   covers those with           the RF will require
 buildings, etc.) are eligible to receive   (including customary and      officially registered       that:
 compensation for the land being            traditional rights            rights over the property.   1) WB ESS5 is
 alienated, damages/ demolition and         recognized under the laws     Under the Law, all real     followed,
 lost crops caused by a project (the        of the country) are           estate items (buildings
                                                                                                      2) The GoA allows
 Law on Property Alienation for             provided compensation for     and other property) and
                                                                                                      the application of
 Public and State Needs), or in the         the land they lose at         all the improvements on
                                                                                                      WB ESS5 for WISE
 cases their lands are not alienated        replacement value.            the land parcel need to
                                                                                                      Project.
 but partially used for public projects                                   be compensated for
 (servitude) (the Civil Code (Articles                                    when alienated from
 210-218), Land Code (Articles 50-and                                     legal owners. Informal
 100)),                                                                   users are not
                                            b) Persons who do not         compensated. Only
 b) Persons who do not have formal          have formal legal rights to   state-registered
 legal rights to the assets are not         land but have a claim to      improvements are
 entitled to compensation                   such land or assets –         subject to
                                            provided that such claims     compensation;
                                            are recognized under the
                                            laws of the country or
                                            become recognized
                                            through a process
                                            identified in the


                                                               8
c) Persons having built a                   resettlement plan – are
construction or planted trees in            provided compensation for
areas belonging to others cannot            the land they lose at
receive compensation for loss of            replacement value;
assets.
                                            c) Persons who have no
                                            recognizable legal right or
                                            claim to the land they are
                                            occupying are provided
                                            resettlement assistance in
                                            lieu of compensation for
                                            the land they occupy, and
                                            other assistance as
                                            necessary, if they occupy
                                            the project area prior to
                                            the cut-off date.
2. Entitlements
As per Armenian legislation                 PAPs are provided              Armenian legislation         ESS5 provisions and
1) the compensation is paid only to         resettlement assistance in     aligns with World Bank       the RF’s Entitlement
the owners and persons having the           lieu of compensation for       Environmental and            Matrix shall be
property rights over the assets if the      the land they occupy, and      Social Standard 5 (ESS5)     followed.
ownership/property rights have              other assistance, as           in terms of protections
been acquired before the project            necessary, to achieve the      for title holders but does
cut-off date (e.g. the date of filling in   objectives set out in this     not provide equivalent
the protocol describing the alienated       policy, if they occupy the     protection and hence,
property),                                  project area prior to a cut-   entitlements for
                                            off date.                      informal occupants.
2) all the improvements done after
the cut-off date in excess of the
scope set by the law and all the
encumbrances generated over the
property after the cut-off date are
not subject to compensation.
1)   The adequate compensation              Compensation levels            Both Armenian                To address this gap,
     should be paid to the owner in         should be sufficient to        legislation and WB ESS5      it is recommended
     case of alienation, whereas the        replace the lost land and      provide for                  to follow local
     amount of compensation                 other assets at full           compensation for lost        legislation in case of
     exceeding the market value by          replacement cost in local      land and assets.             compensation to
     15% will be considered as              markets.                       National legislation         legal owners and
     adequate ((the Law on Property                                        appears to be more           compensation for
     Alienation for Public and State                                       beneficial for PAPs who      structures. However,
     Needs, Article 11)                                                    are legal owners.            for informal
2)   Market value is determined as                                                                      occupants, the
     per RoA Law on Real Estate                                                                         provision of the RF
     Valuation Activity (2005).                                                                         will be followed to
                                                                                                        meet the ESS5
                                                                                                        objective.
No provision for income/livelihood          The WB policy requires         Armenian legislation         To address this gap,
rehabilitation measures and/or              rehabilitation for             does not provide any         the RF will require
allowances for affected PAPs and            income/livelihood, for         provision for livelihood     that:
vulnerable groups, and/or                   severe losses, and for         restoration.                 1) WB ESS5 is
resettlement expenses (see above            expenses incurred by any                                    followed,
mentioned RA laws)                          and all PAPs during the
                                                                                                        2) The GoA allows
                                            relocation process
                                                                                                        the application of



                                                                9
                                                                                                 WB ESS5 for WISE
                                                                                                 Project.




 3. Information Requirements
 The resolution of the Government       Information related to        Requirements of the WB     To address the gap,
 on acknowledgment of exceptional       quantification and costing    ESS5 and ESS10 are         the RF will require
 superior public interest is to be      of land, structures and       broader than national      that:
 properly communicated to the           other assets, entitlements,   legislation.               1) WB ESS5 and
 owners and persons having property     and amounts of                                           ESS10 are applied,
 rights over the assets within seven    compensation and                                         including all the
 days after it enters into force. The   financial assistance are to                              mechanisms
 owner and the persons having           be disclosed in full to the                              envisaged by the
 property rights over the property to   affected persons.                                        local legislation.
 be alienated are entitled to                                                                    Relevant measures
 participate in completing the                                                                   include timely
 description of the property to be                                                               disclosure of
 alienated. The copy of the protocol                                                             information, and
 on description is to be sent to the                                                             inclusive
 owner and the persons having                                                                    consultations and
 property rights over the property                                                               accessible FGRM.
 (the Law on Property Alienation for
 Public and State Needs, Article 7).
 Local municipalities are required to
 acknowledge the communities
 through mass media and public
 discussions on expected changes in
 their living environment
 (Government Resolution No 660
 dated 28 October 1998).
 4. Meaningful Consultation
 There is no specific legislative       ESS5 and ESS10 requires       Requirements of the        To address this gap,
 provision in the “the Law on           the project to conduct        Armenian legislation and   the RF will require
 Property Alienation for Public and     meaningful consultation       the WB ESS10 are           that:
 State Needs” to ensure meaningful      with PAPs along all the       different.                 1) WB ESS10 is
 consultation with affected people      project cycle                                            followed,
 and communities. Local authorities
                                                                                                 2) The GoA allows
 are obliged to acknowledge the
                                                                                                 the application of
 communities through mass media
                                                                                                 WB ESS10 for WISE
 and public discussions on expected
                                                                                                 Project.
 changes in their living environment
 (Government Resolution No 660
 dated 28 October 1998


  2.2 Identified Gaps and Proposed Approaches
In conclusion, both Armenian laws and regulations on land acquisition and resettlement, as well as World Bank
Environmental and Social Standard 5 (ESS5), share the common objective of ensuring that affected parties
receive fair and adequate compensation. Key gaps include: i) Lack of provisions for compensation and livelihood


                                                          10
support for informal land occupants and ii) absence of legal provisions on livelihood restoration and meaningful
consultations under the current legal framework.
Livelihoods restoration: the current legal framework laws does not provided basis for how livelihood restoration
should be implemented for affected persons.
o    Project’s approach: Activities with significant impacts on livelihoods as a result of involuntary land
     acquisition and restrictions on land use will not be funded under Phase 1. Project will aim to minimize
     adverse impacts by prioritizing the use of public land with no conflicting land use, thereby avoiding physical
     and economic displacement as much as possible.
Eligibility for Compensation: Armenian laws do not provide explicit compensation or rehabilitation for non-
titled land users, potentially leaving them vulnerable.
o    Project’s approach: the RF’s entitlement matrix covers all categories of project affected people under the
     ESS5 including informal occupants.
Meaningful consultations: Armenian legislation do explicitly outline public notification and information
disclosure requirements, however does not require consultations in case of land acquisition and resettlement.
 o    Project’s approach: the project will ensure the meaningful inclusion of PAPs and their representatives (e.g.,
      civil society organizations), particularly vulnerable groups, in consultation and decision-making process
      before and during project implementation as guided by the project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
      Accessible GRM will be established for all project-affected parties.
 Across all subprojects, no civil works will commence until all applicable compensation and livelihood
 restoration measures related to the project or its sub-components are fully implemented.
 The Government of the RoA commits to taking all necessary actions to ensure the full and effective
 implementation of RPs prepared in accordance with the RF and to fulfilling all relevant provisions of ESS5.




                                                        11
                                        CHAPTER 3: Resettlement Plan

Any project activities that require land and/or access to land, resulting in involuntary land acquisition or
restrictions on land use, must prepare an RP for WB review and approval. MoTAI and WC will be responsible
for the preparation and implementation of the RP, with technical support from the PCT. As necessary, MoTAI
and WC will coordinate with relevant agencies, jurisdictions, and project contractors to ensure timely and
effective planning and implementation.
The RP preparation process begins once the physical footprint of the proposed investment is determined,
confirming that specific land parcels must be acquired for project use. MoTAI and WC will conduct an initial
site screening to assess current land usage and tenure arrangements and will prioritize site selection that
minimizes physical and economic displacement as part of feasibility studies and detailed design preparation.
If resettlement impacts are anticipated, MoTAI and WC will commission a census survey (through a consultant
if needed) to i) identify and enumerate all displaced persons within the selected site(s), ii) develop a
comprehensive inventory and valuate land and other assets to be acquired for project use, including tenurial
status and claims.
Further elaboration of the process is presented in this chapter.


     3.1 Land Acquisition Scenario
Potential implementation of the RF where RPs could be anticipated include the following types of impacts:

                               Table 2: Potential Resettlement Impacts under the Project

     Scenarios                                       Probability11         Severity             Action
     Acquisition of Private Land for Irrigation      Moderate              >10% of the          GoA’s decision on the
     Infrastructure and Reservoir                    (considering that     productive land      expropriation for
     Development. This process involves the          the GoA will          is lost12            public interest
     acquisition of private land to facilitate       prioritize state-                          (eminent domain),
     irrigation system alignment, including          owned land)                                RP to be prepared,
     the establishment of small-scale                                                           reviewed and
     regulating reservoirs and associated                                                       approved by the WB
     inundation areas.
     Impacts on land use for state-owned             Moderate              >10% income          Idem
     leased land, including but not limited to                             loss
     i) permanent and temporary structures,
     ii) mobile assets and equipment, and iii)
     agricultural activities, including crop
     cultivation.
     Impacts affecting informal land use             Moderate              >10% income          Idem
     include the loss of permanent and                                     loss
     temporary structures, displacement of
     mobile assets, and disruption of
     agricultural activities such as crop
     cultivation.


11
     Very unlikely, Unlikely, Moderate, Likely, Very Likely
12
     The owner may require alienation of the whole land plot if >10% of the productive land is lost

                                                              12
 Temporary restrictions on land use for                     Moderate                   >10% income              RP prepared and
 construction activities, with potential loss                                          loss                     reviewed and
 of income, such as loss of harvest and                                                                         approved by the WB,
 disruptions to business activities                                                                             compensation
                                                                                                                provided by local
                                                                                                                authorities
 Contractors' leasehold for construction-                   Likely                     -                        Leasehold shall be
 related activities includes the                                                                                voluntary through
 establishment of base camps, storage of                                                                        bilateral agreement
 construction materials, and placement of                                                                       with the landowners,
 equipment.                                                                                                     with prior review by
                                                                                                                the PCT and
                                                                                                                supervision engineer


The works to be implemented under the WISE Project will be carried out predominantly in areas owned by the
state or local municipalities (community13) which do not pose significant resettlement risks. However, some use
of private lands may be expected under the project and also there might be informal structures on state or
municipal lands. Adequate mitigation of all impacts to either the property or the incomes and livelihoods of
project-affected persons will necessitate compliance with the WB ESF, preparation and implementation of RPs.
The project implementation structure for WISE will be established within the MoTAI and WC, which is the main
line agency responsible for the management of all WISE components, and/or will be established within a new
water agency, which might be created after project effectiveness.


     3.2 Preparation of RPs
The RF outlines the structured process for the preparation of Resettlement Plans (RPs) in compliance with the
World Bank ESS5 and GoA’s legal framework. This process ensures fair, transparent, and sustainable land
acquisition, compensation, and resettlement measures for project-affected persons. The key steps in this
process include
          3.2.1 Sub-project Identification and Screening
Based on the feasibility and detailed design development and following GoA’s decision on public interest, MoTAI
and WC through technical support from the PCT shall:
      •    Identify land requirements for the project’s activities including irrigation canals, regulating reservoirs
           (and inundation areas) as well as water and sanitation infrastructure.
      •    Assess project impacts on land ownership, potential displacement, and access to water resources.
      •    Classify the scale of displacement (minor land take, partial acquisition, or full displacement). Potential
           infrastructure with significant land acquisition and livelihood impacts shall be excluded from Phase 1.
      •    Engage with landowners, farmers, and stakeholders to gauge initial concerns and willingness to
           participate in negotiated settlements. This step could also assess presence of tenurial disputes.


          3.2.2 Scoping & Baseline Studies
Where land acquisition is anticipated for specific sub-projects, the MoTAI and WC with technical support from
the PCT and technical consultants shall:



13
  Communities are local self-governing administrative territorial units in Armenia. Communities include one or more settlements. All settlements in
Armenia are included in communities, either separately or together with other settlement(s). The cities of Yerevan and Gyumri are also communities.


                                                                       13
   •    Provide initial notification of expropriation for public interest to the affected people under the project
        and announce a cut-off date (refer to sub-section 3.3).
   •    Conduct cadastral mapping to determine land ownership, boundaries, and tenure status, including
        presence of tenurial disputes and conflicts.
   •    Conduct a census to develop a comprehensive inventory affected land and assets, including farmlands,
        homes, businesses, trees, and crops, assets, including mobile assets on and/or attached to the land.
   •    Carry out a socioeconomic survey focusing on directly impacted people from land acquisition, including
        vulnerable household.
   •    Assess environmental and social impacts, especially regarding livelihoods, restrictions on land use and
        access to natural resources, including water due to land acquisition. This could be linked to site-specific
        ESIA.
   •    Where gaps exist with the national framework, discuss with the relevant authorities to address those
        gaps in line with the ESS5 as guided by this RF.
In the context of the project, vulnerable households include but not limited to:
   •    households headed by women, where there are no family members of working age (this does not
        include family members that undertake mandatory service in the armed forces of RA, hold 1st or 2nd
        degree of disability, or serve as full-time student of up to 23 years old);
   •    households, headed by people of the pension age (elderly), (this does not include family members that
        undertake mandatory service in the armed forces of RA, hold 1st or 2nd degree of disability, or serve as
        full-time student of up to 23 years old);
   •    poor households, which are registered in the Family Benefit System of the RA Ministry of Labor and
        Social Affairs (MLSA) and receive corresponding allowance according to the order, set forth under the
        RA legislation; if households are identified as poor based on the socio- economic survey, but is not
        registered in the Family Benefit System, PCT will assist the households to get registered. As soon as
        these households are registered in the Family Benefit System, they become eligible for the allowance.
   •    displaced families where all adult family members hold refugee status.


       3.2.3 Stakeholder Engagement & Consultation
As part of the sub-project activity preparation, MoTAI and WC through technical support from the PCT shall:
   •    Develop a sub-project level SEP, identifying all affected people including vulnerable groups.
   •    Organize community meetings to explain land acquisition processes, compensation mechanisms, and
        livelihood support where applicable. This includes engagement with WUAs and relevant community
        representatives to ensure that such consultations are inclusive and accessible to diverse groups.
   •    Document feedback and grievances for incorporation into the RP.


       3.2.4 Preparation of Resettlement Plans
Based on the socio-economic and census data and stakeholder consultation results, including concerns and
grievances, MoTAI and WC through technical support from the PCT and technical consultants shall:
   •    Confirm land acquisition requirements, distinguishing between permanent acquisition (e.g., reservoir
        areas, canal re-alignment) and temporary use (e.g., construction easements) based on the final detailed
        designs.
   •    Commission a valuation by an independent appraiser. The affected lands and assets valuation is
        conducted in compliance with “The Law on Real Estate Valuation Activity” which defines the
        fundamentals of real estate assessment activities in Armenia.


                                                       14
    •    Determine compensation structures, including land-for-land, cash payments, and alternative livelihood
         programs in line with the entitlement matrix (Annex 1) and affected people’s preferences based on the
         consultations.
    •    Establish a site-level FGRM to handle disputes related to land valuation, compensation, and alternative
         arrangements in line with the requirements on FGRM under the RF.
    •    Prepare an Implementation Budget detailing costs for compensation, land purchase, relocation, and
         livelihood restoration.


        3.2.5 Approval & Disclosure
Once the RPs have been drafted, MoTAI and WC shall:
    •    Submit the RP to the WB and relevant government agencies for approval.
    •    Disclose the RP publicly in local languages, providing clear explanations and entitlements for the
         affected people.
    •    Address stakeholder feedback, including concerns such as siting and compensation amounts, as they
         are submitted through the FGRM.
    •    Ensure that all affected persons understand their rights and entitlements before implementation.


  3.3 Cut-off Date
Compensation eligibility will be determined by a cut-off date, after which individuals occupying project-affected
areas will no longer be entitled to compensation, in accordance with ESS5. This cut-off date, set at the
commencement of the census survey of Project-Affected Persons (PAPs), will be communicated to affected
communities during preliminary public consultations. Affected assets will be documented through a detailed
inventory conducted in the presence of affected individuals and local authorities or their legal representatives
if the asset owners are unavailable. Every effort will be made to ensure affected individuals can review and sign
asset documentation at a convenient time, with any absences duly recorded.
Individuals or entities moving into the project area or undertaking construction or planting activities after the
cut-off date will not be eligible for compensation. However, they will receive advance notice to vacate and
dismantle structures before project implementation. While no fines or sanctions will be imposed, they will be
allowed to retain materials from dismantled structures, and the Project will provide necessary transportation
assistance for their relocation. In cases where project activities are significantly delayed after the cut-off date is
announced, the process will be revisited, and the RPs will be updated accordingly.


  3.4 Implementation of RPs
MoTAI and WC will designate an entity to serve as the implementation unit for the RPs, including any necessary
updates. This role may be assigned to a function within the PCT or another authorized unit. Operating under the
supervision of MoTAI and WC, the unit will collaborate with relevant agencies to facilitate expropriation
processes, provide legal assistance, and implement livelihood support measures in accordance with the RPs.
Compensation payments for expropriated land and assets will be financed through the state budget and must
be completed before the commencement of civil works.
The implementation unit will be responsible for the following actions:
    •    Conducting close consultations with PAPs and local authorities, ensuring transparent, timely, and
         inclusive communication on resettlement issues with all affected people.
    •    Verifying RP census data and asset inventory records.



                                                         15
    •   Conducting cadastral and topographic surveys and updating measurements and inventory data as
        needed due to design modifications.
    •   Preparing, negotiating, and finalizing contracts or agreements with the affected people.
    •   Preparing documentation for the registration of new land plots or cadastral registration of servitude
        rights as required.
    •   Delivering compensation, with cash payments made via bank transfer; if a project affected person
        does not have a bank account, one will be opened for them at no cost.
    •   Monitoring and ensuring adherence to grievance procedures.
    •   Handling court proceedings in cases where agreements cannot be reached.
    •   Overseeing the construction of necessary infrastructure and any modification that could impact the
        scope of the RPs as part of the Monitoring and Evaluation process (refer to Section 3.6)
    •   Preparing the RP Completion Report.
The acquisition of land and related assets will proceed only after compensation, in accordance with ESS
requirements, has been provided and, where applicable, displaced persons have been received moving
allowances in addition to their compensation. Furthermore, livelihood restoration support will be initiated in a
timely manner to ensure affected persons are adequately prepared to transition to alternative livelihood
opportunities as needed.


  3.5 Disclosure and Consultations
The RP summarizes results of measures taken to consult with displaced persons regarding the project, its likely
impacts, and proposed resettlement measures. It also summarizes the meetings held with displaced persons
(dates, locations, number of participants), including comments, questions, and concerns expressed by displaced
persons during these meetings as well as responses provided to them. The PCT discloses a draft RP to the
displaced persons (and the public) after Bank review and solicits comments from displaced persons regarding
the proposed plan. Disclosure of the final RP occurs following consideration of comments received and following
Bank acceptance.
Stakeholder Engagement activities, described in a separately prepared SEP for WISE project, will start with the
commencement of the project.
Mechanisms for stakeholder engagement across different groups are expected to include but not limited to
public consultations, interviews and focus groups discussions, including outreach to enable safe platforms to
raise concerns.
Prior disclosure of relevant information in a format and language accessible to target groups will be performed
in advance of any public consultations, interviews and/or focus group discussions. This will also include
disclosure of available Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism (FGRM) channels.
During the screening process the vulnerable segments of the affected community should be identified, for
instance large number of women headed households, ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, extremely
poor households, etc. These groups need meaningful consultation. Meaningful stakeholder engagement should
focus on consultations, collaboration and empowerment of stakeholders, and two-way communication. Special
information and communication materials can be prepared and disseminated among these groups, focus group
or round table discussions, separate meetings can be held with the representatives of those groups or separate
people to reveal their opinion about the project, their concerns and needs for inclusion in the Project. The
concerns and suggestions should be considered during the elaboration of detailed designs as much as possible
and feedback should be provided to the parties concerned.




                                                      16
  3.6 Monitoring and Evaluation
MoTAI and WC, through the PCT, will oversee the monitoring of RP implementation and provide periodic
progress reports to the WB on the status of land acquisition and RP execution. Institutional arrangements will
be established for internal monitoring of resettlement activities, with external monitoring agencies engaged
when necessary to ensure independent oversight, particularly for compliance reviews and reporting. The RPs
will be updated based on the findings of the final RP audit. Internal monitoring reports will be prepared by the
PCT and incorporated into all regular Project Progress Reports, with a final RP Completion Report submitted to
the WB upon completion of each RP.
Internal monitoring and supervision will:
    •   Verify that a complete census of all PAPs has been conducted.
    •   Ensure that the RP and baseline survey (if required) have been prepared.
    •   Confirm that property valuation and resettlement activities align with the provisions outlined in the RF
        and respective RPs.
    •   Oversee the proper implementation of all resettlement measures as approved.
    •   Ensure timely allocation of sufficient funds for resettlement activities and verify their proper use in
        accordance with the RPF and respective RP.
If external monitoring is deemed necessary due to significance of impacts and/or grievances, an independent
entity will be engaged to perform the following:
    •   Assess the social and economic impacts of land and asset expropriation on the affected people
    •   Verify whether the objective of the ESS5 is achieved, especially with regards to impact avoidance and
        mitigation and livelihoods restoration.
    •   Identify remedial measures if necessary
    •   Provide recommendations for improving resettlement implementation to ensure alignment with the
        principles and objectives outlined in the RF
The responsibility for the final audit will be defined within the RP, considering the significance of the impact.
This role may be assigned to a supervising company or an external monitoring agency. Upon the completion of
expropriation and the implementation of all required activities, particularly those related to livelihoods, an RP
Completion Report will be prepared by the PCT.




                                                       17
                          CHAPTER 4: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT

The preparation and implementation of the RP require close collaboration among multiple stakeholders, led and
coordinated by the MoTAI and WC. Effective planning and execution are essential to ensure compliance with
applicable policies and protect the rights and well-being of project affected people.
The PCT will play a key role in facilitating the RP process by ensuring the availability of relevant experts to support
both the preparation and supervision of RP implementation. This includes overseeing stakeholder engagement,
addressing grievances, and ensuring that all resettlement measures are carried out in line with the ESS5. Through
coordinated efforts, the RP aims to minimize disruption, promote fair compensation, and support livelihood
restoration for affected communities.
Specific roles and responsibilities are outlined as follows:


  4.1 Water Committee of Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructures
The Water Committee of the RA MoTAI bears overall responsibility for oversight and monitoring of all activities under
this RF. The WC will guide, supervise and report on progress in preparation and implementation of RPs, and will
handle resettlement issues requiring action and coordination with all stakeholders, including national and local
government authorities, communities, civil society, etc.
The responsibility for the assessment of social risks associated with the resettlement, provision of the respective
conclusions and preparation of any RPs required will reside with a group of specialists from the PCT. The group will
include the project coordinator, legal, environmental and social specialists. Day-to-day responsibility will reside with
the social specialist who will receive baseline information with the help of civil engineers of the Project, carry out
visual inspection of the site, screening and prepare the above-mentioned documents.
Final responsibility for initiation and implementation of all activities relating to resettlement policy will be borne by
the WC/MTAI.


  4.2 Ministry of Finance
The Ministry of Finance will provide the budget for the implementation of the RPs to the MTAI/WC following the
official approval of the final RPs by the GoA.


  4.3 Cadaster Committee
The Cadaster Committee is an executive authority which elaborates and implements the policies of the RA
Government in the area of maintaining the unified national cadaster of real estate. The Cadaster Committee is
responsible for providing information about the status of real estate ownership and is in charge of the state
registration of ownership.


  4.4 Regional and Local Authorities
The regional and local authorities will support social impact assessment related surveys, consultations with PAPs and
complaints resolution.
The following figure describes the roles and responsibilities for the implementation of the RF.




                                                           18
                Figure 1 - Overview of key actors in implementing resettlement strategy and plans


Responsibility for preparation and implementation of the RP rests with the PCT. As necessary, the PCT will
exercise its authority to coordinate actions with any other involved agencies, jurisdictions, or project contractors
to promote timely and effective planning and implementation.
The RPs must be approved by the RA Government before their implementation can begin. The WC will be responsible
for coordination with the WB for the purpose of review and approval of RPs.
RP preparation will begin once the physical footprint of a proposed investment has been determined,
establishing that a particular site (or sites) must be acquired for project use. The PCT initially screens proposed
sites to identify current usage and tenurial arrangements and identifies the site (or sites) that will minimize
physical and economic displacement. The PCT subsequently carries out, or causes to be carried out, a census
survey to identify and enumerate all displaced persons on the selected site (or sites) and to inventory and
valuate land and other assets that are to be acquired for project use.
The WC may engage various consultants to support resettlement-related tasks and activities, ensuring
compliance with the RF and other relevant regulations. These consultants will play a crucial role in minimizing
project impacts, collecting essential data, and facilitating the resettlement process. Key roles include:
    •   Design Consultant (DC) – Responsible for preparing project designs while ensuring alignment with RPF
        principles to avoid or minimize project impacts. The DC will collect data on affected land plots, assets,
        and project affected people for the census and socio-economic survey, as needed. Additionally, the DC
        will disseminate project-related information during the design phase.




                                                        19
      •   Supervision Consultant – Appointed to oversee construction works, ensuring compliance with project
          designs as well as social and environmental requirements. The Supervision Consultant will provide social
          safeguards monitoring data to the PCT and WC.
      •   Licensed Valuator – Contracted to assess affected assets and calculate compensation amounts in
          accordance with the RA Valuation Law, relevant standards, ESS5, and the RF.
      •   Survey Consultant – Responsible for conducting the census and socio-economic survey (SES) among
          Project-Affected Households (PAHHs) and preparing a comprehensive report on the findings.

These consultants will collectively contribute to an effective and transparent resettlement process, ensuring
that affected individuals receive fair compensation and support in accordance with project policies.
In cases of small-scale land acquisition with minimal livelihood impacts, the WC may integrate the task of RP
preparation into the DC Terms of Reference (TOR), ensuring measures are in place to prevent conflicts of
interest. Under this arrangement, the WC/ PCT will not separately contract a licensed valuator or survey
consultant, as the DC will engage a subcontractor to prepare the required RP.
For large-scale land acquisition, the WC will appoint a specialized consultant to oversee the preparation and
implementation of the RP. Additionally, an External Monitoring Agency (EMA) will be contracted to ensure
independent oversight and compliance with resettlement policies.
Specific responsibilities for each phase of the RF implementation are summarized as follows:
                                        Table 3: Roles and Responsibilities

 NO        ROLES                                                               RESPONSIBILITY
           Preparation of Resettlement Plan
 1         Preparation of the survey instruments for census and detailed       PCT, Consultant
           inventory of losses, timeline for RP preparation
 2         Acquiring of cadastral information and maps                         PCT, Consultant
 3         Notification of expropriation, site-visit, initial assessment       PCT
 4         Approval of the government decree for preliminary studies, if       MTAI, WC
           needed
 5         Establishment of Cut-off date                                       WC, PCT
 6         Conducting of Public Consultation with affected people              PCT, Consultant
 7         Conducting of the Census                                            PCT, Consultant
 8         Verification of land ownership and identification of non-entitled   PCT, Consultant
           land users, legalization of land where applicable
 9         Conducting of detailed measurement survey                           Consultant
 10        Conducting of the assets inventory                                  PCT, Consultant
 11        Decree for Eminent Domain, if needed                                RoA Government
 12        Conducting of the Valuation of the Affected Assets                  Consultant
 13        Signing of the asset description protocols                          PCT, Consultant
 14        RP report preparation                                               PCT, Consultant
 15        Obtaining World Bank’s approval to the RP                           WB
 16        Disclosure of the RP                                                PCT, WC
 17        Revision of the RP based on the comments of the stakeholders        PCT, Consultant
 18        WB final review and approval                                        WB
 19        Submission of RP to Government of RA if needed or to the Local      PCT, WC
           Authorities
 30        RP implementation preparatory actions                               PCT
 31        Establishment of RP implementation unit if needed                   WC, MTAI
 32        Establishment of Grievance redress mechanism, including             WC, MTAI
           grievance redress committee


                                                         20
33   Identification of the payment method as well as Commercial    PCT
     Banks, if any, for compensation disbursement/ transfer
     RP implementation
34   Legal provisions/ signing of Land acquisition contracts       PCT, WC
35   Compensation payments                                         RoA Ministry of Finance, LSGBs
36   Handling of disputes and grievances                           PCT, WC, MTAI
37   Preparation of the Completion Report                          PCT
38   Approval of Completion report                                 WB
39   Commencement of civil works                                   PCT
40   Post-RP social impact assessment and audit (as applicable)    PC, Consultant
     Continuous tasks
41   Internal Monitoring of RP implementation                      PCT
42   External monitoring and preparation of Compliance Report by   Consultant
     an External Monitoring Agency (EMA) (as applicable)
43   Grievance Redress                                             PCT




                                              21
        CHAPTER 5: FEEDBACK AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM FOR
                            RESSETLEMENT ISSUES

To ensure that project affected people can voice concerns regarding the land acquisition process, compensation
calculations and payments, provision of assistance, or other relevant matters, the Resettlement Plan (RP) will
establish an accessible and responsive feedback and grievance redress mechanism (FGRM) at a site-level. The
RP will outline submission procedures, organizational arrangements, and performance standards for handling
grievances, along with measures to inform affected persons and communities about the grievance process and
response expectations.
The FGRM will provide a transparent, credible, and fair process for resolving grievances effectively, fostering
trust and cooperation as part of a broader community consultation approach. It will facilitate corrective actions
where necessary and serve as an integral tool for managing disputes related to resettlement.
The FGRM will specifically address grievances arising under Project Components 2 and 3 due to the
implementation of the Resettlement Framework (RF) for relevant sub-projects. The PCT will be responsible for
managing the FGRM and overseeing its implementation at a site-level. The PCT, in collaboration with the
project’s technical supervision consultant, will define roles and responsibilities for grievance resolution and
determine appropriate courses of action. Additionally, the consultant will support the PCT in monitoring
grievance resolution handled by relevant parties.
The project FGRM will address a range of resettlement-related issues, including land and asset acquisition,
compensation disputes (e.g., amount of compensation, suitability of remaining land plots), restrictions on land
use, business disruptions, and damages caused by construction or rehabilitation works. Given its importance,
the FGRM is also comprehensively detailed within the Resettlement Framework (RF) to ensure consistency and
effectiveness in addressing concerns in line with the project’s SEP.


  5.1 Objective
The project’s FGRM serves as a key instrument to:
    •   Enable affected individuals to submit complaints and resolve disputes that may arise during project
        implementation.
    •   Ensure that the PCT identifies and implements appropriate, mutually acceptable redress measures to
        the satisfaction of complainants.
    •   Promote accessibility and transparency in the handling of complaints and grievances.
    •   Manage dispute resolution efficiently, minimizing delays and reducing the need for judicial proceedings
        as an initial course of action.


  5.2 Steps
The project’s FGRM will include the following steps:
    •   Step 1 recording of grievances either in writing or verbally via telephone hotline/mobile, mail, social
        media (FB etc.), website, and grievance logbook via a Focal Point / Liaison officer and directed to the
        PCT within 24 hours. The FGRM will also allow anonymous grievances to be raised and addressed.
    •   Step 2 grievance processing: classifying the grievances based on the typology of complaints and the
        complainants in order to provide more efficient response and providing the initial response immediately
        as possible. The typology will be based on the characteristics of the complainant (e.g., vulnerable
        groups, persons with disabilities, etc.) and also the nature of the complaint.

                                                       22
       •   A Grievance Redress Committee (GRC)14 at Project level will be established to address complaints and
           grievances pertaining to resettlement and to pre-empt all disagreements being referred to the court.
Step 1 of the FGRM involves recording the complaint (whether written or oral) in the FGRM log which will be
prepared and provided to the communities and contractors. The grievances will be recorded by focal points at
community level or PCT for issues concerning compensation amounts, technical errors, delayed payments, etc.
The standard timeframe for resolving the stage 1 grievance is 7 days.
Once a standing grievance has been logged, it will follow the following processing tracks to determine course of
action (Step 2):
       -   Technical errors (i.e., cadastral measurement, valuation, omission of assets, etc.): the technical team
           will verify the correctness of measurement and valuation of affected assets. If the team reveals errors
           in measurement and valuation of all assets, a Corrective Action Plan (CAP) will be developed and sent
           to the WB for review and approval. A feedback will be sent to the Complainant within a month (Step 2).
           After the approval of the CAP by the WB, it will be shortly implemented. In case the grievance raised is
           incorrect, the Complainant will be informed of the reason for rejecting the grievance.
       -   Legal disputes: may occur if the Complainant is dissatisfied with the solution of the grievance. He can
           turn to court. The trial at court may take several months, a year or more. In cases of disputes over land
           claims or compensation payments, escrow arrangements may be considered if such an approach will
           not cause significant livelihood impacts and if the property owners and/or claimants agree to allow
           construction works to proceed while disputes are resolved through the country’s legal system.
       -   Implementation of RPs (i.e., compensation amounts, delayed payments, wrong payments, etc.):
           grievances will be resolved at the local level, where possible. Where this is not possible, they will be
           forwarded to the GRC established at the Project level. The GRC will review the information and will
           identify the reason for misconduct. Grievances and their resolution will be recorded and redressed in
           an appropriate time frame of no more than 1 month.
The standard timeframe for resolving the stage 2 grievance is 30 days (1 month).
     5.3 Appeal
At this stage, the grievance will be reviewed at the PCT/WC level. Unsolved grievances, with the complainant’s
consent, will be sent to the PCS/WC in a written form. Similarly, aggrieved complainants dissatisfied with the
resolutions presented and/or offered, can escalate and appeal their grievances to the PCT/WC. The focal point
from the community will assist him/her in lodging an official complaint. The PCT’s GM coordinator will review
the written complaints of the complainants who were not satisfied and send them internally to the appropriate
departments for redress. The timeframe for referral is 10 days. The complainant shall be informed of the
decision within a maximum of 30 days.


     5.4 Closure of Grievances
A grievance will be considered “resolved” or “closed” when a resolution satisfactory to both parties has been
reached, and after corrective measures has been successfully implemented. When a proposed solution is agreed
between the Project and the complainant, the time needed to implement it will depend on the nature of the
solution. However, the actions to implement this solution will be undertaken within one month of the grievance
being logged and will be tracked until completion. Once the solution is being implemented or is implemented
to the satisfaction of the complainant, the status of the complaint in the FGRM log will be marked as “Closed”.
The FGRM log will be submitted to the World Bank team.
In certain situations, however, the Project may “close” a grievance even if the complainant is not satisfied with
the outcome. This could be the case, for example, if the complaint refers to the technical solutions of the design


14
     The tasks and composition of the GRC are presented in Annex 3.

                                                            23
and it cannot be modified, or the grievance has no justification and contains incorrect information or data. In
such situations, the Project’s efforts to investigate the grievance and to arrive at a conclusion to reject the
complaint. The status of the grievance in this case will be “Rejected”. The complainant will be notified about the
decision within a month from the date of the grievance record.


  5.5 Grievance Records and Documentation
The PCT will nominate a GM Focal Point to manage a grievance log to keep a record of all grievances received.
The log will contain the name of the individual or organization lodging a grievance; the date and nature of the
grievance; any follow-up actions taken; the solutions and corrective actions implemented by the Contractor or
other relevant party; the final result or status of the grievance.
The PCT as part of the E&S reports and project’s progress reports shall present the status of grievance resolution.
  5.6 FGRM Focal Point Contact Information
The FGRM focal point and the GRM coordinator’s contact information can be referenced as follows:



  Description                         Contact Details

  GRM focal point at
  community level

  GRM Coordinator

  To:

  Address:

  E-mail:

  Website:

  Telephone:



Information on the Project will be available on the PCT/WC’s website and will be posted on information boards in
affected communities in the Project area. Information can also be obtained from the GM Focal Point.
The FGRM mechanism will not impede access to the Country’s judicial or administrative remedies.




                                                        24
   CHAPTER 6: Cost and Budget
Table 4 below presents the estimated budget for the implementation of resettlement activities under the WISE
Project. The budget is for preparation of RP(s) (if any) and it will be sourced from loan funds under Component
4 on the Project’s Management..
The resettlement compensations will be covered from the RoA state budget if the scale of resettlement impact
is large and expropriation is required for rehabilitation of main and secondary canals or construction of DRRs.
In case of small-scale resettlement impacts for tertiary (on-farm) canals rehabilitation, the resettlement
compensation will be covered through municipal budgets, pending discussion and agreement with local
municipalities.
            Table 4. Resettlement Preparation and Implementation Cost and Budget (US dollars)
         Activity             Piece/Unit Cost (USD)              Number                       Total
 Resettlement plan
 preparation and
                                       1000                         5                         5000
 implementation
 consultancy




                                                      25
Annex 1: RP Entitlements Matrix
 Type of loss      Application         Definition
                                            Application
                                                  of PAPs              Definition
                                                                       Compensation
                                                                                  of PAPs
                                                                                       Entitlements
                                                                                                 Compensation
                                                                                                 Entitlements
Land                Specification
Permanent         PAPs losing land   Owner with full           Cash compensation at full replacement cost
loss of land      regardless of      registration              or replacement land of the same value at
(agricultural,    impact severity                              location acceptable to PAPs, as feasible. If
commercial,                                                    residual plots become unusable the Project
residential, or                                                will acquire it in full if the PAP desires so.
other)                                                         Technical, financial, and/or material
                                                               assistance provided to ensure full restoration
                                                               of livelihood.
                                     Legalizable owner         PAPs will be legalized and provided with cash
                                                               compensation at full replacement cost and, if
                                                               needed, assistance in acquiring replacement
                                                               land at a location acceptable to the PAP, as
                                                               feasible. Measures provided to ensure full
                                                               restoration of livelihood according to
                                                               individual plan.
                                     Renter/Leaseholder        Rental allowance in cash for 3 months and
                                                               measures provided to ensure full restoration
                                                               of livelihood according to individual plan.
                                                               If renters had paid rent in advance, any
                                                               unused portion should be returned to them
                                                               by the owner or as compensation from the
                                                               Project.

                                     Informal settler/PAPs
                                     with no registration or
                                     valid documentation/
                                     non-legalizable owner     *One-time rehabilitation allowance equal to
                                                               market value of one net harvest (in addition
                                                               to crop compensation) for land use loss;
                                                               additional rehabilitation assistance as
                                                               appropriate to achieve restoration of existing
                                                               income / livelihood (to be determined in the
                                                               RP.




                                                   26
                                      PAPs occupying or
                                      using land that is        *One-time rehabilitation allowance equal to
                                      owned by private          market value of one net harvest (in addition
                                      investors                 to crop compensation) for land use loss;
                                                                additional rehabilitation assistance as
                                                                appropriate to achieve restoration of existing
                                                                income / livelihood (to be determined in the
                                                                RP.

Buildings and Structures
Residential       PAPs losing their   All PAPs regardless of    All impacts will be considered as full impacts
and non-          place of            legal ownership (legal    disregarding the actual impact percentage.
residential       residence,          and legalizable owners,   Impacts to the property and other assets will
structures/ass property, and/or       informal settlers/ non-   be compensated in cash at full replacement
ets               incomes related     legalizable owners)       cost free of depreciation or transaction cost.
                  to buildings and
                  structures.         PAPs occupying or  Compensation at full replacement cost for
                                      using land that is any assets owned and structures built by
                                      owned by private   PAPs.
                                      investors.         One-time self-relocation allowance in cash
                                                         equal to 12 months at minimum subsistence
                                                         income of family of 5 as defined in national
                                                         legislation. Measures provided to ensure full
                                                         restoration of livelihood according to
                                                         individual plan. The costs of this
                                                         compensation will be spent by the private
                                                         investor.
Loss of Community Infrastructure/Common Property Resources
Loss of          Community /          Community/                Reconstruction of the lost structure in
common           Public Assets        Government                consultation with the community and
property                                                        restoration of their main functions.
resources
Loss of Income and Livelihood
Crops             Standing crops      All PAPs regardless of    Crop compensation in cash at gross market
                  affected or loss    legal status              value of actual or expected harvest.
                  of planned crop                               Compensation will be provided regardless of
                  incomes                                       the expected harvest time.
Trees             Trees affected      All PAPs regardless of    Cash compensation at market rate on the
                                      legal status              basis of type, age, and productive value of
                                                                the trees.




                                                    27
Business/Empl    Losses from        All PAPs regardless of     Owner: (i) permanent impact: cash indemnity
oyment           business or loss   legal status               of 1 year net income; (ii) temporary impact:
                 of employment                                 cash indemnity ot net income for the months
                                                               of business stoppage. Assessment to be
                                                               based on tax declaration or in its absence, on
                                                               minimum subsistence income for a five-
                                                               person household (adjusted accordingly for
                                                               larger households)
                                                               Permanent workers/employees: indemnity
                                                               for lost wages equal to 3 months of regular
                                                               salaries of 3 months of minimum subsistence
                                                               income for a five-person household (adjusted
                                                               accordingly for larger households).
                                                               For both business owners and employees:
                                                               Measures provided to ensure full livelihood
                                                               restoration.
Restriction to   The involuntary    All PAPs regardless of     Measures to assist PAPs in their efforts to
public space     restriction of     legal status               restore livelihoods in accordance with
                 access to legally                             individual plans.
                 designated parks                              TC and respective contractor will collaborate
                 and protected                                 with PAPs to address and resolve any
                 areas resulting in                            potential conflicts.
                 adverse impacts
                 on the livelihoods
                 of affected
                 persons.
Allowances
Severe impacts   >10% income loss   All severely affected      Agricultural income: 2 additional crop
                 Or loss of >10%    PAPs, including            compensations each covering 1 year’s worth
                 of productive      informal settlers and      of yield from affected land.
                 land               business owners who        Other income: 1 additional compensation for
                                    are losing more than       3 months’ worth of minimum subsistence
                                    10% of their income as     income for 5-person household.
                                    a result of
                                    Project activities.
Relocation /     Transport /        All PAPs who require       Provision of allowance covering transport
Shifting         transition costs   relocation of residence,   expenses.
                                    or business/economic       If the PAP left residential house but over a
                                    activity                   certain period of time due to objective
                                                               reasons cannot move into a new one, s/he
                                                               will receive relevant rental allowance.
Vulnerable       To be identified   PAPs below poverty         Allowance equivalent to 3 months of
People           in PAP census      line, single-parent        minimum subsistence income for a family of
Allowances                          households, disabled,      five and employment priority in project-
(below the                          elderly persons living     related jobs. This is an additional allowance
poverty line,                       alone                      to all other entitlements presented in this
single-parent                                                  matrix.
households,
disabled,
elderly
persons living
alone)


                                                   28
 Temporary                                              All affected persons.                Due compensation will be assessed and paid
 impact during                                                                               based on this RPF during construction or
 construction                                                                                before if priory identified.



 Unforeseen                                             PAP below poverty line, WC and construction contractors will address
 resettlement                                           women headed,           and mitigate / compensate unforeseen
 impacts                                                pensioner headed        resettlement impacts during the project.
                                                        households, AHH with
                                                        disabled persons15




15 Households including family(s) who are registered in the family benefit system (vulnerability assessment system) and receive family allowances; headed

by women, where there is no other adult of working age, except for elderly persons (people of old pension age), persons doing compulsory military service
in the Armed Forces of RA, persons having disability of 1st or 2nd groups, and students up to 23 years full-time studying at educational institutions; headed
by elderly persons (people of old pension age), where there is no other person of working age, except for persons doing compulsory military service in
the Armed Forces of RA, persons having disability of 1st or 2nd groups, and students up to 23 years studying full-time at educational institutions;
Households headed by persons with disability of 1st and 2nd group, where there is no other person of working age, except for persons doing compulsory
military service in the Armed Forces of RA, persons having disability of 1st or 2nd groups, and students up to 23 years studying full-time at educational
institutions.




                                                                            29
Annex 2: RP Content
Suggested content should include
   a. Description of the project (with appropriate maps and illustrations), including explanation for the
      necessity of acquiring particular sites for project use and efforts undertaken to avoid or minimize the
      amount of land acquisition or other potential impacts deemed necessary
   b. Results of a census survey of displaced persons and inventory and valuation of affected land and
      assets The census survey of the Project affected households (PAHH) and inventory can be conducted
      by the social specialist of the PCT if the scope of the resettlement impact is small. However, provided
      large scale of impacts are expected, a Resettlement Consultant can be contracted to develop and to
      implement RP. The survey will be conducted with separate interviews with all project affected
      people. It will allow to assess their vulnerability and will plan assistance in compliance with the
      Entitlement Matrix presented in Annex 1. The personal data of project affected people should not
      be publicized.
   c. Description of any project-related restrictions on resource use or land use where applicable.
   d. Description of tenure arrangements, including collective, communal, or customary use or ownership
      claims
   e. Review of relevant laws and regulations pertaining to acquisition, compensation, and other
      assistance to displaced persons, and identification of gap-filling measures needed to achieve ESS5
      requirements
   f.   Description of land and asset valuation procedures and compensation standards for all categories of
        affected assets. The valuation of affected lands and assets can be done only by a licensed valuator
        that can be separately contracted by the PT if the RP should be developed by the PT. The affected
        lands and assets valuation is conducted in compliance with “The Law on Real Estate Valuation
        Activity” which defines the fundamentals of real estate assessment activities in Armenia.
   g. Eligibility criteria for compensation and all other forms of assistance, including a cutoff date for
      eligibility
   h. Organizational arrangements and responsibilities for RP implementation
   i.   Implementation timetable
   j.   Estimated budget and financial contingency arrangements
   k. Consultation and disclosure arrangements
   l.   Special attention should be paid to the rights of vulnerable groups including ethnic minorities,
        women, migrants/refugees, the very young and the very old, people with disabilities. The livelihoods
        of vulnerable groups are especially sensitive to changes in the socio-economic context and are
        dependent on access to essential services.
   m. Description of grievance mechanism
   n. Arrangements for monitoring implementation progress.
   o. The RP should be complemented by a separate set of individual compensation files for each displaced
      household or persons. These files are to be handled confidentially by the borrower to avoid any
      prejudice to displaced persons. Eligibility criteria for compensation and all other forms of assistance
      should be clearly summarized in a table that can be used for consultation with displaced persons (see
      “Entitlement Matrix” provided in Annex 1).


                                                      30
p. Additional planning measures must be incorporated into RPs for projects causing physical
   displacement, or significant economic displacement, as described below.




                                           31
Annex 3. Grievance Redress Committee: Tasks
and Composition
GRC will include:
   − Representative of the Water Committee,
   − Deputy director of PCT,
   − Representative of Local self-government bodies,
   − Representatives of the relevant state authorities and/or Marzpetaran in the project area,

The composition of the GRC will be shared with the WB team prior to commencement of RP preparation. A GRC
will be headed and convened by the WC to resolve particularly complicated cases addressing complaints and
grievances pertaining to resettlement.

Key responsibilities and functions of the GRC is as follows:
     − Have meetings as needed;
     − Ensure that handling of grievances is in accordance with the GM procedure;
     − Ensure that follow-up actions in response to grievances are taken within an agreed timeframe;
     − Maintain a database of all registered grievances, along with details on the nature of the issues raised,
        the case history, and actions taken;
     − Report on outstanding/resolved grievances to the Committee members;
     − Coordinate with responsible state/local or other bodies for resolving the grievances;
     − Ensure the availability of GM information in the project area;
     − Coordinate with community representatives on the efficacy and usefulness of the GM; and recommend
        changes if any required;
     − Undertake site visits to assess issues raised by those who lodge grievances, if necessary.




                                                      32
