Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 10/15/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04513




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 23, 2025                                                                               Page 1 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508221                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        SC FIRM                      2026

                     Operation Name            Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure and Resilience Management Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                    LATIN AMERICA AND            Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                         CARIBBEAN                    Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     State of Santa            Secretariat for Civil Defense and         01-Oct-2025                  27-Feb-2026
                     Catarina                  Protection (SDC)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     02-Jul-2025               149,400,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To reduce the risk of climate related disasters in targeted areas of Santa Catarina and to strengthen institutional
                     capacities to manage those risks


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Santa Catarina Climate Resilience project will implement the first phase of an ambitious, multi-year integrated
                     climate and disaster risk management investment program led by the Santa Catarina Civil Defense Agency. The project
                     will support risk mitigation infrastructure works, increase institutional capacity to assess and monitor disaster risks,
                     develop strategies to support the most vulnerable populations and increase participation of the private sector disaster
                     recovery. Specifically, the project will carry out various river improvement, control and slope stabilization works to
                     mitigate the impacts of floods and landslides on the residents of the rapidly urbanizing Itajaí Valley, and other priority
                     locations. The Project will also establish a foundation for future DRM investments in other parts of the state, through

                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     supporting the development of disaster risk reduction plans, which will identify specific investment priorities and
                     estimated costings. The focus through these plans will be on the protection of vulnerable communities, public
                     infrastructure, health and school facilities. Finally, the project will expand the climate monitoring and early warning
                     capacities in Santa Catarina, with the aim of increasing radar coverage to the entire state, and cooperation with
                     neighboring states, and improving the interface between climate monitoring and local civil defense agencies at the
                     municipal level. Support to the private sector will be explored through existing emergency support programs for SMEs.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Santa Catarina, located in the South of Brazil, has an area of 95,730 km² and an estimated population of 7.6 million
                     inhabitants (IBGE, 2022), distributed across 295 municipalities. It has a high urbanization rate (84.4%) and a Human
                     Development Index (HDI) of 0.774. The per capita GDP in 2021 was US$ 9,600, with services (62.6%) and industry
                     (32.5%) as the main contributors. Social vulnerability is more intense in rural areas and urban peripheries. Santa
                     Catarina is highly susceptible to extreme hydrological events (floods, landslides), being the 5th state with the greatest
                     material damage from socio-environmental disasters in Brazil.
                     The state territory has diverse geology with sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks. Geomorphologically, it is
                     part of the Southern Plateau, with mountains and valleys, and the Plateaus and Mountains of the East-Southeast
                     Atlantic and the Plateaus and Chapadas of the Paraná Basin define its morphology. Predominantly humid subtropical
                     climate (Cfa), with well-distributed rainfall. There are regional variations due to altitude, with hot summers on the coast
                     and harsh winters on the plateau. The climatic diversity influences land use, with mosaics of native vegetation and
                     agricultural areas. The relief is diverse, ranging from coastal plains to mountainous areas. The soils reflect this variation,



Public Disclosure
                     with a predominance of soils derived from effusive rocks in the West and sedimentary rocks in the East. Land use is
                     linked to agricultural suitability and topography. The state is divided into 27 basins, grouped in 10 hydrographic regions,
                     or watersheds. The Itajaí-Acu river basin (15.089 km²), and the Camboriú river basin (220 km²) is known as the
                     “Hydrographic Region of Itajaí valley” or simply “Itajaí valley. .
                     The entire State territory is within the Atlantic Forest Biome, with formation/s such as Dense Ombrophilous Forest
                     (coast), Mixed Ombrophilous Forest (plateau, with Araucarias), Deciduous and Semi-deciduous Seasonal Forest (west),
                     Pioneer Formations (mangroves, restingas, dunes), and Altitude Fields. The state has more than 100 conservation units,
                     including the São Joaquim National Park and the Carijós Ecological Station. The Ecological Corridor Caminho das
                     Nascentes stands out, aiming to protect springs and promote ecological connectivity. The project does not directly
                     interfere with this corridor. The region includes remnants of the Atlantic Forest, considered natural heritage with
                     ecological, landscape, and symbolic importance.
                     Santa Catarina is home to many original, traditional, and quilombola communities, that adopt communal uses of natural
                     resources as part of their livelihoods. Indigenous People include the Guarani M’byá and Ñandeva (mostly in coastal
                     areas), the Kaingang (at the western areas), and the Xokleng (in the Itajaí River Basin). They count for a population of
                     23,297 self-declared indigenous people. These groups are mostly family farmers – which represents 78.1% of the more
                     than 180,000 agricultural landholdings in the state, with more than 95% of their landholdings owning less than 50
                     hectares and almost 68% holding less than 20 hectares. Family farmers – along with low-income urban populations
                     occupying risk areas – will be among the main beneficiaries of the flood containment works in the Itajaí River Basin
                     supported by the Project.
                     Project financed infrastructure will be located in the Itajaí River Basin. According to the latest census (2022), 1.93 million
                     people live in the valley’s 51 municipalities–a quarter of the state’s population.. Unplanned urbanization, the
                     suppression of native vegetation have amplified and aggravated the region’s vulnerability to disasters.

                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     Despite the challenges such as aging producers and access to credit, family farmers represent a significant portion of
                     agricultural landholdings in the region. They play a fundamental role in rural areas, driving agricultural production with
                     culturally rooted, environmentally sustainable, and socially significant practices. In this region, family farming represents
                     74.5% of the approximately 30,000 agricultural landholdings, with 78.2% and 71.6% of these family farmers holding
                     areas of less than 50 and 20 hectares, respectively. Their livelihood is associated with polyculture and commercialization
                     of food products in the internal market and throuhg public purchase programs. These family farmers are particularly
                     exposed to the adverse impacts of floods and hold less capacity to avoid and recover from the damages and economic
                     losses they cause, making this group a key beneficiary of flood containment works supported by the project. It is worth
                     to highlight that, although the Xokleng are present in the region and one of the existing dams of the flood containment
                     system is located nearby their Laklãno Land, Project activities do not include this dam or interfere with their land.
                     A second main and vulnerable group of beneficiaries comprises those living in precarious housing in urban areas. Based
                     on 2022 data, Santa Catarina has the highest proportion of precarious housing in the South of Brazil, with a rate of 7.3%.
                     In urban areas, 174,497 households were in precarious conditions. The Itajaí River Basin concentrated 30.8% of these
                     households (equivalent to 8.3% of the households in the region). The increase in socio-environmental vulnerability in
                     this region is rooted in developing economic, cultural, and social processes that have led to accelerated and
                     disorganized population growth in some localities, increasing the number of houses built in unsuitable locations without
                     basic sanitation. Among the determining factors for the occupation of risk areas in the region are a regional
                     development model that attracts workers due to the wide availability of jobs, the high population growth experienced
                     by municipalities in the region over the last decade, real estate speculation and lack of housing policies, the disaster risk
                     management model adopted in the region is highly reactive, mainly focused on responding to events and quickly
                     rebuilding destroyed structures, and the existence of peripheral areas where the most vulnerable segments of the




Public Disclosure
                     population are attracted. In addition, it is worth to highlight that a recent survey in the Itajaí-Mirim sub-basin found
                     that, among residents in risk areas, there is a notable low risk perception among the male population and a low
                     percentage of residents (26%) who claim to be able to recover quickly in case of material losses.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Borrower – the Government of the State of Santa Catarina – has recently enhanced its experience with the
                     Environmental and Social Standards of the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework through the preparation
                     of two operations: the Santa Catarina Rural Development Project for Sustainability and Innovation (P506142) and the
                     Brazil Proactive, Safe, and Resilient Road Asset Management Program - State of Santa Catarina Project - Phase 3
                     (P504253).
                     The assessments conducted by the Bank in preparation for these two operations highlighted the client's high
                     institutional capacity for managing environmental and social risks and impacts and concluded that the use of the
                     Borrower’s Environmental and Social (E&S) Framework allows for the achievement of outcomes materially consistent
                     with the objectives and requirements of most of the World Bank's Environmental and Social Standards.
                     The State Secretariat for Protection and Civil Defense (SDC) will host the PMU for the Project and has a high qualified
                     technical staff to deal with disaster risk management, who has also been in charge of the operation and maintenance of
                     the existing flow control infrastructure (dams) in the Itajaí Valley and the state. The PMU will oversee project execution
                     and compliance, being responsible for the overall planning, technical, operational, financial, and administrative
                     management of the Project and for overseeing institutional coordination, monitoring, and evaluation of project
                     activities.
                     The PMU will count on environmental and social development specialists to ensure proper management of
                     environmental and social risks in a manner appropriate to the requirements of the country’s environmental and social


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     framework and the relevant Environmental and Social Standards. The PMU will also count on an independent panel of
                     consultants with recognized expertise in the various technical fields relevant to dam safety, who will be appointed by
                     the Borrower and acceptable to the Bank for reviewing and advising on the investigation, design, construction and the
                     start of operations of the new and under construction dams. As required under the Brazilian legislation on dam safety
                     and the Project´s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), the Borrower will implement an already agreed a
                     Dam Safety Action Plan that establishes technical, operational and emergency guidelines to ensure the structural
                     integrity of dams and the protection of downstream populations and ecosystems, in accordance with national,
                     international best practices and the ESS4.
                     All Project large infrastructure works will be licensed by the State Institute of Environment (IMA), which operates under
                     the country and state robust regulatory framework and –for the types of the proposed works– requires environmental
                     and social impact assessments (ESIA) and public consultations with potentially affected populations for licensing
                     construction and operation.
                     As part of its due diligence during Project preparation, the Bank reviewed the environmental and social documentation
                     that the Borrower has prepared under the country’s regulatory framework for licensing these works to determine if
                     they would meet the ESSs and has concluded that: a) the ESIAs properly identify and access all relevant environmental,
                     social and labor risks and impacts of these works, addressing the key elements of the relevant ESSs; b) the ESMPs
                     incorporate programs and plans that include material measures to manage those risks in a manner that allow the
                     achievement of outcomes materially consistent with the objectives of the relevant ESSs; and c) the licensing process
                     included opportunities for prior and informed consultation with key stakeholders.
                     Hence, the overall conclusion is that by enhancing the institutional capacity of SDC with a) the hiring of environmental
                     and social risk management specialists and the Panel and b) the adoption of the principles set in the Project’s




Public Disclosure
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Resettlement Framework, the Borrower will have in place the needed capabilities for
                     managing the risks of the Project.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                              High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                       High
                     The Project has been classified as High Risk due to the nature, scale, and complexity of the proposed interventions, as
                     well as the sensitivity of the environmental context. It encompasses both structural and non-structural measures
                     aimed at disaster risk reduction and enhancing local flood resilience. Project activities are designed to benefit the
                     community and environment by enhancing preparedness and reducing vulnerability to climate-related risks and
                     minimizing potential disaster impacts. While the implementation of these activities may result in impacts from
                     construction, these are expected to be short-term, localized, and mitigated through procedures standardized by
                     applicable environmental legislation. The Project involves the construction of four flood control dams and river
                     improvement works in the Itajaí River Basin. These are large-scale civil works with significant environmental
                     footprints, including vegetation clearance, earthworks, and hydrological alterations. The dams are classified as large
                     under ESS4, with two rated as Risk Class IV – High and two as Risk Class III – Substantial, according to ICOLD Bulletin
                     72 (as detailed in ESS4 paragraph). Although the project area includes remnants of the Atlantic Forest biome, there is
                     no direct overlap with protected areas. Nonetheless, the ecological sensitivity of the region necessitates robust


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     mitigation and restoration measures. The main environmental impacts identified include: (i) soil degradation and
                     erosion due to vegetation clearance and earthworks; (ii) air and water pollution from particulate emissions,
                     sedimentation, and fuel spills during dredging and construction; (iii) waste generation, including hazardous and
                     construction waste; (iv) hydrological disruptions, altering river flow, aquatic habitats, and fish migration; (v) loss of
                     native vegetation, including Atlantic Forest fragments and riparian zones; (vi) impacts on fauna, affecting two
                     threatened species through habitat loss and disturbance; (vii) aquatic ecosystem changes due to dredging, invasive
                     species, and water quality degradation; and (viii) noise pollution, especially in inhabited areas. Importantly, the
                     Project plans to expropriate areas for temporary flood reservoirs, restore them ecologically, and achieve a net gain in
                     biodiversity in floodplain and riparian ecosystems for long-term environmental sustainability. The environmental risks
                     will be mitigated through the implementation of a comprehensive set of programs and measures outlined in the
                     ESMF and ESMPs. Key strategies include erosion and water quality control, recovery of degraded areas, restoration of
                     native vegetation, monitoring of fauna and flora, and proper waste management. Specific measures will be adopted
                     to minimize impacts on sensitive habitats and threatened species, based on biodiversity assessments. Continuous
                     environmental supervision, compliance with licensing conditions, and institutional capacity building are integral to the
                     approach, ensuring that environmental impacts are effectively avoided, minimized, or compensated throughout all
                     phases of the project. Furthermore, an Independent Panel of Experts on Dam Safety will be hired, as required by ESS
                     4, to review designs, supervise construction, and ensure adoption of international best practices. An independent
                     consultancy will also be contracted by the SDC, no later than 90 days after the Project Effective Date, to carry out a
                     Cumulative and Synergistic Impact Assessment of the entire flood control system of the Itajaí River Basin, consistent
                     with ESS 1, ensuring an integrated analysis of the environmental effects of the multiple planned interventions.
                     Additionally, before the start of works, the SDC will hire firm to implement the ESMPs, as well as independent




Public Disclosure
                     supervision company responsible for monitoring the execution of these programs, evaluating their effectiveness, and
                     ensuring compliance with the established E&S requirements.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Project aims to reduce exposure to cyclical floods and the ensuing life and economic losses and it will benefit the
                     most low-income and socially vulnerable rural and urban inhabitants (and among them the women, the children and
                     the elderly) in the Itajaí River Basin. These social groups have been driven by historical socioeconomic trends to
                     occupy at-risk flooding and sloping areas, are increasingly exposed to climate-related disasters and hold the lowest
                     capacity to cope with adversity. The social risk is rated Substantial because many Project-supported activities are
                     expected to lead to: a) Temporary disturbances in the everyday life of nearby communities, due to the traffic of heavy
                     machinery, noise, vibration, dust and temporary project-induced labor influx. b) Potential interference with unknown
                     archeological sites due to earth movement works. c) Land acquisition leading to physical relocation and/or economic
                     losses in rural and urban areas for the construction of flood control dams and their retention lakes, the fluvial
                     improvement works in the Itajaí-Mirim River and its dumping areas and, potentially, the Nature-Based Solutions still
                     to be defined. d) Community exposure to health and safety risks resulting from unexpected and accidental failure or
                     malfunction during the operation phase of the new dams, which, according to early dam safety assessments, could
                     under a worse case scenario require the evacuation downstream communities. Although severity would be high,
                     probability is low given the engineering standards to be applied and dams are single-use for flood control, remaining
                     open and empty for the majority of the time. e) Furthermore, the construction of flood control dams has faced in the
                     past opposition at one proposed site (municipal government and local communities), who raised concerns related to
                     potential social and environmental impacts and limited local benefits. To avoid, minimize or mitigate such risks,
                     material measures have been agreed with the Borrower and are reflected in the Project’s ESCP and already initiated


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     by the client. The Project will rely on the Borrower’s Environmental and Social Framework (BESF) to protect cultural
                     heritage by implementing both a Cultural Heritage Management Plan and minimize OHS risks. The Borrower is
                     developing a Resettlement Framework that incorporates all objectives and requirements of ESS 5 in the
                     implementation of processes of land acquisition leading to physical relocation an/or economic losses. It is also
                     developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan to ensure that meaningful consultation with affected communities guides
                     the preparation and implementation of the works that will be contracted using the “design and build” method.
                     Finally, the risks associated with dam safety and labor influx on community health and safety will be addressed
                     through: a) compliance with high construction standards on the design and construction of the new dams as advised
                     by a Dam Safety Panel of Experts and implementation of Dam Safety Plans consistent with the requirements set in ESS
                     4; and b) the tapping of local labor force giving priority for hiring local residents to fill available positions and the
                     enforcement of proper behavioral standards to prevent SEA/SH incidents.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The main instrument for E&S risk management of the Project as a whole is an Environmental and Social Management
                      Framework (ESMF) under preparation by the Borrower. This ESMF sets out principles, rules, guidelines and
                      procedures to assess the environmental and social risks and impacts. It includes information on the area in which
                      works are expected to be sited, including any potential E&S vulnerabilities of the area, the potential impacts that may



Public Disclosure
                      occur and mitigation measures to be used. The ESMF also summarizes institutional roles and responsibilities to
                      manage E&S risks. Non-structural activities such as risk assessment, early warning systems, and institutional
                      strengthening are expected to yield positive environmental and social outcomes. However, structural interventions,
                      especially river improvement works, the construction and operation of flood control dams, generate significant
                      temporary environmental and social impacts. These impacts are generally manageable through standard mitigation
                      procedures aligned with Brazilian environmental legislation. Works executed under the project will be contracted
                      under design-and-build methods. The two investments that already secured their preliminary environmental licenses
                      in 2016 will be implemented first: the Petrolândia flood control dam and the fluvial improvement works in the Itajaí-
                      Mirim River. Final project designs – including assessment of alternative locations – will only be known during
                      implementation as detailed engineering designs are finalized. In order to better understand the critical path for
                      readiness of the first works, the timeline for can be divided in three phases: expropriation, environmental
                      compliance, and execution. For Petrolandia river control dam, the provisional timeline is as follows: • Expropriation
                      Phase: This phase is currently underway. A firm has been contracted to conduct necessary surveys, site visits and
                      resettlement planning. It is estimated that these activities will be completed by March 2026. Resettlement planning
                      will be aligned with the requirements of the ESF. Resettlement Plans for each works will be prepared by the client
                      with inputs from the firm by April 2026. • Environmental Compliance Phase: The dam already has a preliminary
                      installation license, and the Environmental Impact Study and Report (EIA/RIMA) have been completed. The
                      Environmental Installation License from 2018 is being renewed. The Santa Catarina Environmental Institute (IMA) has
                      requested additional information and technical documentation, including the Authorization for Vegetation
                      Suppression. This authorization is expected by December 2025, and the vegetation removal is estimated to take
                      about 1 month. The client is submitting the required evidence for the installation license on an ongoing basis and will


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      be completed before construction begins. • Execution Phase: the firm that will be hired to execute the construction
                      of the dam will update the detailed engineering designs. Outstanding information requested by IMA relate to the
                      existing designs that will be addressed by the firm. The bidding process for the is expected to start in February 2026,
                      and the final designs will be initiated in August 2026 and completed in 4 months. All installation license conditions
                      must be met before construction starts, which is scheduled for December 2026. Bidding of the supervision firm is
                      expected to begin in May 2026, with execution starting in November 2026, one month before construction begins.
                      For the Itajai-Mirim river improvement works, the provisional timeline is as follows: • Expropriation Phase: the client
                      will contract a firm to conduct surveys, site visits and resettlement planning. Bidding is estimated to start in March
                      2026, and it is expected to take 5 months. The firm will complete all activities in 12 months. The client will prepare
                      the Resettlement Plan with inputs from the firm by September 2027. • Environmental Compliance: Environmental
                      compliance requirements will be addressed, including obtaining the vegetation suppression authorization and
                      fulfilling Environmental Installation License conditions. For this, contracting the Forest Inventory is necessary,
                      estimated at 4 months for the bidding process starting in March 2026 and 4 months for execution. SDC has already
                      obtained a preliminary installation license from IMA. However, a series of conditions must be met prior to execution
                      of works, including the Forest Inventory. • Execution Phase: The client will hire a firm to finalize the design and
                      budget, which would take 4 months for bidding starting in June 2026 and 5 months for execution. Bidding for the
                      construction contract will begin late 2026 and contracted by April 2027. Construction is expected to start in
                      September 2027 for three years. The bidding for supervision is expected to begin in April 2027, with execution
                      starting in August 2027, one month before construction. Environmental licensing for complex projects as those
                      supported by the Project follows CONAMA 237/1997 and CONSEMA 98/2017, requiring an evaluation of activities
                      based on their environmental impact on physical, biological, and socioeconomic environments. Given the scale and




Public Disclosure
                      complexity of the planned infrastructure works, there is a need for detailed Environmental and Social Impact
                      Assessments (ESIA), a comprehensive Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), and active stakeholder
                      engagement. The construction of flood control dam in Petrolândia, and the fluvial improvement works in the Itajaí-
                      Mirim River in Itajaí have already undergone the initial stages of environmental licensing and have ESIAs and ESMPs
                      structured. The ESMF has a section dedicated to dam safety, including the description of the new dams, the WB dam
                      safety standards, (including the provisions of the Good Practice Note), the applicable legislation and a preliminary
                      dam safety plan, which is reflected in the Project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). The dam
                      safety plan includes the requirement to hire the Panel of Experts (PoE), in a manner acceptable to the Bank, within 60
                      days of the Project's effectiveness (a deadline well aligned with the proposed bidding timeline of the first works).
                      Additionally, it determines that the Panel shall inspect all dam sites, reviews/comment all designs of the new dams,
                      oversee the construction works, present recommendation for the improvement of the dams' safety, and that the
                      Borrower will adopt the recommendations presented by the PoE. To address these impacts, the ESMP and other
                      complementary measures have been agreed upon with the Borrower and are reflected in the Project’s ESMF and
                      ESCP. In summary, the ESMF requires the execution of a range of environmental programs, including but not limited
                      to: 1. Environmental Supervision Program: Ensures compliance with all environmental obligations, including
                      mitigation measures and licensing conditions. 2. Construction Environmental Program: Guides contractors in
                      implementing best practices for erosion control, sediment management, and pollution prevention. 3. Air Quality
                      Monitoring Program: Tracks particulate emissions and enforces dust suppression measures. 4. Noise Monitoring
                      Program: Assesses sound levels and implements noise abatement strategies. 5. Water Quality Monitoring Program:
                      Conducts regular sampling to detect changes in turbidity, contaminants, and aquatic health. 6. Waste Management
                      Program: Establishes protocols for segregation, storage, recycling, and disposal of construction and hazardous waste.
                      7. Degraded Area Recovery Program: Focuses on revegetation, slope stabilization, and restoration of disturbed areas.


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      8. Riparian Zone Restoration Program: Reestablishes native vegetation along watercourses to enhance ecological
                      connectivity and water quality. 9. Dredging Management Plan: Ensures proper handling, transport, and disposal of
                      dredged sediments, especially those with potential contamination. 10. Environmental Compensation Plan: Provides
                      financial and ecological offsets for unavoidable impacts, including support to conservation units. 11. Social
                      Communication Program: Establishes a continuous, transparent, and accessible two-way communication channel
                      with affected communities that will incorporate the requirements set in the broader Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                      prepared for the Project (see ESS10 section for details). 12. Expropriation Process Monitoring Program: Ensures that
                      expropriation processes occur fairly, transparently, and in compliance with World Bank NAS 5. 13. Environmental
                      Education Program: Promotes environmental awareness and risk perception in affected communities. 14.
                      Archaeological Monitoring and Rescue Program: Protects archaeological heritage in intervention areas. The
                      implementation of the ESMF and the ESMP are supported by institutional arrangements for environmental oversight,
                      including public consultations and coordination with licensing authorities. As indicated in the ESCP, the Project will
                      also maintain a qualified Project Management Unit (PMU) and hire specialized consulting firms to prepare additional
                      studies (as Biodiversity Assessments or Cumulative and Synergic Impact Assessment) and implement required
                      environmental management plans. Additionally, supervising firms will monitor the implementation of these plans by
                      contractors and consulting firms and report on their performance. The capacity building plan and the monitoring and
                      reporting of the E&S performance are included in the ESCP. In conclusion, while the Project presents significant E&S
                      risks and impacts due to its scale and nature, the structured implementation of targeted environmental programs, as
                      outlined in the ESMF and ESMP, provides a solid framework for impact mitigation.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The project is one of the instruments that enables the implementation of a flood management Master Plan, which
                      was prepared based on a series of meetings and public hearings with key stakeholders, carried out as part of the
                      SESA) and in accordance with the JICA Guidelines for Environmental and Social Considerations. It was discussed with
                      society and incorporated contributions from the Itajaí River Basin Committee (a multistakeholder instance created by
                      State Decree 2,109/1997, composed of 20 water user organizations, 20 community organizations, and 10
                      representatives from public agencies). Its implementation involves the participation of various sectors of the regional
                      society. Following the BESF, the flood control dam in Petrolândia and the fluvial improvement works in the Itajaí-
                      Mirim River had their preliminary licenses issued by IMA in 2016. Public hearings locally held for presentation and
                      discussion of the ESIA occurred between 2015 and 2018. IMA required the developers to: carry out further public
                      consultations on the ESIA and launch a Social Communication Program, serving as a continuous channel for two-way
                      communication between them and the affected communities; distribute graphic materials (informative booklets and
                      posters) with relevant information about the works in the adjacent areas and through state and municipal Civil
                      Defense websites; participate in meetings and gatherings with community leaders; and locally publicize job positions
                      for the execution of the works. SDC was mandated to make available a toll-free phone number and other
                      communication channels for residents to raise inquiries and compliances. Prior to the public hearings the ESIA were
                      made available to the public virtually and in printed copies distributed to the municipal governments for public
                      consultation. They remain available at IMA website. All these measures – that go much further than a one-time public
                      hearing – are considered fully aligned with ESS10 requirements. Specific Project information has been disclosed by
                      the Borrower through various means – official websites and social media – since it was approved by the federal
                      government in September 2024 (exemplarily, https://www.defesacivil.sc.gov.br/2024/09/28/comissao-de-
                      financiamentos-externos-autoriza-emprestimo-de-us-1192-milhoes-para-obras-de-defesa-civil-em-sc/ and


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                    Page 9 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      https://www.instagram.com/p/DAb2zTIvhUL/). Since then, hundreds of citizens posted comments on the Project
                      through social media, more than 90% of a positive nature. Throughout Project preparation, SDC disclosed public
                      information on the purpose, nature, scale, and duration of the Project and took part in several state and regional
                      events convening key stakeholders where it presented the Project. In March 2025, SDC convened a workshop to
                      discuss technical aspects of the Project (including E&S issues) with and get feedback from representatives of state
                      and municipal civil defense collegiates. Between March and April 2025, SDC held a series of regional seminars aimed
                      at strengthening municipal Civil Defense agencies and, on the seminar held in Blumenau (April 8), the Project and the
                      advances made in financing the construction of flood containment dams were presented to representatives of 45
                      municipalities of the Itajaí Valley, who expressed support for the construction of the dams and river improvement
                      works, considering them fundamental for the protection of lives, infrastructure, and the local economy. Between
                      April and July 2025, technical visits were carried out in the municipalities of Agrolândia, Petrolândia and Pouso
                      Redondo to discuss the dam construction works. At the meetings in the first three towns, municipal and community
                      leaders expressed support for the construction of the dams, recognizing the urgent need for structural works to
                      contain flooding and highlighting the recurring impact of extreme weather events on the regional economy, public
                      safety and the most vulnerable areas. At the meeting in Pouso Redondo – where there has been opposition to the
                      construction of the downstream dam since 2019 despite of technical endorsement by the Technical Chamber of the
                      Itajaí River Basin Committee, – concerns with the downstream dam were expressed again on the basis that the urban
                      perimeter has expanded into the area originally planned for the reservoir. Greater acceptance of the upstream dam
                      was shown due to the possibility of its use for water supply. In response, SDC is evaluating the feasibility of relocating
                      the downstream dam and started talks with the State Water Company (CASAN), which has begun studies to assess
                      the possibility of multiple uses for the dam. The downstream dam is no longer considered under the Project. In July




Public Disclosure
                      2025, a consultation was held with residents of the Area Directly Affected by the construction and formation of the
                      flooded area of the Perimbó River Dam (in the municipality of Petrolândia). 32 property owners in the neighboring
                      communities voiced concerns regarding the expropriation process and the forms of compensation, the loss of
                      productive areas, the definition of the route of the new access roads and the need for greater dialogue with the
                      public authorities. Online consultation is ongoing including dialogue with the Itajaí River Basin Committee. During
                      preparation, SDC prepared a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) focusing on early and continuous stakeholder
                      engagement, transparent communication of Project activities and, particularly, on the establishment of strategies to
                      ensure the incorporation of local stakeholders’/directly affected groups’ feedback in planning and implementation of
                      the envisaged activities, which will be contracted under a “design-and-build” method. The effectiveness of this
                      strategy will be monitored and evaluated through the intermediate Project indicator on the share of citizens who
                      have a positive perception of the proposed project's activities after participating in consultations. The SEP contains an
                      initial mapping of key stakeholders, including the participatory multi-stakeholder committees in place in the Itajaí
                      Valley, people potentially affected by adverse impacts of infrastructure works (and highlighting, among them, the
                      presence of disadvantaged and vulnerable social groups) who must be engaged during the implementation of the
                      Project and its works. It also proposes specific strategies to make relevant information about the Project and its
                      specific works available to each relevant stakeholder in a timely and culturally adequate manner and to promote their
                      engagement during Project preparation and implementation. It defines the responsibilities of SDC and Contractors in
                      matters of stakeholder engagement. Finally, it clearly describes a three-tier channel through which all stakeholders
                      would be able to raise their concerns and grievances with regards to the Project and reach resolution. This three-tier
                      Grievance Mechanism comprises: 1st Tier – At the working-sites, Contractors will be required to put in place Social
                      Communication Offices, which will also serve to receive, register and respond to complaints and requests of the local
                      population. 2nd Tier – The Supervision Firm to be hired to oversee all Project-supported workers will also be required


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 10 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      to keep a channel to receive complaints that members of local communities do not feel comfortable to register at the
                      1st Tier and forward them to the 3rd Tier for proper resolution. 3rd Tier - SDC Sectoral Ombudsman (as part of the
                      State Ombudsman System) will operate both as a direct channel to receive, register and respond to complaints and a
                      second-tier and appeals channel for redressing complaints that are not satisfactorily resolved at the 1st and 2nd Tiers.
                      The assessment made of the SDC Sectoral Ombudsman found that it holds all the elements required under ESS 10 for
                      an effective grievance mechanism. It holds different ways in which users can submit their grievances (including
                      anonymously), a log where grievances are registered in writing and maintained as a database; publicly advertised
                      procedures, setting out the length of time users can expect to wait for acknowledgement, response and resolution of
                      their grievances; transparency about the grievance procedure, governing structure and decision makers; and no rules
                      restricting access to appeals instance (including the national judiciary) to which unsatisfied grievances may be
                      referred when resolution of grievance has not been achieved. It also has the capacity to handle SEA/SH complaints,
                      ensuring sigilous of information and a protocol to guide survivors to referral services. The SEP also provides actions
                      associated with emergency preparedness activities, such as dissemination of training for civil defense, dissemination
                      of the meteorological information system, awareness campaigns on preventive and rescue actions, dissemination of
                      the alert system, community training and simulations, among others. Specific actions are defined for vulnerable
                      groups, such as women, aiming to better integrate them into the rescue and safety system, since they play an
                      important social role in community emergency and alert situations, but historically have greater difficulty in receiving
                      targeted communications and participating in representative bodies on disaster risk reduction. The draft SEP will be
                      made available for public consultation through SDC electronic page. To ensure broad stakeholder participation, at this
                      stage, SDC will publish an informational notice on the same page, inviting consultation and providing the electronic
                      address for submitting contributions. Additionally, the invitation to participate will be sent via email to organizations




Public Disclosure
                      representing key stakeholders. The public consultation will remain open for a minimum period of 30 consecutive
                      days. The final SEP – incorporating the feedback of the consultation process – will be disclosed within 30 days after
                      the Project effective date.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The Project will engage on direct and contracted workers and, most certainly, the Contractors will rely on primary
                      suppliers who, on an ongoing basis, will provide directly to them goods or materials essential for the performance of
                      their contracts. It will not involve people employed or engaged in providing community labor. The contingent of
                      workers involved with the core functions of the Project cannot be estimated yet. However, it is certain that many of
                      the contracted workers will face risks associated with outdoor work and heavy machinery, as well as being exposed to
                      risks related to road safety. The Brazilian labor framework addresses most elements considered under ESS2 – with
                      the only exception of the requirements related to community workers – in a manner that allows the achievement of
                      outcomes materially consistent with the objectives of this standard. In consequence, the Project will rely on BESF for
                      dealing with labor related risks and no standalone Labor Management Procedures needs to be prepared. The gap
                      between the Brazilian labor framework and ESS2 in aspects related to community workers is not relevant as the
                      Project will not employ or engage people in providing community labor. This legislation ensures worker protection,
                      fair treatment, and non-discrimination, freedom of association, and accessible means to raise workplace concerns.
                      Additionally, it prevents the use of all forms of forced and child labor. To ensure the health and safety of workers, all
                      employers are legally required to comply with high Occupational Health and Safety Standards. The standards and
                      rules on Occupational Health and Safety required by Brazilian legislation adequately address the health and safety
                      risks to which project workers will be exposed to, which can be minimized and mitigated through the adoption of


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 11 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      routine measures – such as the use of proper personal protective equipment (PPE), the certification of skills and
                      training as a condition for hiring operators of heavy machinery, and the signaling of work sites aimed at reducing the
                      speed of vehicles traveling on roads undergoing rehabilitation and maintenance services. In accordance with this
                      legislation, contractors will be required to hire occupational safety technicians, develop and implement operational
                      safety plans, and provide the necessary PPE. As mentioned, Federal Law 14,540/2023 established the Program for
                      Preventing and Combating Sexual Harassment and other Crimes against Sexual Dignity and Sexual Violence within the
                      scope of public administration, determining that governmental bodies and entities must develop actions and
                      strategies to prevent and combat sexual harassment. This legal framework is properly enforced by federal and state
                      institutions as well as overseen by judicial instances (Federal and state Labor Public Attorney Offices and Labor
                      Justice) and its requirements will be enforced by the implementing agency (with regards to direct and contracted
                      workers) and clearly defined in the bidding documents for hiring contractors. The bidding documents will cause
                      Contractors to: (a) develop and adopt standards of conduct that does not condone with practices of SEA/SH and
                      other forms of Gender-Based Violence aligned with the SEA/SH Action Plan developed under the Project’s ESMF and
                      (b) to inform workers – at the time of recruitment for performing work related to core functions of the project –
                      about the Project’s Workplace Grievance Mechanism as well as of judicial and administrative channels available
                      according to the country’s labor law. In addition, the bidding doccuments will also cause Contractors to (a)
                      incorporate specific requirements on child labor, forced labor, and work safety issues in all purchasing orders and
                      contracts with suppliers, (b) report to the Borrower as well as to the country’s labor authorities if child labor, or
                      forced labor, or serious safety issues related to their primary supply workers are identified, and (c) shift – within a
                      reasonable period – their primary suppliers to suppliers that can demonstrate that they are in compliance with the
                      relevant country legislation. These requirements will be included in the Project’s ESCP. The Project's ESCP clearly




Public Disclosure
                      states material measures aiming at compliance with Brazilian Labor Law regarding fair and equal treatment of the
                      workforce, non-discrimination, freedom of association, working conditions, zero tolerance with child and forced
                      labor, SEA/SH, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), and SEA/SH Prevention Procedures. The ESMF has developed a
                      mandatory SEA/SH Prevention Plan, which will be implemented by executing agencies and contractors, covering
                      aspects of prevention, identification, response and support to survivors, accountability, monitoring and evaluation as
                      well as setting out the principles of a Code of Conduct. Furthermore, it requires the Borrower to report to the Bank
                      on all incidents and accidents that may harm the health and safety of project workers (and beneficiary community
                      members) or expose them to any form of discrimination, harassment, and abuse, and take measures to prevent their
                      recurrence. Furthermore, it requires the Borrower to disclose and require contractors to disclose information on
                      internal and external grievance mechanisms where project workers can raise concerns about working conditions and
                      terms (including SEA/SH and Gender-Based Violence issues). Finally, to reduce project-related influx of laborers and
                      its potentially adverse impacts in rural communities, the Borrower will encourage Contractors to tap on the local
                      labor force and prioritize the hiring of members of nearby communities as much as feasible.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      The interventions planned under the Project, particularly the construction of dams and river improvements in the
                      Itajaí Valley, entail a series of significant impacts, that include changes in air quality, soil degradation, sedimentation
                      of water bodies, waste generation, and alterations in water quality. These impacts primarily arise from activities such
                      as vegetation removal, earth movement, excavations, installation of hydraulic structures, and operation of heavy
                      machinery. a) Air quality alteration is a direct impact of the construction phase, resulting from the emission of
                      suspended particulate matter and atmospheric pollutants from the combustion of fossil fuels by vehicles and


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 12 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      equipment. Although classified as low magnitude and temporary, this impact can affect the health of workers and
                      nearby communities. b) Soil degradation and the intensification of erosion processes represent one of the most
                      significant environmental impacts. The removal of vegetation cover and the movement of large volumes of earth
                      expose the soil to rain, promoting erosion, sediment transport, and slope instability. This impact is classified as high
                      magnitude and potentially permanent, requiring structural and vegetative measures for containment. c)
                      Sedimentation of water bodies, especially downstream of the works, is another significant impact, resulting from
                      sediment input from intervention areas. This process compromises river flow capacity, alters river morphology, and
                      can affect aquatic fauna. d) Water quality alteration is associated with sediment disturbance, chemical input use, and
                      the risk of contamination by oils, greases, and solid waste. This medium magnitude and temporary impact can
                      compromise multiple water uses, including human supply and irrigation. e) Finally, solid waste generation during the
                      construction phase, including debris, packaging, material remnants, and hazardous waste, represents a low to
                      medium magnitude impact that can be fully controlled with the implementation of a Waste Management Program. In
                      summary, those impacts are significant, especially during the construction phase of the works, but can be controlled
                      and mitigated through the rigorous application of the environmental programs outlined in the ESMF that will guide
                      the preparation of the Contractors’ ESMPs (C-ESMPs): a) Construction Environmental Program : It defines operational
                      procedures to minimize physical impacts during the execution of works, such as erosion control, stormwater
                      management, and protection of sensitive areas. It works in an integrated manner with other programs. b)
                      Environmental Supervision Program: It ensures the implementation and compliance with all environmental programs,
                      mitigation measures, and license conditions. It acts as a technical control and environmental compliance body. c)
                      Particulate Material Monitoring Program: Its objective is to monitor the emission of dust and particulate matter
                      during the construction phase, especially in earthworks and soil movement activities. Monitoring is carried out at




Public Disclosure
                      strategic points and supports corrective actions, such as road humidification and vehicle speed control. d) Sound
                      Pressure Monitoring Program: It evaluates the noise levels generated by the construction works, focusing on the
                      health of workers and nearby communities. When levels above legal limits are identified, mitigation measures are
                      adopted, such as acoustic barriers and operational adjustments. e) Waste Management Program: It establishes
                      guidelines for the segregation, storage, reuse, and proper disposal of solid waste generated during construction. It
                      aims to prevent soil and water contamination, as well as promote environmental education for workers. f) Hazardous
                      Material Management Plan: It establishes guidelines for the segregation, storage, labeling, emergency response and
                      proper disposal of hazardous material employed during construction. g) Degraded Areas Recovery Program (PRAD):
                      Focused on slope stabilization, revegetation of exposed areas, and erosion control, PRAD is essential for restoring soil
                      integrity after the completion of works. It includes actions such as terrain modeling, drainage, and planting of native
                      species. h) Water Quality Monitoring Program: It conducts periodic collections to assess the effects of construction on
                      water bodies, especially regarding turbidity, sediments, and contaminants. The data guide control and prevention
                      measures for impacts on the multiple uses of water. The programs are enhanced by specific measures, such as
                      installing silt barriers, safeguarding water catchment areas, conducting preventive equipment maintenance, and
                      revegetating riverbanks. These programs and measures are thoroughly detailed in the ESMF and the ESMPs of
                      projects that are already in a more advanced phase, serving as a foundation for the development and customization
                      of future ESMPs.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      The project encompasses fluvial improvements in the Itajaí river channel, construction of new flood contention dams
                      and the design and implementation of Nature-Based solutions (retention basins, linear parks and green roofs) for


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                    Page 13 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      flood risk mitigation. During the construction stage, all Project-supported infrastructure works are expected to bring
                      some disturbances to community everyday life due to a) increased traffic of heavy machinery and b) project-induced
                      labor influx, which is not expected to be in large number and will not occur in hard-to-supervise or extremely poor
                      areas. They are not expected to lead to higher levels of community exposure to hazardous materials, or water-borne,
                      water-based, water-related, and vector-borne diseases, communicable and noncommunicable diseases, or SEA/SH
                      incidents too. To prevent, identify, and respond to cases of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEA/SH), as
                      well as other forms of gender-based violence (GBV), and to ensure the safety and well-being of individuals and
                      communities, a dedicated plan has been incorporated into the ESMF. This plan outlines measures for prevention,
                      awareness-raising, strengthening reporting mechanisms, supporting victims, and holding perpetrators accountable. It
                      also establishes clear protocols for handling allegations and monitoring the effectiveness of these measures. The
                      ESCP includes the implementation of this plan as one of its key actions. These works are not expected to lead to
                      direct impacts on ecosystem services that may result in adverse health and safety risks to nearby communities. On
                      the contrary, the rapid biodiversity assessment already conducted for the Petrolândia dam highlights potential
                      benefits on ecossystem services because the regulation of water flows may potentially protect downstream
                      ecosystems and the conversion of agricultural areas into temporary flood zones may, in the medium and long term,
                      favor the regeneration of native vegetation, promoting a net gain in biodiversity. To prevent and respond to SEA/SH
                      incidents, the ESMF developed a SEA/SH Prevention and Response Plan, which implementation will be mandatory to
                      all Contractors and implementing agencies (as described above, ESS 2). Contractors may retain direct or contracted
                      workers to provide security to safeguard its personnel and property and they will be required to a) verify that these
                      workers are not implicated in past abuses and adequately trainned in the use of force and appropriate conduct
                      toward workers and affected communities, b) cause them to act within the applicable law and c) review all allegations




Public Disclosure
                      of unlawful or abusive acts, take action to prevent recurrence and, where necessary, report these acts to the relevant
                      authorities. The Project has, provisionally, considered the construction of up to four flood control dams envisaged
                      under the 2010 Master Plan – Serra Velha, Serra Alves, Petrolândia, Downstream” and Rio Pombas “Upstream”. The
                      final selection of the new dams to be funded by the Project depends on the E&S assessment and availability of
                      funding from other sources. All these four new dams are classified as large dams in accordance with ESS 4 and they
                      are at a different stage of development. The Petrolândia dam has preliminary engineering design and environmental
                      license, but the other three dams have not started the preparation of the environmental and social studies required
                      for licensing. The detailed engineering design will be prepared by the Contractor (design and built arrangement). The
                      Project preparation followed the Good Practice Note on Dam Safety (GPN), including evaluation of the borrower's
                      system and its dam's safety management capacity, identification and inspection of dams and a preliminary risk
                      assessment. It comprised a revision of the available documentation, including the engineering designs and the
                      hydrological study that selected the sites for construction the new dams and considered cumulative and synergic
                      impacts (RHAMA: 2018). The Task Team adopted the risk classification issued by the International Commission on
                      Large Dams (ICOLD Bulletin 72), considering (a) dam height, (b) reservoir capacity, (c) number of people potentially
                      affected, and (d) other potential consequence. The analysis considered the distance to the downstream urban areas
                      as a proxy to assess the potential damage and the number of people potentially affected, in case of dam break. This
                      preliminary risk assessment found that two dams would be classified as substantial risk (Class III) and two dams
                      classified as high risk (Class IV). Hence, the risk classification of the dams planned under the Project considers factors
                      such as reservoir volume, total height, evacuation requirements, and potential downstream damage. With a volume
                      of 8.3 million cubic meters and a height of 28 meters, also requires evacuation of over 1,000 people, the Serra Velha
                      dam and is classified as Risk Class III/Substantial. The Serra dos Alves dam, with a smaller volume of 3.27 million cubic
                      meters but a height of 35 meters, falls into Risk Class IV/High, due to its high potential for downstream damage and


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 14 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      evacuation needs. The Petrolândia dam (volume of 4.81 million cubic meters and height of 18 meters) is classified as
                      Risk Class III/Substantial. The Rio das Pombas upstream dam (8.29 million cubic meters and 36 meters in height is
                      classified Risk Class IV/High. All dams share a common characteristic of requiring evacuation of more than 1,000
                      people and present high potential damage downstream, underscoring the critical importance of robust safety and
                      emergency planning. The scale of infrastructure, notably dam construction, exceeds prior experience of the
                      implementing agency, SDC, raising the importance of support and capacity building during the project
                      implementation. Component 3 aims to overcome the lack of experience with dam safety and has provisions for
                      capacity-building, including dam safety. Additionally, the Project will fund technical support for the PMU within the
                      SDC to oversee the preparation of engineering designs, dam safety plans and construction supervision. The Borrower
                      already submitted the terms of reference (ToR) for hiring specialists for the Independent Panel of Experts (PoE) –
                      which shall be composed of specialists in hydrology/hydraulics, geotechnics, concrete, and hydromechanical
                      equipment. The Borrower already submitted a list of pre-selected specialists who may compose the PoE and has also
                      submitted the ToR for technical supervision of the new dams. Both ToRs are in line with the GPN requirements. The
                      Borrower also agreed on the preliminary dam safety plan (reflected in the Project’s ESCP), defining dam safety
                      measures for the Project, including: a) Hire the PoE in a manner acceptable to the Bank, within 60 days of the
                      Project's effectiveness and ensure that the PoE: i. Inspects all the sites of the new dams and reviews/comments on
                      the reports, projects and safety requirements of the new dams, as well as formally presents recommendations, if
                      necessary, for the improvement of the dams' safety projects and procedures. ii. Has its recommendations, including
                      design review and further investigations, incorporated into dam designs and works. iii. Reviews the tender documents
                      to confirm that they include key technical elements of the project iv. Reviews the safety plans for the new dams,
                      including: quality control plan, instrumentation plan (prior to bidding), preliminary O&M plan, and general framework




Public Disclosure
                      of the emergency preparedness plan (EPP). v. Has its recommendations regarding engineering design and
                      construction methods implemented by contractors and construction supervision companies. vi. Inspects the works,
                      technical aspects and quality control of the construction, in accordance with the agreed schedule and dam safety
                      plans, as necessary; Ensure that the Panel reviews the definitive safety plans, including Final Instrumentation Plan
                      (prior to tendering as recommend by the GPN), Final O&M Plan (at least six months before starting first reservoir
                      filling), Final EPP, along with dam failure analysis and flood maps, and the first reservoir filling plan at least one year
                      before the start of reservoir filling. vii. Reviews the performance of the new dams during the first filling and provide
                      recommendations on the revision of the O&M and EPP plan, if necessary, to ensure the safety of the dam; and finally
                      start the implementation of safety plans, including instrumentation, monitoring and inspections in accordance with
                      the O&M and EPP plan. b) Hire and mobilize a construction supervision consulting company before the start of the
                      works, in accordance with the ToR approved by the Bank. Most of the dam safety requirements defined in the ESS 4
                      are addressed by the Brazilian Policy on Dam Safety (Laws 12,334/10 and 14,066/20). The Brazilian legislation
                      mandates the implementation of dam safety plans, including the Emergency Preparedness Plan – EPP that must
                      comprise inter alia flood inundation maps with impact-zone population tables, stakeholder notification flowcharts,
                      alert systems, and periodic drills). All plans must be prepared by qualified professionals and require consultations
                      with affected communities as well as disclosure and testing of the EPP with local authorities and residents. The
                      Project’s dam safety action plan adds the requirement to engage an independent panel of experts to oversee the
                      design and construction works.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant




                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 15 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      The standard is relevant because Project-supported works will require land acquisition, leading to physical
                      displacement and/or economic losses. The execution of expropriation procedures for flood control dams and river
                      improvements is the responsibility of SDC, which will hire a specialized company to prepare the technical appraisal
                      reports of affected areas and to conduct the necessary procedures for the payment of compensations/resettlement
                      processes. As the Project will support works for which the project designs have not been designed and the
                      environmental licensing has not been obtained yet, SDC is preparing a Resettlement Framework (RF) fully in line with
                      all requirements of ESS 5 for compensation for lost land and assets, income losses and livelihood restoration. The RF
                      will clarify resettlement principles, organizational arrangements, and design criteria to be expanded into specific
                      Resettlement/Livelihood Restoration Plans (R/LRPs) proportionate to potential risks and impact of each work. The
                      first draft of the RF will be submitted to the Bank prior to Negotiations. Gap-Filling Measures Compliance of the RF
                      and RPs with ESS 5 requirements will serve to overcome gaps in the BESF, which overall refer to a) compensation of
                      those with or without informal claims to land or assets recognized under national law for the land they occupy
                      beyond the compensation for improvements on the land; b) assistance to affected employees who lost their jobs; and
                      c) the establishment, dissemination, and documentation of a cut-off date for eligibility to prevent claims for benefits
                      by ineligible individuals (such as opportunistic invaders). However, in the specific case of people affected by the
                      construction of dams (PAB), these gaps have been erased since the new National Policy on the Rights of Populations
                      ffected by Dams (PNAB – Law 14,755/2023). In full alignement with the requirements of ESS 5, this law establishes a
                      comprehensive national policy to protect the rights of populations affected by dams in Brazil, defines the rights and
                      reparations for affected communities, sets up programs and committees for oversight, and outlines the
                      responsibilities of entrepreneurs involved in dam construction and operation. PABs include those suffering impacts
                      such as loss or devaluation of property, disruption of livelihoods, cultural changes, and restricted access to natural




Public Disclosure
                      resources and places of worship due to dam construction, operation, or emergencies. PABs are entitled to distinct
                      forms of compensation for material and moral damage that recognize their experiences, are negotiated with locally
                      representative committees and of PABs’ choice. The options for compensation must include the replacement of
                      affected assets, cash compensation, collective resettlement prioritizing cultural ties, independent technical advice,
                      emergency aid. Housing and resettlement sites must maintain or improve previous living conditions. PABs dependent
                      on land for physical and cultural reproduction (including owners, sharecroppers, squatters, etc.) have rights to
                      material loss compensation and assistance programs for reestablishing livelihoods. The compensation plan must also
                      pay special attention to vulnerable groups among the PABs. The PNAB creates a national collegiate body with
                      government, entrepreneurs, and civil society representatives to monitor and evaluate its implementation, alongside
                      local committees overseeing specific cases. Public Prosecutor's and Defender's Offices are permanent guests.
                      Entrepreneurs must fund and implement the plans, maintain ongoing communication plans demonstrating program
                      execution, and comply with social responsibility rules. Land acquisition needs have already been estimated for two
                      confirmed Project-supported activities as considered below: a) Petrolândia Dam: In 2016, an assessment
                      commissioned to an independent and qualified consultancy – that was not in preparation or anticipation of the
                      Project as this was only planned 8 years later – estimated that the construction of Petrolândia dam (including the
                      areas for the infrastructures and the retention lakes) would require the acquisition ≅ 128 ha. The ongoing updating of
                      this early assessment identifies that the number of affected landholdings will reach 85 in Petrolândia (of which 10 for
                      the construction works). Most of these landholdings will be only partially affected (just 9 families will need to be
                      relocated). Following the country law and procedures, the State of Santa Catarina conducted the expropriation of the
                      areas needed just for the dam infrastructure, comprising 60 ha and affecting 10 landholdings in Petrolândia (of which
                      three were totally affected). These affected people have already been fully compensated and there is no open judicial
                      claims. For these expropriation processes land, houses and productive assets were evaluated according to the


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      Brazilian ABNT NBR 14.653-1 standard and combined three complementary methodologies: i. The value of the bare
                      land was based on its market value based on field research, carried out with real estate agencies, market
                      professionals, individuals, and other stakeholders active in the region. ii. The value of the affected
                      structures/improvements based on parameters nationally established and periodically updated by the National
                      System of Construction Cost and Index Research (SINAPI) for the construction of structures and improvements of the
                      same size and constructive standards to estimate the replacement cost. iii. The value of agricultural production that
                      could not be harvested before the expropriated land was taken possession based on standards established and
                      periodically updated by the Agricultural Research and Rural Extension Company of the State of Santa Catarina
                      (EPAGRI). Following a jurisprudence established by the Superior Court of Justice, the areas occupied by Permanent
                      Protection Areas within each of these 10 properties were not compensated. The expropriation of the lands that will
                      be occupied by the inundation lakes has not started yet. As these works will now be supported by the Project, the
                      Borrower has commissioned a new assessment of involuntary resettlement impacts due to land acquisition by an
                      independent consultancy, which started in February 2025 and is ongoing. This assessement will subsidize the
                      preparation of the Petrolândia`s Resettlement/Livelihood Restoration Plan, which will be submitted to the Bank
                      within 30 days after the Effective Date of the Project, ensuring readiness for implementation of this first work. b)
                      Fluvial improvement works in the Itajaí-Mirim River: As part of the ESIA required by the licensing process carried out
                      in 2014 and approved IMA in early 2016, land acquisition needs for the best technical alternative of the dredging
                      works and the construction of two sluice gates in the existing drainage channel were estimated in 148 urban and rural
                      areas (totaling 74 hectares). They included small farms and residential, commercial, service, and industrial buildings in
                      the urban area. At the time, IMA required: a) the hiring of land registration services to document all properties,
                      identify affected people, assess property values, and determine the viability of each property post-expropriation,




Public Disclosure
                      facilitating relocation planning to mitigate negative impacts and socio-economic losses and maintain current
                      economic and living conditions as well as neighborhood relationships; b) the presentation of a socioeconomic census;
                      and d) the immediate implementation of a Social Communication Plan. IMA informed the developer that
                      interventions in areas potentially affected by the wor could only occur after compensations of affected people have
                      been made. However, these works stalled, no land acquisition has been made so far and the assessment of
                      involuntary resettlement impacts will be updated as part of the preparation of a specific R/LRP, which shall be
                      submitted to the Bank within 30 days after the Project’s Effective Date. The works planned in the municipalities of
                      Agrolândia and Pouso Redondo no assessment of land acquisition needs has been or can be conducted yet, because
                      projects are still in the planning phase, environmental licensing has not started, studies of alternative locations have
                      not been made, and investments are not confirmed yet. Borrower’s Commitments a) Develop a Resettlement
                      Framework (RF) to guide the preparation of R/LRP for each one of Project-supported activities that requires land
                      acquisition through expropriation and leads to physical relocation or economic losses following the most stringent
                      requirements of ESS 5 and Federal Law 14,755/2023, including, inter alia, the definition of an explicit plan for ongoing
                      disclosure, meaningful consultation and participation of displaced persons in the design of compensation and
                      resettlement options, the establishment of an independent grievance mechanism for displaced persons and a
                      monitoring and evaluation system, provisions for livelihood restoration measures and tailored assistance for
                      vulnerable groups. b) The assessment of adverse impacts related with land acquisition/involuntary resettlement will
                      be updated as part of the preparation of each Resettlement/Livelihood Restoration Plan, which will be submitted to
                      the Bank’s review and no objection as a condition for the starting of the associated work. c) A “de facto report” on
                      the previous 10 processes of land acquisition (conducted by an independent consultant) will be submitted to the
                      Bank within 30 days after the Project’s Effective Date and prior to the finalization of the bidding documents for the
                      Petrolândia dam. It will contain evidence that the current living conditions of the affected people are equal or better


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      than prior to expropriation and include, as needed, corrective measures with timelines acceptable to Bank. d)
                      Prepare, implement and complete the RP’s implementation needed for each work prior to its beginning.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project involves the construction of 4 flood control dams and the deepening and dredging of the already rectified
                      river Itajai Mirim channel. The dams are located in a highly modified landscape with fragments of the remains of
                      Mata Atlantica (Atlantic Forest) and rural/agriculture land. The Itajaí mirim river is predominantelly located within
                      Itajaí municipality urban area, and a already modified habitat. While the construction of Petrolandia dam will result to
                      a loss of small fragments of natural habitats (2.6 ha) there won’t be impacts to critical habitats. The Petrolandia dam
                      ESIA did not identified endangered aquatic species within the area of influence of the project. During project
                      preparation a Rapid Biodiversity Assessment was conducted to asses the potential impacts from Petrolandia dam
                      construction to the Modified or Critical Habitats. The Studied concluded that there will be minimal impacts to Natural
                      Habitats associated to the loss of Natural Habitats for the construction, whereas the existing habitats within the
                      flooding zones wouldn’t be negativelly affected due to its temporary characterisitc related to flood control dams.
                      Following Brazilian licencing process the Borrower must compensate for the loss of the 2.6ha of land clearings,
                      regenarating 30ha of forest in another area for conservation in the same watershed wich is expected to meet ESS6
                      compensation (no net loss) requirements. It is also worth noting that all the riparian areas along the flooding zones
                      will be regenarated, substantially improving the biodiversity function along the project affected area. At this stage it is
                      not possible to asses the impacts and loss of Natural Habitats, or potentially Critical Habitats, for the construction of
                      the other three dams, nevertheless it is expected to be minor. Neither it is possible to asses potential impacts to



Public Disclosure
                      aquatic habitats and endangered aquatic species, but given that there won’t be permanent obstruction of the flow of
                      the river, no significant or permanent impacts are expected. Going forward as seth forth in the ESCP, the borrower
                      must conduct a Biodiversity impact assessment during the environmental licensing phase, and identify potential
                      impacts to Natural or Critical Habitats, and complete the Biodiversity Action Plans to achieve no net loss, or even net
                      gain of biodiversity in accordance with ESS6 requirements as necessary. It is important to note that the Botuverá
                      dam, which impacted the Serra do Itajaí National Park, has been excluded from the project. Although the
                      municipalities targeted by the interventions are located within or near the area of influence of the “Caminho das
                      Nascentes” Ecological Corridor—an important environmental protection initiative established by state decree—the
                      project’s activities have been carefully designed to avoid any direct interference with this corridor. Specifically, there
                      will be no vegetation removal within its boundaries, nor will any areas within the corridor be subject to flooding as a
                      result of the temporary reservoirs associated with the flood control dams. Aditionally, an ESMP for Petrolândia dam
                      has been agreed with the state regulatory agency (IMA), which has mandated the implementation of specific
                      biodiversity related programs to meet local regulatory requirements as follows: • Forest Replacement and Riparian
                      Zone Restoration Program: aimed at restoring degraded areas using native species and floristic enrichment
                      techniques. • Germplasm Rescue and Conservation Program: which involves collecting seeds and seedlings before
                      vegetation removal, ensuring ex situ conservation of genetic diversity. • Fauna Disturbance, Rescue, and Monitoring
                      Programs: aimed at minimizing wildlife mortality and monitoring fauna response to environmental changes. •
                      Vegetation and Biological Contamination Monitoring Program: to assess the effectiveness of restoration actions and
                      control the proliferation of invasive species. The Borrower has committed to implement compensatory measures, ,
                      primarily aimed at ecological restoration within the flooding zones. This initiative seeks to transform lands currently
                      used for agriculture, pasture, or those already significantly degraded into zones that are environmentally functional.


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                       Page 18 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      The focus is on safeguarding water resources, promoting biodiversity, and increasing the ecological connectivity of
                      the landscape. Consequently, the project presents an opportunity to restore approximately 30 hectares of native
                      ecosystems for the dam under study, with similar calculations applicable to the other three dams included in the
                      project. This involves replacing human-altered land uses with natural vegetation, emphasizing floodplain formations
                      and riparian forests, which are historically the most degraded habitats in the region. Additionally, the restoration of
                      these areas will contribute to the recovery of floodplain habitats, vital for the conservation of endangered species like
                      the marsh staghorn thrush (Scytalopus iraiensis), and will improve the environmental quality of watercourses,
                      benefiting aquatic wildlife.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      No Indigenous Peoples are present at the areas of Project’s interventions. The existing flood management system of
                      the Itajaí-Açu river encompasses one dam (the North Dam) owned by the federal government and constructed in the
                      early 1990’s nearby the Laklãno Indigenous Land. Holding an area of 37,018 hectares, the Laklãno Indigenous Land
                      extends over four municipalities within the Hercílio river (a tributary of the Itajaí-Açu river) basin. It hosts a
                      population of around 3,800 inhabitants, who belong to the Xokleng and the Guarani peoples. Although part of the
                      Masterplan, this dam located in the Hercílio River is not included in the scope of the Project and has no
                      interdependencies for implementation with the works considered for Project support. It does not meet the criteria of
                      an Associated Facility either, because its construction has not been carried out contemporaneously with the Project
                      and its operation is not necessary for the project to be viable and would have been conducted even if the project
                      does not exist. There have been some past disputes between the Xokleng community and the owner of the dam (a



Public Disclosure
                      federal agency). However, SDC has recently taken the responsibility for the dam operation and engaged in fruitful
                      relationships with the Xokleng community. Agreements have been reached with the Xokleng community and are
                      being fulfilled. SDC has resumed routine maintenance and operation works on the dam.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The construction works to be financed involve excavations, movement of earth and flooding of areas where
                      previously unknown cultural heritage may be encountered and the probability of finding archaeological sites is high.
                      The documentary, bibliographic, and ethnographic analysis conducted identified the region as having high
                      archaeological potential. Indeed, there are already 2,111 archaeological sites registered by IPHAN (the federal agency
                      in charge of cultural heritage register and protection) in Santa Catarina (https://sicg.iphan.gov.br/). This potential
                      justifies the adoption of preventive and corrective measures in accordance with both ESS8 and the current Brazilian
                      legislation, which is considered able to allow the achievement of outcomes materially consistent with the objectives
                      of ESS8. Hence, the Project’s ESMF has developed guidelines for the preparation and implementation – as needed –
                      of Cultural Heritage Management Plans (CHMP). It defines the objectives of the CHMP as the establishment of
                      measures to be followed to mitigate deterioration or loss, and to preserve the tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage and especially the archaeological and historical materials that may be found during construction works. It
                      states that Contractors will be in charge of carrying out – as part or their C-ESMPs – the CHMP, which shall be made
                      up of: a) A survey and mapping of potentially relevant areas where tangible and intangible cultural heritage may be
                      found based on consultations with relevant authorities and local communities. b) A Worker’s Training Program aimed
                      at the personnel involved in the work who may eventually find themselves in front of various material remains. This
                      Program must include basic information on archaeological, paleontological and historical cultural heritage and the


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      rules on cultural heritage protection necessary for proper management of chance finds. It may comprise awareness
                      training sections for all personnel with the potential to encounter tangible or intangible cultural heritage resources
                      during their day-to-day activities and a specific cultural heritage training for those non-cultural heritage specialists
                      designated as monitors. c) An Archaeological Monitoring and Rescue Program structured based on the data obtained
                      in the previous archaeological diagnosis of the intervention area and established whenever the documentary,
                      bibliographic and ethnographic analysis carried out identifies a region as having high archaeological potential, which
                      justifies the adoption of preventive and corrective measures according to current legislation. It includes continuous
                      monitoring of the Works by a specialized technical team during the execution of earthmoving, excavation or other
                      activities that involve soil turnover, in order to identify any archaeological remains immediately and comprises: i. A
                      Chance Finds Procedure ruling that when recognized or unrecognized tangible and intangible cultural heritage are
                      found during the works, the execution of the works must be immediately halted at the specific location, and the
                      competent authorities — especially IPHAN (the federal agency responsible for the protection of cultural heritage in
                      the country) — must be notified. The area should be isolated until authorization for the resumption of activities is
                      granted by IPHAN. ii. Archaeological Rescue Procedures ruling that, upon confirmation of the presence of sites or
                      archaeological remains, a rescue and salvage process shall be started and all found assets or remains must be
                      registered, protected and transferred to officially authorized Custodians following the technical guidelines issued by
                      IPHAN. iii. An Heritage Education Program aimed at surrounding communities and educational institutions with the
                      goal of promoting the recognition and appreciation of tangible and intangible cultural heritage locally found and
                      documented through educational workshops and lectures, the production of educational and informative material,
                      the dissemination of findings (when appropriate) in public and cultural spaces and the regulations ruling on cultural
                      heritage protection, acess to cultural heritage sites and equitable sharing of benefits from cultural heritage use. d) An




Public Disclosure
                      implementation timeline and an estimate of resource needs for each cultural heritage protection measure. e) A
                      monitoring and reporting system on the performance and effectiveness of the measures taken as the progress of the
                      monitoring and rescue actions must be documented and periodically communicated to IPHAN, including information
                      on methodologies, location of findings, description of materials, and sauvage and protection measures taken. These
                      requirements are well aligned with BESF and will be incorporated in all bidding documents for hiring the contractors
                      that will implement construction works involving excavations, movement of earth, flooding or other changes in the
                      physical environment. Indeed, following BESF (as provided by Art. 216 of the Federal Constitution, Law 3,924/1961 on
                      the protection of archaeological sites, Law 9,605/1998 on the Environmental Crimes Law and specific normatives of
                      IPHAN), the Preliminary Licenses issued by the state environmental licensing agency (IMA) required for the works of
                      the Petrolândia’s flood control dam and the fluvial improvement works in the Itajaí-Mirim River mandate for the
                      carrying out of overarching Archaeological Monitoring Programs. These programs shall be structured based on the
                      data obtained from the prior archaeological diagnosis of the intervention area and require the presence of a
                      specialized technical team during the execution of earthworks, excavation, or other activities involving soil
                      disturbance, to immediately identify any archaeological remains and unrecognized cultural heritage. The progress of
                      the monitoring activities and any rescue actions must be documented and periodically communicated to IPHAN, with
                      reports that include methodologies, location of findings, description of materials, and sauvage and protection
                      measures taken. The required overarching Archaelogical Monitoring Programs encompass most of the elements of
                      the proposed CHMP – the measures for identifying cultural heritage, the Chance Finds Procedure, the Archaeological
                      Rescue Procedures, the Heritage Education Program and the monitoring and reporting system.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant



                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                      There are no Financial Intermediaries involved in Project implementation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part
                       During preparation, the Bank conducted an assessment of the aspects of the Borrower’s Environmental and Social
                       Framework that are relevant for the Project considering a) the procedures for screening, assessing and addressing
                       environmental and social risks and impacts of infrastructure works that are similar to those that will be financed by
                       the Project and b) the documentation the Borrower has prepared for the licensing process of the Petrolândia dam and
                       the dredging of the Itajai-Mirim channel (which works will be financed by the Project).
                       The overall findings of this assessment highlight that:
                       •      The State of Santa Catarina has a strong institutional capacity to enforce and comply with the robust country
                       and state legislation on the assessment of infrastructure projects whose environmental and social risks and impacts
                       are significant (substantial or high). In such cases, BESF requires an environmental and social impact assessment that
                       considers direct and indirect, synergistic and cumulative impacts conducted by independent consultancy firms, free,
                       prior and informed consultations with affected communities and other stakeholders, the issuance of technical



Public Disclosure
                       opinions by FUNAI in matters of interest of Indigenous People and by IPHAN on issues related to cultural heritage, and
                       the presentation of an environmental and social risk management plan composed by programs that comprise all
                       measures that are needed to address the risks and impacts of the project.
                       •      The use of BESF will allow the achievement of outcomes that are materially consistent with the objectives of
                       the World Bank Environmental and Social Standards that are relevant for the Project and address aspects related with:
                       the assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts; labor and working conditions,
                       protection of the work force and occupational health and safety; resource efficiency, pollution prevention and
                       hazardous and non-hazardous waste management; infrastructure design and safety, traffic and road safety,
                       community exposure to health issues and security personnel; legally protected areas of high biodiversity value;
                       protection of cultural heritage; and information disclosure and grievance redressing.
                       •      Some gap-filling measures are need to be addressed with regards to: a) the hiring of an independent and
                       qualified Panel of Experts on dam safety; b) compensation of adverse impacts of land acquisition leading to physical
                       relocation and/or economic losses; c) the hiring of an independent and qualified consultancy firm to conduct a
                       Cumulative and Synergistic Impact Assessment of the whole flood control system of the Itajaí River basin, according to
                       Terms of Reference approved by the Bank and consistent with ESS 1; d) the hiring of an consultancy or the inclusion in
                       the ToR of the hired one to conduct an Biodiversity Assessment (consistent with ESS 6) of works involving vegetation
                       suppression; and e) the establishment of a process that ensures meaningful (continuous, effective, timely, culturally
                       adequate and inclusive) dialogue and collaboration with affected communities, addresses concerns and find solutions
                       that balance local and broader needs.
                       •      The environmental and social impact assessment prepared by the Borrower to comply with BESF during the
                       licensing process of the infrastructure subprojects that will be financed by the Project cover all the aspects that are


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                   Page 21 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                       relevant under the ESF and require the preparation of a ESMPs (still under development) that encompass a broad set
                       of programs, which content can be slightly improved to address the gaps found on the overall assessment.
                       Therefore, the Project’s ESCP has incorporated some additional measures to enhance the management of
                       environmental and social risks (and the ESMPs to be prepared for all works), focusing on aspects related to dam
                       safety, resettlement processes and procedures, biodiversity conservation and stakeholder engagement.



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       There are no financing partners.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     During Project preparation, the Borrower has developed and submitted to the Bank a draft Environmental and Social
                     Management Framework (ESMF) and a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). The Borrower has also shared the
                     environmental and social studies prepared for the development of the Itajaí River Basin Disaster Risk Management Plan
                     (commissioned by JICA to independent consultancy firms) and the environmental and social documentation (EIA/RIMA)
                     previously prepared for the licensing process of the Petrolândia dam and for the fluvial improvement works in the
                     Itajaí-Mirim River. It also provide access to the Preliminary Licenses issued by IMA and its requirements and the early
                     study on land acquisition needed for those two dams (carried out in 2016).



Public Disclosure
                     The SEP and the ESMF will be publicly disclosed through SDC website prior to Appraisal and will remain under
                     consultation during 30 days.
                     As agreed in the Project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan, the Borrower will Implement the following
                     actions and material measures:
                     •        The establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU), including the designation of an E&S risk management
                     team. The PMU will be hosted in SDC and established and the staff will be appointed as set out in the Loan Agreement
                     and thereafter maintained throughout Project implementation.
                     •        The hiring of a supervision consultancy staffed with qualified environmental and social risk management
                     specialists.
                     •        The hiring of the Independent Panel on dam safety and the implementation of the Dam Safety Action Plan.
                     •        The operationalization of SDC’s Setoral Ombudsman Office as the Project's Grievance Mechanism no later 30
                     days after the Project’s effectiveness.
                     •        The public disclosure on SDC’s website of the post-consultation versions of the SEP and the ESMF within 30
                     days after the Project’s effective date.
                     •        The preparation and submission to the Bank no objection of Resettlement Framework (RF) within 30 days after
                     the Project’s effective date.
                     •        The public disclosure of the no-objected RF within 60 days after the Project’s effective date.
                     •        The hiring of an consultancy to conduct an Biodiversity Assessment (consistent with ESS 6) of works involving
                     vegetation suppression within 60 days after the Project’s effective date.
                     •        The submission to the World Bank of a “de facto report” on the 10 processes of land acquisition already
                     conducted according to the country’s law for the site of the Petrolândia dam (including information on the current


                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                 Page 22 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     living conditions of the affected people – as much as feasible) within 30 days after the Project’s Effective date and agree
                     on taking corrective measures (as needed).
                     •        The submission to the World Bank for review and no objection of all ESIA, ESMP, environmental licenses issued
                     by IMA, and Resettlement Plans (RP), and supplementary assessments and plans not required under the national law
                     but required by the ESSs prior to the calls for proposals for these project-supported activities.
                     •        The oversight of the implementation by the contractors of the material measures needed to avoid, minimize
                     and mitigate adverse environmental and social impacts of the works they are in charge of as well as of the operation of
                     channels of communication and grievance redressing accessible to communities located nearby their work-sites and
                     support areas.
                     •        The submission to the World Bank of biannual Progress Reports considering the Project’s environmental and
                     social performance.
                     •        The timely report of OHS-related accidents in working places, SEA/SH incidents, and accidents and incidents
                     that may harm the environment and human populations associated with project-supported activities.
                     The World Bank will conduct routine biannual implementation support missions throughout the Project’s life cycle. Due
                     diligence field-site visits will be conducted as needed to ensure proper management of environmental and social risks
                     of the large infrastructure works.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank


Public Disclosure
                      Task Team Leader:      Jack Campbell                           Title:          Lead Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                 jcampbell2@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Maria Catalina Ramirez                  Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                 mramirez1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Flood Infrastructure And Resilience Management Project (P508221)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Jack Campbell, Maria Catalina Ramirez

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Ana Carolina Rodrigues Velloso Cordeiro

                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa




Public Disclosure




                    Oct 23, 2025                                                                                    Page 24 of 24
