Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDDC01187




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            P508689                      Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for
AFRICA, EASTERN AND                                         Africa
SOUTHERN AFRICA
Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
29-May-2025                    15-Sep-2025                  Agriculture and Food
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             International Centre of      International Centre of
Financing (IPF)                Insect Physiology and        Insect Physiology and
                               Ecology                      Ecology

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen innovation capacities of relevant African stakeholders for enhanced use of climate information services
and adoption of validated climate-smart and nutrition-sensitive agriculture technologies in IDA-eligible countries in
Africa.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   To be decided
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             To be decided

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        100.00

  Total Financing                                                                                             100.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                100.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                100.00

                                                                                                                   Page 1
      The World Bank
      Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)


       IDA Grant                                                                                                  100.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                    Concept Review Decision
Moderate                                                        The review did authorize the preparation to continue




A. Introduction and Context

Regional Context

1. The livelihoods of African agricultural producers are threatened by climate change. Agriculture is vital to Africa's
   economy and livelihoods, employing 52% of sub-Saharan Africa's workforce and contributing significantly to GDP.
   However, the sector is stagnating, with minimal growth and increasing vulnerability to climate change. Climate
   change reduces crop yields and livestock productivity, with droughts, floods, and storms causing significant
   agricultural damage. By 2050, climate change could reduce crop yields by 8% on average and cost African nations
   USD 50 billion annually.
2. Women farmers are especially vulnerable to climate change impacts. Agriculture is an important livelihood source
   for women throughout sub-Saharan Africa; however, the productivity of women farmers consistently lags that of
   men farmers, due to lower access to land, improved technologies, inputs, and credit, among others.
3. At a time when the number of people to feed will almost double by 2050 to over 2 billion, climate change poses
   a serious threat to food production, in a continent where food and nutrition insecurity is already alarming. Almost
   two-thirds of the African population is food insecure, and more than 140 million people face acute food insecurity.
   The increased frequency of climate-induced production shocks has made it increasingly difficult to maintain positive
   growth in per capita food production over the longer term.
4. Strengthening the productivity and resilience of African agriculture will depend critically on the ability of
   governments and their partners to bring science and innovation to the forefront of the development agenda.
   Incentives, knowledge, science, and finance will all need to play a role to improve the climate resilience of
   production systems, build efficient value chains, facilitate internal and external trade, and boost the purchasing
   power of the most vulnerable households.
5. As countries contemplate a shift towards climate-smart investments, investing in agricultural research and skills
   is more critical than ever. Investing in research and development (R&D) is highly effective at reducing poverty and
   hunger, yet it is severely underfunded across the continent. Similarly, investing in human capital in the agrifood
   sector can significantly enhance resilience and growth. Returns to tertiary education are higher in sub-Saharan
   Africa than anywhere else globally, but the share of the population with completed tertiary education is very low,
   and enrollment in STEM disciplines is limited. Addressing these gaps is crucial for building a resilient and productive
   agricultural sector in Africa.



                                                                                                                       Page 2
      The World Bank
      Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)


Sectoral and Institutional Context

6. The ongoing Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa Project (AICCRA, P173398) constitutes
   one of the World Bank’s flagship initiatives for supporting climate change research and innovation in Africa’s
   agrifood systems. The Project, supported by an original IDA grant of USD 60 million (2020) and an Additional
   Financing (AF) of USD 40 million (2024), is built around a strong partnership with the Consultative Group for
   International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and aims to strengthen the capacity of governments, regional
   organizations, farmers and other relevant stakeholders and enhance access to and use of climate information
   services and validated climate-smart agriculture technologies in IDA-eligible countries in Africa.
7. CGIAR is the world leader in international agriculture research on climate change adaptation. CGIAR specializes
   in “translational research,” adapting knowledge produced through basic research so it can be applied in specific
   contexts. CGIAR does this by partnering with regional organizations, national research institutions, civil society
   organizations, and private firms and individuals. The partnerships it has forged have been instrumental in the
   development, adaptation, and dissemination of improved agricultural technologies.
8. AICCRA is contributing to filling the “missing middle” between CGIAR and regional and national programs in
   Africa. AICCRA is playing a catalytic role in strengthening the agriculture research architecture in Africa, supporting
   interactions between CGIAR Centers and regional and national programs. By fostering partnerships between CGIAR
   and local research institutes, universities, civil society organizations, farmer organizations, and private sector,
   AICCRA is filling a critical gap and making cutting-edge climate research and innovation available to National
   Agricultural Research Systems (NARSs) and other key stakeholders in Africa.
9. Though AICCRA, regional and national-level stakeholders are being empowered to take climate-smart agriculture
   (CSA) innovations to scale. AICCRA is facilitating the development of Climate Information Services (CIS) and
   promoting the adoption of CSA solutions across sub-regions within Africa extremely vulnerable to climate change.
   The project is also supporting on-the-ground activities in selected countries in Western, Eastern and Southern Africa
   where CGIAR science has the greatest chance of success in delivering catalytic results, which can be adopted by
   other countries in the region. Since 2020, AICCRA and its AF have provided access to enhanced CIS and validated
   CSA technologies to more than 7 million beneficiaries, and contributed to improving the resilience to climate risks
   of more than 21 million beneficiaries.
10. The proposed AICCRA III Project will build on the successes of AICCRA, to promote resilience to climate change
    and improved food and nutrition security throughout the continent. The proposed Project is expected to continue
    supporting critical knowledge creation and capacity building activities and facilitating the development of CIS and
    promoting the adoption of CSA technologies and practices. I will also strengthen the focus on nutrition-smart
    agriculture (NSmartAg) and on human capital development for job generation in the continent.

Relationship to CPF

11. The proposed AICCRA III Project is well aligned with World Bank regional strategies. AICCRA III will directly support
    the Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy Update (2021-2023). It will contribute to the World Bank Group
    Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence 2020–2025, the World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan 2021-
    2025 and the World Bank Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan (2020). AICCRA III’s work on increasing
    economic opportunities for women aligns with the goals of the new WBG Gender Strategy 24-30.
12. AICCRA III will build upon the achievements of past and current engagements by the World Bank in Africa. The
    design of AICCRA III incorporates lessons learned from other World Bank initiatives in the region, including the West


                                                                                                                       Page 3
        The World Bank
        Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)


    Africa Agricultural Productivity Programs (WAAPP), the Great Green Wall initiative (GGW), the Sahel Irrigation
    Initiative Support Project (SIIP), and the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS).
13. AICCRA III will complement and add value to ongoing World Bank lending operations in Africa. Noteworthy among
    these operations are the West Africa Food System Resilience Program (FSRP) MPA and the Eastern and Southern
    African FSRP, approved in November 2021 and June 2022, respectively. AICCRA III will complement the FSRPs by
    serving as a conduit for the latest international agricultural research and innovations generated by CGIAR Centers.
14. As a regional project, AICCRA III will continue to help advance the regional integration agenda. By supporting
    activities that will be implemented at sub-regional level through multi-actor networks, AICCRA III will support spill-
    over effects and the creation of global public goods, that could not be achieved by engaging solely with individual
    partners at country level. On the research supply side, working at regional level justifies investment in infrastructure
    and personnel at scales that surpass minimum critical mass and allow economies of scale to be captured. On the
    research demand side, working at regional level facilitates the flow of innovations across national borders and
    enhances learning effects, increasing the number of adopters and amplifying the benefits.
15. Paris Alignment: The operation, as of this stage, can be considered as fully aligned with the goals of the Paris
    Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. Considering that all project activities either constitute adaptation
    options, or alternatively facilitate and enable adaptation, those activities are expected to significantly reduce risks
    from climate hazards both in the target countries, but also with significant spill-over effects in the whole region. On
    mitigation, none of the activities are significant greenhouse gas (GHG) emitters, and they otherwise do not expect
    to have a negative impact on any of the target countries’ low- GHG emissions pathways.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
To strengthen innovation capacities of relevant African stakeholders for enhanced use of climate information services
and adoption of validated climate-smart and nutrition-smart agriculture technologies in IDA-eligible countries in Africa.

 Key Results (From PCN)

The PDO will be measured by the following PDO indicators, to be refined during project preparation:

    •     Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (disaggregated by women, youth, people from traditional
          local communities)
    •     Beneficiaries using enhanced climate information services and climate- and nutrition-smart agriculture
          technologies and practices (disaggregated by women, youth, people from traditional local communities, and
          people using digitally enabled services)
    •     Enhanced climate information services and/or validated climate-smart agriculture technologies originating in
          one sub-Saharan African country increasingly made accessible in other sub-Saharan African countries
    •     Share of national and regional students supported by the Project who are employed/in training in an African
          institution within 6 months of graduation (disaggregated by women, youth, people from traditional local
          communities)
    •     People benefiting from actions to advance gender equality, and actions that expand and enable economic
          opportunities (disaggregated by women, youth, people from traditional local communities)


D. Concept Description

                                                                                                                         Page 4
       The World Bank
       Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)




Description

16. The proposed Project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF), comprising an IDA grant of US$100 million to be
    implemented over a six-year period. AICCRA III builds on successive iterations of the well-established AICCRA program
    in Africa. As such, the Project will target the same six focus countries as the parent project – Zambia, Kenya, Ethiopia,
    Ghana, Senegal and Mali. These six target countries were selected to represent three agro-ecological zones in Africa,
    among the most vulnerable in the world to the impacts of climate change: Western African and Sahelian drylands,
    Eastern African dry lowlands to highlands, and Southern African drylands. Compared to AICCRA and its AF, AICCRA III
    will seek to further increase spillover impacts on additional countries in Africa.
17. AICCRA III will leverage the historical partnership with CGIAR centers to support a further move of the model
    towards a project in Africa for Africa by Africa. Thanks to the strong alliance with the CGIAR system, AICCRA and its
    AF have been instrumental in spurring innovation and improving the capacity to generate and transfer knowledge,
    decision-making tools, and validated climate-smart agriculture (CSA) technologies in Africa. They have also created a
    strong network of partners and stakeholders across the continent (including meteorological services, research
    institutes, agriculture extension agencies, universities, among others), whose role and leadership has been
    increasingly important through implementation. The natural next step in the physiologic evolution of the AICCRA
    program is to further strengthen the ownership and role of African organizations, to enhance the Africa-centric focus
    of the Project. As such, while maintaining the strategic partnership with Africa- based CGIAR centers, AICCRA III will
    move implementation to leading African research institutions, leveraging their regional capacities and contributing to
    strengthening regional systems.
18. AICCRA III will build on AICCRA’s technical legacy, further refining the focus of supported activities. AICCRA III will
    continue to emphasize the generation and sharing of knowledge and tools on CSA and climate-information services
    (CIS), the creation of partnerships for delivery of climate-smart innovations, and the work on the ground to ensure
    that access to CSA and CIS translates into effective use by the ultimate beneficiaries. The Project will also retain the
    strong focus on mainstreaming gender and social inclusion considerations, as well as on leveraging digital technologies
    and innovative solutions across components. At the same time, AICCRA III will complement efforts to promote CSA
    and CIS with a new emphasis on improved nutrition as a driver of climate resilience, as well as on building skills and
    human capital for the creation of green jobs in Africa for African youth. Within this framework, a particular attention
    will be devoted to the selectivity of supported interventions, prioritizing building climate resilience in value chains that
    are key for regional food and nutrition security and identifying opportunities for scaling up spillover effects through
    other projects within the WBG portfolio.
19. AICCRA III will consist of five components, as detailed below. All activities will be undertaken for the benefit of IDA-
    eligible sub-Saharan African countries.


Component 1: Knowledge generation and sharing
20. This component will focus on generating and sharing scientifically rigorous knowledge and tools to advance
    sustainable agricultural practices, with a particular emphasis on CSA, CIS, and NSmartAg. By addressing critical gaps
    in agricultural climate and soil health services, this component will promote the development and dissemination of
    innovations that target resilience and enhanced food and nutrition security for the most vulnerable populations. The
    component will prioritize gender-sensitive innovations and will integrate approaches that promote youth employment
    and the adoption of digital agriculture technologies. This component will strengthen the foundation for sustainable,
    climate-resilient agricultural systems by emphasizing inclusivity and leveraging science and technology.


                                                                                                                           Page 5
       The World Bank
       Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)


21. All activities will share the goal of achieving enhanced resilience, productivity, and sustainability in agricultural
    systems. Their component will aim to improve access to and the use of climate- and nutrition-smart knowledge, tools,
    and resources, equipping stakeholders with the means to drive meaningful change. A key focus will be on
    strengthening the capacities of farmers, extension agents, and other stakeholders to adopt evidence-based, inclusive
    practices that foster long-term impact. Tailored CSA bundles, soil health improvements, and diversified agrifood
    systems are central to advancing climate adaptation and mitigation. Furthermore, these initiatives will prioritize
    increasing gender equity, youth participation, and job creation by promoting inclusive agricultural technologies and
    innovations. Across all activities, there will be a strong emphasis on digital innovation and data-driven solutions,
    including by developing centralized hubs or platforms for knowledge sharing, enhancing CIS, and creating tools for
    real-time data such as climate forecasts, pest alerts, and crop recommendations.
Component 2: Regional capacity strengthening
22. This component will strengthen the capacities of key regional and national institutions in Sub-Saharan Africa to
    anticipate climate impacts, adopt adaptive measures, and identify agricultural innovations for climate mitigation.
    By leveraging digital tools across the research-to-development spectrum, the component will aim to empower
    institutions to drive climate-smart agriculture, ensuring resilience and sustainability in agricultural systems while
    addressing the needs of vulnerable populations. The component will also emphasize opportunities to streamline
    nutrition considerations into research and development and delivery methods, using gender-sensitive and socially
    inclusive approaches.
23. Capacity-building initiatives will target regional and national institutions to improve CSA, climate risk management,
    and resilience, as well as to strengthen institutional frameworks and promote policy coherence. Training programs
    will focus on enhancing sub-seasonal and seasonal forecasting, adaptive planning, pest and disease management,
    early warning systems, and integrating nutrition into agricultural practices. Furthermore, specific activities will also
    foster cross-country knowledge-sharing, as well as the creation of public-private partnerships.


Component 3: Scaling-up inclusive uptake
24. This component will support testing, validation and identification of scaling-pathways of CSA and NSmartAg
    technologies and practices from research stations to farmers’ fields. The component will improve access by farmers
    and other value chain actors to climate-informed and nutrition-sensitive agricultural advisory services that can inform
    decision-making about choice of technology/innovation and enterprise management. Targeted outreach will prioritize
    smaller subsistence farmers, traditional local communities, and marginalized social groups, including women, youth,
    and persons with disabilities. To ensure adequate scale-up, the component will build linkages with other WBG
    operations in the region, and leverage private sector financing to accelerate CSA and NSmartAg adoption.
25. The component will aim to increase the adoption of CSA, NSmartAg, and CIS through tailored advisories and digital
    tools. Activities will prioritize strengthening value chains and empowering women and youth to actively participate in
    agriculture while improving access to finance, high-quality inputs, and scalable CSA and NSmartAg technologies and
    practices. Efforts will focus on enhancing climate resilience, soil health, and agricultural productivity. By promoting
    inclusive, sustainable agricultural systems supported by community-led scaling, private-sector engagement, and
    evidence-based decision-making, initiatives will aim drive long-term resilience and equity in agriculture across Africa.


Component 4: Boosting human capital and innovation
26. This component will work towards enhancing human capital and accelerating research and innovation capacity in
    the agriculture and food sector, to improve job opportunities on the African continent. Focus areas will include (i)

                                                                                                                        Page 6
       The World Bank
       Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)


    digital, (ii) agriculture, with emphasis on food and nutritional security, (iii) water, and (iv) energy. The component will
    partner with leading regional education institutions and programs (“lighthouses”) to increase opportunities in Master,
    PhD, postdoctoral, executive, and vocational education for competitively selected youth from the region. The
    establishment of digital farming schools will further enhance access to training and tools. Furthermore, lighthouses
    will provide technical assistance to replicate incubator and accelerator programs to support entrepreneurship and
    contribute to the generation and dissemination of climate- and nutrition-smart innovation in agriculture and food.
27. Initiatives will aim to foster a skilled, inclusive workforce and drive transformative agricultural solutions, retaining
    talent in sub-Saharan African countries to contribute to their national public/private sector development. The
    component will focus on generating incentives for youth to remain in Africa, for instance by fostering the
    establishment of scholarship schemes, research grants, internships, fellowships at public and private institutions on
    the continent. Special consideration and support will be given to underserved social groups such as young female
    innovators, youth from traditional local communities, and persons with disabilities.


Component 5: Project management
28. This component will support the day-to-day implementation, coordination, supervision and overall communication
    and management of project activities, including (i) project management and coordination, including training for
    project staff on technical and on social, environmental, and fiduciary issues; (ii) monitoring, evaluation, and impact
    assessment of project activities, including beneficiary satisfaction surveys and impact evaluation; (iii) fiduciary costs,
    including audits; (iv) implementation, monitoring, and reporting of Environmental and Social Management.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                       Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




The environmental risks of the project are assessed as moderate due to the small-scale and low-complexity nature of
activities, which are not expected to cause significant adverse effects on the environment, human health, or safety through
pollution of air, soil, and water. Activities such as small-scale testing and validation of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and
NSmartAg technologies will occur in research stations and farmers’ fields. Risks such as pollution and impacts on
biodiversity and flora and fauna are also expected to be minimal, as these will be limited to pilot demonstration sites.
Similarly, risks related to the introduction of invasive species and impacts on biodiversity are negligible, as activities will


                                                                                                                          Page 7
       The World Bank
       Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)


be conducted in controlled environments. Social risks are also rated moderate due to their low magnitude and manageable
scale, provided adequate mitigation measures are implemented. Key social risks include occupational health and safety
concerns, particularly from pesticide use, and the potential exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, including
women, from project benefits. Forced and child labor risks are low, given that project workers are primarily skilled
professionals such as scientists and researchers, although the use of family labor by farmers cannot be entirely ruled out.
The risk of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEA/SH) is considered low. A negative list will ensure the exclusion
of large-scale activities with significant environmental and social (E&S) impacts. This will include that all activities that
could lead to significant impacts on land acquisition, restrictions on land use, involuntary resettlement, or economic or
physical displacement, cultural heritage, land degradation and biodiversity loss etc will not be financed. The project will
build on the extensive experience and resources from earlier AICCRA initiatives, including decision-making tools and an
Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Guide with screening tools, templates for Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs), and E&S checklists. These resources will be customized and updated for AICCRA III, ensuring
effective E&S risk management. Each grant recipient will develop an Environmental and Social Management System
(ESMS) based on the ESRM Guide, which will include ESMPs, E&S Procedures and protocols for assessing and mitigating
risks; Code of Conduct and Grievance Mechanism for Workers and procedures for Occupational Health and Safety, Waste
Management, Pest Management and Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Grievance Mechanism. These measures will be
proportional to the nature and scale of financed works. This approach, grounded in lessons from earlier AICCRA projects,
provides a strong foundation for replicating good practices under AICCRA III and effectively managing moderate E&S risks.
Icipe will customize and adopt an Environment and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Guide and a Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP) to be disclosed prior to project appraisal.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Viviana Maria Eugenia Perego
   Senior Agriculture Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology
  Abdou Tenkouano
  Director General
  atenkouano@icipe.org

 Implementing Agencies
  International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology
  Abdou Tenkouano
  Director General
  atenkouano@icipe.org

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                                                                                                                        Page 8
     The World Bank
     Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa(P508689)



The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Viviana Maria Eugenia Perego

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Elhadji Adama Toure                03-Dec-2024

Country Director:                       Boutheina Guermazi                 17-Dec-2024




                                                                                         Page 9
