Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Program Information Document (PID)


                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Feb-2025 | Report No: PIDPC00170




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)      Region                        Operation ID                  Operation Name
Angola, Angola, Angola,
Angola, Angola, Botswana,
Burundi, Burundi, Burundi,
Comoros, Comoros,
Comoros, Congo,
Democratic Republic of,
Congo, Democratic
Republic of, Eswatini,
Eswatini, Ethiopia,
                                                                                          Sustainable Rural Water
Ethiopia, Kenya, Kenya,       EASTERN AND SOUTHERN
                                                            P508698                       Supply and Sanitation
Kenya, Kenya, Lesotho,        AFRICA
                                                                                          Program Phase 2
Madagascar, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mozambique,
Mozambique, Sao Tome
and Principe, Sao Tome
and Principe, Somalia,
South Sudan, South Sudan,
Tanzania, Tanzania,
Tanzania, Zambia, Zambia,
Zambia
Financing Instrument          Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                              12-May-2025                   15-Sep-2025                   Water
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
Ministry of Finance           Ministry of Water

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The program development objective is to increase and sustain access to at least basic water supply, sanitation and
hygiene services in all rural districts.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development



                                                                                                                     Page 1
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)



 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                                Yes
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                          Yes

 SUMMARY
    Government program Cost                                                                                                        6,465.49

    Total Operation Cost                                                                                                                260.00
      Total Program Cost                                                                                                                240.00
      IPF Component                                                                                                                      20.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                                     260.00

    Financing Gap                                                                                                                         0.00

 FINANCING
    Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                                    200.00
      World Bank Lending                                                                                                                200.00
    Total Government Contribution                                                                                                        60.00


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.       Economy. Tanzania’s economy has shown consistent growth, with real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increasing
by 5.2 percent in 20231, reflecting a recovery from recent global challenges. Despite this economic momentum, poverty
reduction remains slow, particularly in rural areas where approximately 65 percent of Tanzanians reside and are
dependent on agriculture and natural resources. According to the recent census, the current population is now 61.7 million
and is forecast to double by 20442. Tanzania’s expanding population has resulted in the absolute number of people under




1 World Bank. 2024. Tanzania Economic Update 2024.

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099031124044543127/pdf/P1796101f356d10fa1b47215b969e1205b2.pdf
2 Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics. 2022. Population and Housing Census. https://www.nbs.go.tz/uploads/statistics/documents/sw-

1720088450-2022%20PHC%20Initial%20Results%20-%20English.pdf

                                                                                                                                           Page 2
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)


the poverty line increasing since 2018, to reach 15 million in 20223. Inadequate WASH access costs Tanzania an estimated
3.2 percent of its 2022 GDP4.
2.       Health. Although Tanzania’s under-five mortality rate has declined steeply from 141 per 1,000 live births in 1990,
to 43 per 1,000 live births in 2022, chronic undernutrition and stunting remain critical health issues, with significant
regional disparities5. Stunted children face increased susceptibility to disease and diminished cognitive and educational
outcomes. Environmental factors such as drinking water quality, poor sanitation, and hygienic practices significantly
contribute to poor nutritional status and stunting in children under five6. Tanzania regularly suffers from cholera linked to
poor Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) conditions, including an ongoing outbreak since 1 January 2024 affecting 23
regions, with 6,143 cases and 100 deaths7.
3.       Gender disparities persist in labor force participation and education and in rural areas, where women and girls
often bear the responsibility of water collection form distant or non-functional sources. Improving sanitation facilities,
particularly in schools, is crucial for enhancing female education and reducing gender-based violence. It is common for
girls to miss school due to insufficient access to menstrual hygiene facilities and menstrual materials at schools8.
4.       Climate. In 2022, Tanzania ranked 150th out of 191 countries on readiness to cope with climate change, and it is
the 47th most vulnerable country to climate change, with a corresponding direct impact on the economy. Projections
indicate that inaction on climate change could lead to a 4 percent reduction in real GDP by 20509. Climate challenges
include prolonged droughts, severe storms, floods, and rising temperatures. Addressing these challenges requires
strengthening local and national institutions to plan and implement interventions that support resilience and sustainable
resource use. Ensuring adequate water resources for competing needs requires attention, as renewable freshwater
resources (per capita) have been roughly halved over the last 25 years and are increasingly variable due to climate change.
5.       Increasing and sustaining access to rural water supply and improving sanitation and hygiene practices is a high
priority for the GoT. The GoT is committed to achieving universal access to water and sanitation by 2025 through the
Tanzania Development Vision.


 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program

6.      Public expenditure on Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) in Tanzania is low, with a heavy reliance on donor
funding, unequal allocation of funds, and poor sustainability and efficiency of services. Although the current capital
expenditure (CAPEX) of approximately US$218 million annually is theoretically sufficient to achieve universal basic access
to WASH, the progress required to meet the targets by 2030 is significantly higher. The allocation of capital budgets to
Local Government Authorities (LGAs) has favored those with higher access, exacerbating inequality in WASH access.
Despite a more than three-fold increase in the number of sustainably managed water points under the SRWSS,
sustainability is a key issue, impacting infrastructure sustainability and climate resilience.
7.      Private sector capital mobilization remains a significant challenge for scaling up WASH access in Tanzania,
particularly in rural areas. Historically, funding for water supply and sanitation services in rural areas has been insufficient,
with most funds directed towards urban areas. To bridge the financing gap in the sector, there is a need to unlock private

3 World Bank. 2024. Tanzania Economic Update 2024.

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099031124044543127/pdf/P1796101f356d10fa1b47215b969e1205b2.pdf
4 World Bank. 2024. Country Partnership Framework FY25 – 28.

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099061724153527007/pdf/BOSIB193d9b4f005a1a0c01407ba1414034.pdf
5 Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics. 2022. Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria Indicator Survey
6 Springer Nature. 2017. Factors influencing stunting among children in rural Tanzania: an agro-climatic zone perspective
7 World Health Organization. October 2024. Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and other Emergencies.
8 World Bank Group. 2022. Tanzania Gender Assessment
9 World Bank Group. 2024. Tanzania Country Climate and Development Report (Draft). Washington, D.C.



                                                                                                                            Page 3
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)


 financing. The government has initiated sector reforms to unlock additional funding, and to strengthen regulation and
 support private sector engagement, but further reform is required.
 8.       The Government of Tanzania (GoT) has implemented the Water Sector Development Program (WSDP) to
 address these challenges. The third phase of the program, WSDP III (2022-2026), aims to strengthen sector institutions
 for integrated water resources management and improve access to water supply and sanitation services. The Ministry of
 Water (MoW) is responsible for overall sector coordination and oversight, while the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
 Agency (RUWASA) focuses on rural water supply and sanitation projects. The Ministry of Health (MoH) and the Ministry
 of Education, Science, and Technology (MoEST) coordinate WASH activities in health care facilities and schools,
 respectively. Basin Water Boards manage water sources within their basins, and LGAs lead and coordinate WASH efforts
 at the district level.
 9.       Despite underperformance in water sector spending under WSDP II (2016-2022), positive results were achieved
 with the support of the Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program (SRWSSP). RUWASA was established to
 monitor and invest in the rural water sector, leading to a significant increase in functional rural water points and improved
 access to water and sanitation for millions of people. The SRWSSP also improved WASH access in primary schools and
 health care facilities and encouraged private sector involvement. However, limited private sector investment has been
 observed despite a conducive legislative framework and government commitment. Progress under WSDP III continues,
 with enhanced access to clean water and more reliable water distribution, although challenges remain in water quality
 and resource management. The proposed program aims to take a holistic approach to improving WASH services,
 strengthening governance, and engaging the private sector for sustainable solutions.

  Relationship to CAS/CPF

10.      The operation is aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Tanzania FY25 – 29.
The operation supports meeting the CPF’s goal “to help Tanzania achieve more inclusive, private sector-led, and resilient
growth during FY25–29 and beyond”. Specifically, the Program will support the achievement of:
 a) Higher Level Objective 1 (HLO1) People: enhanced human capital to boost labor productivity, through increasing
     access to education, by tackling poor attendance due to lack of safe and clean WASH facilities at schools under
     Objective 1, through improving access to good-quality health care services by better WASH services improving
     infection prevention control and attendance, and through expanding access to at least basic WASH services under
     Objective 3;
 b) HL02 Prosperity/Infrastructure/Digital: catalyzing private sector-led growth, through improving access to and
     mobilizing private finance for the WASH sector under Objective 5; and
 c) HL03 Planet: enhancing resilience to shocks and climate impacts, through promoting climate-resilient and low-carbon
     WASH infrastructure and systems under Objective 9.

   Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

11.      Achieving SDGs 6.1 and 6.2 for universal water and sanitation access in the Africa East (AFE) region requires a
long-term vision and a coordinated approach to mobilize finance and leverage implementation capacity. The proposed
Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) aims to accelerate investment in climate-resilient water and sanitation
infrastructure, mobilize development partners around a long-term vision considering climate change resilience, and enable
access to private sector expertise and finance. Through regional phases and partnerships, the MPA will facilitate knowledge
transfer and regional benchmarking among AFE countries.



                                                                                                                         Page 4
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)


12.        The WASH MPA will shift from a project-by-project approach to a systems change approach, promoting
flexibility, streamlined processes, and phased implementation. This regional instrument will allow for agile
implementation and reduce transaction costs in WASH interventions. By engaging with other Global Practices (GPs) within
respective Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs), the MPA will focus on key areas such as climate change, urban
management, health, education, renewable energy, and governance, ensuring strong synergies between different
interventions.
13.        The SRWSSP 2 Program aligns with the World Bank's mission to end extreme poverty and boost shared
prosperity by promoting sustainability, inclusion, and resilience. Additionally, the Program is aligned to the World Bank’s
Africa East Regional commitment to accelerate universal access to safely managed WSS in the region by investments in
improved WSS. The Program for Results (PforR) instrument, used in Tanzania, has proven effective in creating new incentive
frameworks for local institutions and service providers. Investment Project Financing (IPF) is identified as the best
instrument for providing technical capacity strengthening and PforR delivery support. Global and national PforR experience
shows that the results-based approach is more effective when complemented by substantial technical assistance to address
system, capability, and procedural weaknesses.

  C. Program Development Objective(s) (b) and PDO Level Results Indicators

   Program Development Objective(s)


  The program development objective is to increase and sustain access to at least basic water supply, sanitation and
  hygiene services in all rural districts


  PDO Level Results Indicators

 14.      The PDO indicators are:
       a. People provided with at least basic access to water supply services (percentage of which at least basic,
          disaggregated by gender, urban-rural)10
       b. People provided with at least basic access to sanitation services (percentage of which at least basic, disaggregated
          by gender, urban-rural)11
       c. People provided with at least basic access to hygiene services (disaggregated by gender, urban-rural)12
       d. Proportion of rural water schemes sustainably functioning
       e. USD (million dollars) of non-public financing mobilized to provide WASH services in rural areas



 10 Definition based on standards set by the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (JMP). The

 definition for at least basic Drinking Water Services: People using improved sources of drinking water that require no more than 30 minutes per trip
 to collect water are classified as having at least basic drinking water services. An improved drinking-water source is constructed to be protected
 from outside contamination, especially fecal matter. Improved sources include piped water, public taps, boreholes, and protected dug wells or
 springs
 11 Definition based on standards set by the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (JMP). Basic

 Sanitation Services: People using an improved sanitation facility that is not shared with other households are classified as having at least basic
 sanitation services. Improved sanitation facilities hygienically separate excreta from human contact through the use of flushing to piped sewer
 systems, septic tanks, or pit latrines, along with improved pit latrines or composting toilets.
 12 Definition based on standards set by the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (JMP). At least

 basic hygiene is having an on-plot handwashing facility with water and soap available.

                                                                                                                                                Page 5
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)


 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary

15.      Program boundaries. The Program will support WSDP III and the GoT’s successor program in 137 district councils
in 25 regions13 over a 5-year period, as shown in Table 1 below. The Program will use a hybrid design with a PforR
component to support all five components of WSDP III through four results areas focusing on: 1. increasing access to and
sustainability of at least basic rural WASH services; 2. ensuring climate resilient water resources management; 3. improving
policy, institutions and regulation for strengthened service delivery; and 4. maximizing financing for development,
including the use of private investment. An IPF component will provide TA, capacity development, and program delivery
support to key implementing agencies to assist them in achieving the Program results. Excluded activities are urban water
and sanitation infrastructure. Table 1 below provides a summary of the WSDP III program and the slice of WSDP III to be
supported by the Program.

                                                      Table 1: WSDP III and Program Alignment

                    Government program                           Program supported by the PforR                    Reasons for non-
                                                                 (PforR Program)                                   alignment


                                                                 To increase and sustain access to at              Objectives are aligned, but
                    Strengthen sector institutions
                                                                 least basic water supply, sanitation              more focused on basic
                    for integrated water resources
                                                                 and hygiene services in all villages              WASH services
 Objective          management and improved
                                                                 and through strengthening the
                    access to water supply and
                                                                 capacity of selected sector
                    sanitation services
                                                                 institutions.
                                                                                                                   WSDP III ends in 2026,
                                                                                                                   while the PforR program
 Duration           2022-2026                                    2025-2030                                         continues until 2030 (a
                                                                                                                   successor program will be
                                                                                                                   supported)
                                                                                                                   Priority engagement for
 Geographic         Nationwide (31 regions including                                                               the Bank, focusing on
                                                                 25 regions including 137 districts
 coverage           184 districts)                                                                                 rural areas

 Results                                                         Four results areas supporting all five            Aligned
                    Five components
 areas                                                           WSDP III components




13 137 district councils include all LGAs in all regions in Mainland Tanzania with the exception of the following 47 LGAs, namely: Arusha CC, Babati

TC, Bariadi TC, Bukoba MC, Bunda TC, Dodoma CC, Geita TC, Handeni TC, Dar es Salaam CC, Ilemela MC , Iringa MC, Kahama MC, Kasulu TC, Kibaha
TC, Kigamboni MC, Kigoma/Ujiji MC, Ifakara TC ,Kinondoi MC, Kondoa TC, Korogwe TC, Lindi MC, Masasi TC, Makambako TC, Mbeya CC, Mbinga TC,
Mbulu TC, Tunduma TC, Morogoro MC, Moshi MC, Mpanda MC, Mtwara Mikindani MC, Mafinga TC, Musoma MC, Nanyamba TC, Newala TC,
Njombe TC, Mwanza CC, Nzega TC, Singida MC, Shinyanga MC, Songea MC, Sumbawanga MC, Tabora MC, Tanga CC, Tarime TC, Temeke MC, and
Ubungo MC

                                                                                                                                                  Page 6
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)


                                                                                                Aligned with Bank funding
 Financing       US$6.5 billion                       US$ 260 million                           priorities



16.    The PforR cost is US$260 million, which includes a government contribution of US$60 million and an IDA financing
of US$200 million. The IPF component consists of US$ 20 million in IDA credit.

 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           TBD
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component

17.      The potential environmental and social risks that are associated with this Program include: (i) health and safety
risks to workers, particularly those related to traffic safety and the risk of being struck by moving machinery; (ii) limited
air emissions and noise from drilling machinery and transportation; and (iii) challenges in managing construction waste.
Additionally, some technical assistance activities, such as updating IWRM plans, may introduce downstream
environmental and social risks, including; (iv) risks related to changed land use and (v) potential impacts on marine
biodiversity. The moderate risk rating is deemed appropriate at this stage, as the risks and impacts are likely to be
predictable, temporary, and/or reversible.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Ruth Jane Kennedy-Walker
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Toyoko Kodama
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance




                                                                                                                        Page 7
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase 2(P508698)


Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Water
 Mashaka Sitta
 Program Coordinator
 mashaka.ndullu@maji.go.tz

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
finalizing the document.




                                                                                                            Page 8
