Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01459




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                    Operation Name
Ethiopia                       P508364                         Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable
                                                               Production (CRISP)
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date        Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           02-Feb-2026                     24-Apr-2026                    Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
Investment Project             The Federal Democratic          Ministry of Irrigation and
Financing (IPF)                Republic of Ethiopia            Lowlands

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve access to resilient irrigation services in selected areas in Ethiopia.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                               350.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                    350.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                     200.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                    200.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                                   200.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                         Page 1



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


       Other Sources                                                                                                                     150.00
           FRANCE: French Agency for Development                                                                                           50.00
           International Fund for Agriculture Development                                                                                100.00




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                              Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                               The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

 1.      Ethiopia is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world, yet it remains among the poorest. As the
 second most populous nation in Africa, it is home to approximately 132 million people. The country experienced
 remarkable economic growth from 2004 to 2019, with an average growth rate of nearly 10 percent, one of the highest
 globally. However, growth rates have slowed since 2019, with real GDP growth decreasing to around 6 percent. Ethiopia
 remains a low-income country, with a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita of US$1,272 in 2023.1 The country's
 rapid growth masked structural weaknesses such as high inflation, significant foreign debt, currency controls, and
 limited private sector development.

1.       Food insecurity is a persistent challenge in Ethiopia, driven primarily by extreme events and a high dependency
on low-input, low-output rain-fed agriculture. 2 Over 90 percent of cultivated lands depend on rainfall, making food
production highly vulnerable to frequent droughts and floods. As a result, more than 18 percent of the population faces
food insecurity. Nearly 40 percent of children under five are stunted, and 22 percent of women aged 15–49 years are
undernourished. 3 Private sector investment in agriculture remains limited, largely due to the lack of irrigation
infrastructure required to ensure reliable production. Ethiopia is extremely drought-prone and has experienced 19 periods
of severe food shortages caused by droughts over the past century.

2.      The agricultural sector is the backbone of Ethiopia’s economy and employment, yet productivity remains low
due to the heavy reliance on rain-fed agriculture. The sector accounts for 33 percent of the country’s GDP, 73 percent of
employment, and 77 percent of exports.4 Erratic and increasingly unpredictable rainfall contributes to inconsistent and
often insufficient crop yields. In response, the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) has set ambitious goals to reduce the reliance

1 World Bank Open Data—Ethiopia (link)
2 Food Insecurity in Ethiopia. (link)
3 UNICEF (link)
4 Ministry of Agriculture, Ethiopia’s National Agricultural Investment Plan (2021-2030) (link)




                                                                                                                                                 Page 2



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


on rain-fed agriculture by developing their irrigation capacity. Under the Ten-Year Development Plan (2020-2030)5, the
government aims to expand irrigation, promote private sector participation, increase irrigated crop production fivefold,
and create over a million job opportunities in the irrigation sector.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

3.       Irrigation is essential for food security and economic development in Ethiopia, offering a reliable water supply
that reduces dependence on erratic rainfall. Scaling up irrigation is a key pathway to enhancing Ethiopia’s food security,6
as it increases crop yields and productivity, thereby strengthening agricultural production.7 Irrigation enables multiple
cropping seasons and the cultivation of diverse, high-value, and drought-resistant crops, consequently diversifying diets
and income sources, and strengthening resilience to market and climate shocks. The private agribusiness sector supports
this through offtake markets.8

4.       Irrigation is critical for more and better jobs in Ethiopia. Over 2 million youth enter the labor market annually.
Agriculture, the main source of employment is constrained by low productivity and a high share of unpaid or self-employed
labor.9 Widescale irrigation boosts income, supports local communities, and creates jobs in irrigation (system design,
supply, installation, and maintenance), and agriculture (crop offtake, storage and processing) services. These activities are
mostly driven by the private sector, from SMEs to large global agribusinesses. The GoE’s Ten-Year Development Plan
(2020-2030),10 aims to create 820,000 direct jobs from irrigation expansion, 110,000 jobs in infrastructure maintenance,
and 120,000 jobs for new graduates. Irrigation investments have strong multiplier effects, 11 the GoE expects jobs in the
crop and horticulture sector to grow 10 percent annually.12

5.       Ethiopia has strong potential for sustainable irrigation development. According to the Ethiopia Rapid Irrigation
Diagnostic and Stocktaking,13 supported by the World Bank, the country’s irrigation potential is an estimated 10 million
hectares—approximately 9 million ha from surface water and 1 million ha from groundwater. However, only 15 percent
(1.6 million ha) of land is currently irrigated. To sustainably harness this potential, private sector investment and integrated
investments in infrastructure, institutions, capacity building, as well as policy and regulatory reforms are required. The
WBG is currently supporting ongoing projects focused on farmer-led irrigation development (FLID) and small-scale
irrigation in Ethiopia.14




5 Ten-Year Development Plan of Ethiopia (2020-2030) (link)
6 Office of The Prime Minister, February 18, 2025. Press Statement: Ethiopia’s Food Self-Sufficiency Endeavors (link)
7 Jambo, Y., Alemu, A., Tasew, W. (2021). Impact of small-scale irrigation on household food security: evidence from Ethiopia. Agriculture & Food Security 10, 21. (link)
8 Sisay, K. (2024) Impact of irrigated agriculture on households' income and food security: Evidence from the south-west region of Ethiopia. Irrigation and Drainage,

73(2), 676–693. (link)
9
  Jobs Creation Commission, Ethiopia. Plan of Action for Job Creation (2020-2025) (link)
10 Ten-Year Development Plan of Ethiopia (2020-2030) (link)
11 In Africa, irrigated agriculture generates 1.5-2 direct jobs per hectare annually, with each direct job supporting 1.1-1.8 additional positions in equipment value

chains, trade, logistics, and food processing. This multiplier effect results in 3.7-5.6 total jobs per hectare of irrigated land. Giordano, Mark., Namara, Regassa and
Bassini, Elisabeth. (2023). The Impacts of Irrigation A Review of Published Evidence, World Bank (link); Wiggins, S., etc. (2023). Green jobs in agrifood systems –
Setting a vision for youth in the Sahel. Rome, FAO. (link)
12 Ministry of Agriculture, Ethiopia’s National Agricultural Investment Plan (2021-2030) (link)
13 Ethiopia Rapid Irrigation Diagnostic and Stocktaking. Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands & World Bank (2024)
14 FLID is household- or community-led simple irrigation technologies with pumps and drip or micro-sprinkler irrigation. The Bank is currently supporting the FLID

through the ongoing Food Systems Resilience Program for Eastern and Southern Africa (P178566) and small-scale irrigation through the ongoing Lowlands Livelihood
Resilience Project (P180076)


                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3



                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


6.       The rehabilitation and modernization of existing irrigation schemes offers an opportunity to expand Ethiopia’s
irrigation capacity. Most schemes underperform due to poor design and construction, lack of quality management
systems, limited institutional and community capacity, inadequate funding, and insufficient operation and maintenance
(O&M). This underperformance affects all scheme types (small, medium, and large) and governance levels (community-
managed or co-managed public schemes),15 with many performing below 50 percent in terms of irrigated area, crop
intensity, and yields. Upgrading existing schemes can be a cost-effective way to achieve quick results provided the
underlying causes of their decline are addressed. Transparent mechanisms for mobilizing financial resources (e.g. water
fees, government budget, and opex) are also needed along with upfront capex budgets.

7.      Dam safety in Ethiopia is at a critical stage. The country has over 5,000 dams—including more than 100 large
dams, with many aging structures in need of rehabilitation, and about 200 new dams planned, half of which are currently
under development. However, Ethiopia lacks a comprehensive dam safety program with formal O&M procedures,
emergency preparedness plans (EPPs), and functioning monitoring systems. Many old dams pose risks due to unreliable
water supply and downstream safety threats. While the World Bank has recently supported the GoE in updating the
Ethiopia Dam Safety Guidelines and establishing a Dam Safety Unit under the Ministry of Water and Energy (MoWE), 16
implementation is hampered by institutional fragmentation, limited institutional capacity, inadequate O&M funding, and
a shortage of skilled personnel for operation, maintenance and surveillance.

8.      The Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MILLs), established in 2021, leads irrigation development in Ethiopia.
Its mandate is to develop and implement irrigation policies, strategies, and laws; design and implement irrigation projects;
and promote private sector participation. MILLs manages large- and medium-scale federal irrigation schemes and supports
smaller-scale regional projects through capacity building. It also owns and operates key irrigation dams. As a new ministry,
MILLs requires substantial capacity building but also presents an opportunity to enhance collaboration among government,
development partners, and private investors—reducing competing models (grant, subsidized, and open market) and
fostering a sustainable, market-driven irrigation sector.

 Relationship to CPF and Regional Priorities

9.      The proposed Project is fully aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY 2018-22)
and the Government's development priorities. It directly supports CPF Objective 1.3—Improved agricultural productivity
and commercialization. It also contributes to food security under Objective 2.1—Improved sustainability and effectiveness
of safety nets, and supports climate-resilient irrigation development under Objective 2.7—Enhanced management of
natural resources and climate risks. Additionally, the Project aligns with CPF Objective 3.1—Increased capacity and
improved governance in service delivery. The Project reinforces Priority 2 of the Ethiopia Country Climate and
Development Report (CCDR) by promoting climate-resilient infrastructure. Furthermore, it is consistent with Ethiopia's
Ten Years Development Plan (2020-2030), which prioritizes irrigation to reduce reliance on rain-fed agriculture, increase
agricultural production, enhance climate resilience, and create over a million jobs in modern irrigation.

10.    CRISP aligns with the newly proposed Africa Resilient Irrigation for a Sustainable Economy (RISE) Initiative
(P512975) which seeks to accelerate access to climate-resilient irrigation services in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). CRISP


15 Ethiopia Rapid Irrigation Diagnostic and Stocktaking. Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands & World Bank (2024).
16 Supported through the closed Ethiopia Water Resilience Diagnostic and Strategic Roadmap (P177763), and the ongoing Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327)




                                                                                                                                                           Page 4



                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


supports all key pillars of Africa RISE—promoting FLID, enhancing the performance of existing irrigation systems, ensuring
water security for resilient irrigation, and supporting the establishment of national irrigation programs. The Project also
collaborates with IFC’s regional Agri-Connect initiative to link irrigation with value chain development and job creation.
CRISP can offer valuable lessons for sustainable irrigation development across the SSA region.

11.      CRISP is in alignement with IDA21’s Global and Regional Opportunities Window (GROW). CRISP directly
contributes to the Global Challenge Program on “Water Security and Climate Adaptation,” specifically Pillar 2: “Water for
Food” and Pillar 3: “Water for Planet”. CRISP investments focus on adaptation by supporting climate-resilient irrigation,
strengthening resilience to floods and droughts, and improving the sustainability of irrigation services. Interventions by
the Project will reduce vulnerability of agricultural production, food systems, and rural livelihoods to climate shocks. CRISP
is designed for rapid disbursement, prioritizing irrigation investments in batches with critical projects addressed first. The
Grant for Project Preparation (GFPP) advances readiness by supporting technical assessments, feasibility studies and
detailed designs, environmental and social assessments, and capacity building to ensure strong project initiation and rapid
disbursement.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To improve access to resilient irrigation services for sustainable production in Ethiopia.


  Key Results (From PCN)
  PDO Indicator 1: Number of people with enhanced resilience to climate risks
  PDO Indicator 2: Number of people with strengthened food and nutrition security
  PDO Indicator 3: Number of new or better jobs, of which (%) for women and youth


 D. Concept Description

12.      The proposed CRISP project will support the preparation and implementation of Ethiopia’s National Irrigation
Program (NIP), facilitating the transition from a project-based approach to a more comprehensive, program-based
model for the irrigation sector. Since 2022, the World Bank has worked with MILLs to support the Rapid Irrigation
Diagnostic, which recommends a NIP to guide sustainable irrigation development along with a 5-year Investment Plan to
prioritize short-term, high-impact interventions in Ethiopia. MILLs has made the NIP a priority to establish long-term
engagement in the irrigation sector (Figure 1), with a strong role in multi-stakeholder coordination. The NIP is expected
to be developed and launched within the initial years of CRISP implementation, followed by further implementation and
operationalization throughout the remaining project period, ensuring that it functions as a practical, actionable program,
rather than a high-level strategy. While the NIP is under development, the project will finance priority irrigation
investments, including the rehabilitation and modernization of large (>3,000 ha) and medium (500-3,000 ha) scale
schemes, support for small-scale irrigation (<500 ha), promotion of FLID, and dam safety assessments.




                                                                                                                          Page 5



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)




                                 Figure 1. Key Features of the National Irrigation Program


13.      CRISP will focus on improving irrigation services and performance. Ethiopia is experiencing an unsustainable
“build-neglect-rehabilitate” cycle, with irrigation development emphasizing infrastructure construction, instead of
management and service delivery. Combined with inadequate attention given to quality management during planning and
construction, this results in rapid deterioration and poor performance of irrigation schemes. The government faces
institutional weaknesses and financial challenges that hinder effective irrigation O&M. Smallholder farmers engage in
irrigation management through Irrigation Water User Associations (IWUAs); however many IWUAs lack the technical
expertise and financial capacity to effectively manage irrigation systems. Despite strong government interest, private
sector involvement in irrigation remains limited due to an inadequate enabling environment and low profitability.

14.      CRISP will promote private sector participation in irrigation and agriculture. The Project team is working with
IFC and 2030 WRG to co-design private sector participation activities. IFC engagement brings direct investment, advisory
services (capacity building, market access, and the adoption of climate-smart technologies), and blended finance to
overcome barriers to private investment. IFC can also assess opportunities to engage regional irrigation equipment
providers, pilot tailored financing solutions for smallholder farmers to access irrigation equipment and integrate AgTech
platforms to enhance efficiency and data-driven decision-making. WRG will foster collaboration through a multi-
stakeholder platform, address regulatory and financing challenges, and support consultations with farm input providers
and off takers. CRISP will explore broader forms of private sector participation, such as micro-financing for FLID, service
models by irrigation and agri-tech providers (e.g., rentals and pay-per-use), insurance, guarantees, and public-private
partnerships (PPP). The Project will pilot innovative models and create stronger market linkages to improve sustainability,
efficiency, and farmer incomes.

15.       The proposed Project has four components:

      (1) Component 1: Irrigation Rehabilitation and Modernization. This component will support the rehabilitation and
          modernization of existing federal-level large- and medium-scale irrigation schemes and will not construct any new
          irrigation schemes. Three irrigation schemes—Gode, Gidabo, and Ada’a Becho—have been prioritized for this

                                                                                                                       Page 6



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


           work. Component 1 will also support the development of the Investment Plan by financing studies and designs for
           pipeline projects. Key activities include:
               • Rehabilitation of key irrigation infrastructure and extension works to complete distribution networks
               • Modernization of existing schemes to enhance water use efficiency, optimize energy use, and improve
                   agricultural productivity
               • Preparation of pipeline projects to support the rollout of rehabilitation and modernization investments
                   under the Investment Plan
               • Dam safety assessments for relevant dams
               • Develop Irrigation Dam Safety Assessment Guidelines, regulations for dam O&M and emergency
                   preparedness, and an inventory of irrigation dams in Ethiopia

     (2) Component 2: Small-Scale Irrigation (SSI) Development. Component 2 supports the rehabilitation and
         modernization of existing SSIs with an emphasis on community participation and inclusion throughout the entire
         project cycle, and a strong focus on linking irrigation improvements to production improvement and value chain
         development. While the primary focus remains on upgrading existing infrastructure, the component also includes
         the construction of new SSIs in areas that are chronically food insecure, lack existing infrastructure, or where
         rainfed agriculture is highly vulnerable to climate risks. Similar to Component 1, it also contributes to the
         preparation of pipeline SSIs under the Investment Plan. It will also support the development and rehabilitation of
         small water storage systems, such as rainwater harvesting facilities, haffirs,17 and small dams.

     (3) Component 3: Irrigation Service Improvement. At the national level, Component 3 will improve the enabling
         environment for sustainable irrigation development, while at the project level, it will improve O&M and irrigation
         service delivery. Key activities include:
             • Develop a national Directive to guide irrigation O&M, scheme-specific O&M guidelines to facilitate
                 implementation, and support the formulation of irrigation water management policies and regulations
             • O&M TAs for each prioritized federal-level scheme under Component 1, and each region under
                 Component 2
             • Develop the NIP, including subprograms for large-, medium-, and small-scale irrigation, as well as FLID
             • Strengthen the National Irrigation Information System (NIIS) and deploy it to manage information on
                 irrigation assets, water use, and performance
             • Institutionalize a comprehensive Quality Management System across the entire project cycle
             • Pilot irrigation service fees across all schemes under Component 1, as well as in selected SSI schemes
                 under Component 2
             • TA to pilot irrigation water management mechanisms, such as water allocation, permitting, water use
                 monitoring, and abstraction charges under Component 1
             • Salinity Management Pilots in selected federal schemes such as Awash and Gode
             • Strengthen agricultural value chains linked to irrigation investments
             • Enhance private sector participation in irrigation and agriculture




17 Haffirs are traditional water harvesting systems used in the arid regions of the Horn of Africa, particularly in the pastoral areas of Ethiopia (e.g., Afar, Somali,

Oromia), as well as in Sudan and South Sudan. A typical haffir is a pond that collects rainwater and surface runoff during the wet season for use in dry periods. (link)


                                                                                                                                                                          Page 7



                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


    (4) Component 4: Project Management and Capacity Building. This component provides institutional support to
        improve overall project management and coordination. It will enhance governance, institutional capacity, and
        management of E&S risks and impacts within the irrigation sector.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                       Policies                                                  Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   TBD



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


The environmental and social risks of the CRISP project at concept stage are rated Substantial, reflecting potential
impacts on water resources, ecosystems, pollution, dam safety, land acquisition, and social inclusion. Environmental
risks stem from altered hydrological regimes, water scarcity, erosion, habitat loss, and pollution from agrochemicals,
while social risks relate to land acquisition, temporary or permanent displacement, exclusion of vulnerable groups, labor
and OHS issues, SEA/SH, and security constraints in FCV areas. These risks are expected to be manageable and largely
reversible through appropriate mitigation measures. The Borrower will prepare and implement key instruments—
including the ESMF, ESCP, SEP, and site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs—to ensure risks are identified, mitigated, and monitored
throughout project implementation.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Si Gou
   Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

   Ximing Zhang
   Senior Water Specialist

   Hayalsew Yilma
   Senior Irrigation Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

 Implementing Agencies


                                                                                                                      Page 8



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Ethiopia: Climate Resilient Irrigation for Sustainable Production (CRISP)(P508364)


 Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Si Gou, Ximing Zhang, Hayalsew Yilma

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                 Soma Ghosh Moulik                        17-Sep-2025

Country Director:                         Maryam Salim                             21-Oct-2025




                                                                                                         Page 9



                                                                                                 Official Use Only
