Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04684




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 19, 2024                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508689                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       AICCRA III                 2026

                     Operation Name            Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Multi-Regional                                                     Other                      Agriculture and Food


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     International Centre      International Centre of Insect           29-May-2025                15-Sep-2025
                     of Insect Physiology      Physiology and Ecology
                     and Ecology

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost




Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     20-Feb-2025               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To strengthen innovation capacities of relevant African stakeholders for enhanced use of climate information services
                     and adoption of validated climate-smart and nutrition-sensitive agriculture technologies in IDA-eligible countries in
                     Africa.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project will have five main components: 1. Knowledge generation and sharing 2. Regional capacity strengthening 3.
                     Scaling-up inclusive uptake 4. Boosting human capital and innovation 5. Project management


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview


                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                    Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The AICCRA III project is regional in scope, with a focus on 6 countries (Kenya, Ethiopia, Ghana, Senegal, Mali, and
                     Zambia). It will predominantly fund “soft activities” under components 1,2 and 4, such as knowledge generation sharing
                     of products and tools related to climate-smart agriculture (CSA), soil health and fertility (life under ground – LUNG), and
                     nutrition-smart agriculture (NSmartAg ) (component 1), as well as capacity-building of key regional and national
                     institutions in Sub-Saharan Africa (component 2). The project will also support the testing, validation and identification
                     of scaling-pathways of Climate smart agriculture (CSA) and NSmartAg technologies and practices in research stations
                     and in farmers’ fields and project management functions (component 5). While research activities are expected to take
                     place in private or public research centers, demonstration activities to be implemented under component 3 will take
                     place in private individual farmers’ or cooperatives’ fields. Project activities are focused on relatively small sites
                     (averaging 0.03 - 0.5 acres). A negative list will be used to preclude investment of IDA funds in any activities, including
                     large scale works that could generate significant adverse social or environmental impacts, including involuntary
                     resettlement.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology (icipe) who will supervise
                     the activities of the “Grant Recipients” (partners) that are regional research organizations and national government
                     agencies.
                     As a regional research organization, icipe will hold ultimate accountability for technical, administrative, fiduciary, legal,
                     and environmental and social (E&S) risk management compliance functions. icipe is, already implementing a World Bank
                     project Africa Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund for Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (P165581) –




Public Disclosure
                     which was under the earlier Safeguard Operational Policies and therefore has no experience implementing the ESF. At
                     this point, the Bank task team has not been able to undertake E&S assessment to determine the icipe’s capacity for
                     implementation; but it is expected that icipe would need to hire environmental and social expertise for E&S due
                     diligence and monitoring requirements in East and West Africa.
                     icipe will establish grant agreements with partners across the 6 focus countries, with each partner agency identifying an
                     E&S focal point who would be responsible to oversee the implementation of the E&S requirements.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The Environmental risks are expected to be moderate given the type and scale of activities which are neither large nor
                     complex, and nor are they expected to have signifcant adverse effects to the environment or to human health and
                     safety through pollution of air, soil and water. Small-scale testing, validation of CSA and NSmartAg technologies and
                     practices will be conducted in research stations and in farmers’ fields. Some moderate risk of pollution and
                     occupational hazards could be associated with the use and disposal of pesticides however the volumes are expected
                     to be small and contained within the pilot demonstration sites. Similarly other risks such as introduction of invasive
                     species and impact on biodiversity are also expected to be negligible given that the pilots will be conducted within
                     contained areas. A negative exclusionlist will ensure that no large scale activities are included which can have
                     significant Environmental impacts on biodiversity, cultural heritage, land degradation, flora and fauna or water, air


                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                     and soil pollution or activities involving genetically modified organisms, or unsustainable practices that may introduce
                     invasive alien species, etc.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Overall, the social risks have been assessed as moderate, as they are of low magnitude, small-scale, and can be
                     managed through adequate mitigation measures. Key social risks associated with the project include occupational
                     and health and safety risks, in particular related to exposure and/or the use of pesticide, the potential for the
                     exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and women from project benefits. The risks of forced and child
                     labor are low, as project workers are mostly staff from regional and national partners who are highly skilled (scientists
                     and researchers, but the use of family labor by farmers for the demonstration site activities cannot be entirely
                     excluded. Project activities have been screened for the risk of and sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment
                     (SEA/SH), which has been assessed as low. Moreover, any activities that lead to land acquisition, restrictions on land
                     use and involuntary resettlement, economic or physical, will be excluded from project financing.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      There is considerable experience gathered from the implementation of predecessor AICCRA projects. This included 80
                      E&S decision-making tools which were distributed to over 3 million farmers and an E&S Risk Management (ESRM)



Public Disclosure
                      Guide which included screening tools and template of ESMPs and E&S “checklists” and clauses. Icipe can build on the
                      extensive documentation prepared under the predecessor projects and customize, consult,adopt and disclose an
                      updated ESRM Guide for AICCRA III.Each Grant recipient will develop an Environmental and Social Management
                      System (ESMS) based on the ESRM Guide, including: (i) Environmental and Social Management Plan; (ii) E&S risk
                      management; (iii) Code of conduct and grievance grievance mechanism for workers); (iv)Occupational health and
                      safety procedures; (v) Waste management procedures; (vi) Pest management plan; (vii) Stakeholder engagement plan
                      and grievance mechanism.These due diligence measures will be proportional to nature and scale of activities

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      Key affected project stakeholders will include farmers and pastoralists who will directly benefit from new
                      technologies and demonstration activities, public and private national implementation partners (i.e. meteorological
                      departments, agricultural and livestock research organizations and agribusinesses),universities and private sector
                      agribusinesses. Other interested stakeholders include African governments and environmental management
                      agencies/authorities in participating countries, the local population benefitting indirectly from improved agricultural
                      products and food security, financial institutions, including agricultural banks and lending institutions, and
                      professionals involved in climate change adaptation initiatives.Disadvantaged and vulnerable stakeholders include
                      beneficiaries with disabilities, marginalized groups, female farmers, pastoralists, or female-owned agribusinesses.
                      icipe will develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be disclosed prior to project appraisal.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant



                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                      Community workers include labor hired by the farmers to work on demonstration sites. Potential risks include poor
                      working conditions, the use of child and familty labor, and SEA/SH. Relevant measures, such as minimum age
                      requirements, prohibition of child and forced labor, and the application of a Code of Conduct (CoC) to prohibit Sexual
                      Exploitation and Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) will be included in the project’s Manual of Operation (MOP).
                      The staff of regional and national partners will remain subject to the terms and conditions of their existing contracts,
                      which are governed by national labor laws. There will be no legal transfer of their employment to the AICCRA Project.
                      The project will use community workers through the hiring of daily labor by farmers during planting and harvesting
                      activities . Allworkers will be required by the terms of their contract to implement project activities in accordance
                      with ESS2 measures

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      There could be small volumes of pesticides and chemicals used in the demonstration pilots, which coul entail
                      potential risk of air, soil and water pollution due to poor use or disposal methods. AICCRA 1 had provided training on
                      best practice in sustainable pest and disease management programs and promoted Integrated Pest Management
                      approach and diversification of rotations and intercropping and maintenance of plant cover. These lessons could be
                      replicated under AICCRA III to ensure effective risk management.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      While low to moderate in magnitude, there is minimal risk of community health and safety due to potential exposure
                      to pesticides, and dangers associated with a poor storage of pesticide. No security forces or the military are expected




Public Disclosure
                      to be used during project implementation. The SEA/SH risks are considered to be low

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant

                      Any activities that lead to physical or economic resettlement or restriction of land use will be excluded from the
                      financing of the AICCRA III This requirement will be part of the exclusion list.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                    Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      Any activities that lead to land degradation or impact on biodiversity will be excluded from the financing of the
                      AICCRA III .This requirement will be part of the exclusion list.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      As ESS7 is relevant as project activities may involve such groups in Kenya. Should such groups be involved, as per the
                      requirements of the ESF, a specific SEP and grievance mechanism for this community will be preparated to ensure the
                      engagement process will be culturally appropriate.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant



                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)




                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                     No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                              No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                            No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     AICCRA III will build on the extensive work on E&S risk managed undertaken under AICCRA 1 and 2. Icipe will customize
                     and adopt an Environment and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Guide and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be
                     disclosed prior to project appraisal. Subsequently, prior to implementation, each Grant recipient will be develop an


Public Disclosure
                     Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) at its level based on the ESRM Guide.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Viviana Maria Eugenia Perego        Title:          Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  vperego@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                  Page 6 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                        Viviana Maria Eugenia Perego

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                               Ruma Tavorath

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                      Eloise Sophie Fluet




Public Disclosure




                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                Page 7 of 7
