Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2025 | Report No: PIDPC00208




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID              Operation Name
                                                                                     Barbados Water Security
                               LATIN AMERICA AND
Barbados                                                   P508674                   and Sector Efficiency
                               CARIBBEAN
                                                                                     Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               02-Feb-2026                 31-Mar-2026               Water
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Government of Barbados,
                               Barbados Water Authority
Prime Minister's Office

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To promote water secure and efficient services for Barbados.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                   296.12

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                      140.12
    Total Program Cost                                                                                  140.00
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                         0.12
  Total Financing                                                                                           140.12

  Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                           50.00

                                                                                                               Page 1



                                                                                                     Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


          World Bank Lending                                                                                                                                 50.00
       Total Government Contribution                                                                                                                          88.12

       Total Non-World Bank Group Financing                                                                                                                    2.00
          Private Capital and Commercial Financing Amount                                                                                                      2.00
             of which Private Capital                                                                                                                          2.00

    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    B. Introduction and Context


    Regional Context
    1. The Caribbean region comprises a diverse group of Small Island States that faces high levels of socioeconomic
    vulnerability, with populations ranging from under 100,000 to over 11 million and varying income levels. Countries across
    the Caribbean remain structurally exposed to external shocks due to their small size, geographic isolation, and
    dependence on a narrow set of economic activities1. These countries rely heavily on tourism for income generation,
    export earnings, and employment, as well as marine fisheries for food security and rural livelihoods2. Tourism is a central
    source of jobs, supporting approximately 15% of total employment and over 2.75 million jobs3’4. The agriculture and
    fisheries sector contribute modestly to GDP across the Caribbean—up to 1%5,6—but their economic and social
    importance far exceeds their monetary value, providing stable employment to an estimated 3% of the population across
    the region7, and plays a key role in food security, rural employment and coastal economies8.

    2. The Caribbean region is disproportionately affected by the climate crisis given its minimal contribution to
    greenhouse gas emissions yet high vulnerability to subsequent impacts. The Region faces intensifying climate hazards
    such as droughts, floods, and extreme storms which exacerbate socioeconomic disruptions and undermine service
    delivery, food systems, and fiscal stability9. As Small Island Developing States (SIDS), Caribbean nations experience cyclical
    GDP growth and dips on account of being hit by an extreme storm. To illustrate, in Dominica and Grenada, sustained
    damages from hurricanes Maria and Ivan, respectively, exceeded the size of their economies two-fold. This led not only

1
    Justin Ram, J. Jason Cotton, Raquel Frederick, Wayne Elliott, Measuring Vulnerability: A Multidimensional Vulnerability Index for the Caribbean. CDB Working Paper
2 On average, tourism accounts for approximately 30% of GDP in Barbados, around 40% in St. Lucia, and about 20% in Jamaica, making these economies particularly

sensitive to global downturns. Ibis 1
3 Ibis 2
4
  Saint Lucia, for example is particularly reliant on tourism-labor linkages, with more than 55% of young workers (ages 15–24) employed in the sector4, while in In
Barbados tourism accounts for around 10% of the workforce. Jamaica sees nearly 25% of its total workforce engaged directly in tourism and related services. UN data
5 UNCTAD/DOALOS (2019). Oceans and Fisheries – Barbados
6 Jamaica National Fisheries Authority (2024). Jamaica Fisheries: Quarterly Statistics Report January – March 2024.
7 United Nations
8 FAO (2020). The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture.
9 IPCC (2021). Sixth Assessment Report: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability – Chapter 15: Small Islands.




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 2



                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


 to loss of life, but also disruptively large reconstruction burdens10. These and other climate-related stresses such as
 drought, rising sea levels, and saline intrusion exacerbate pre-existing vulnerabilities—such as high debt and dependence
 on tourism, resulting in productivity losses, rising food prices, and deeper inequality11. Given these severe impacts,
 regional leaders have become strong advocates on the global stage regarding the responsibility of the international
 community in aiding not just resilience building but also effective hazard response.

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program
  3. Water security in the Caribbean12 is shaped by rapid and slow onset climate events, natural variability, and
 structural constraints, leaving many countries vulnerable to water shocks. Prolonged droughts reduce freshwater
 availability for households, agriculture, and tourism, while flooding and storm surges destroy infrastructure, contaminate
 water supplies, and interrupt economic activity. Climate change is expected to exacerbate these imbalances, with more
 intense and erratic rainfall patterns increasing the frequency of both droughts and floods while rising sea levels heighten
 risks of saltwater intrusion in coastal aquifers. These changes are already straining fragile water systems and amplifying
 the costs of reliable service delivery across the Region.
 4. Unregulated water abstraction, weak monitoring systems, and limited hydrological data compound the
 Caribbean’s water security challenges. Across many islands, water abstractions often occur with minimal oversight,
 metering, or enforcement13. The Region lacks sufficient groundwater monitoring, leaving water managers with
 insufficient data and information to effectively manage water supply, detect over abstraction, or prevent saline
 intrusion14. With climate projections suggesting more extreme variability, investments in groundwater monitoring
 networks, water storage, regulatory reform, and enforcement capacity are critical to strengthening resilience and
 equitable water management in the Caribbean.
 5. Poor wastewater management in the Caribbean directly undermines water security and socioeconomic
 development by polluting freshwater sources, damaging ecosystems, and weakening key economic sectors. Although
 about 96% of the Caribbean population has access to improved sanitation15, only 41% has access to safely managed
 sanitation and just 17% of households have access to sewerage systems. Moreover, while most households have septic
 tanks on their premises, fecal sludge management (FSM) is widely unregulated and unmonitored. Weak sanitation
 management directly affects surface water, coastal, and groundwater resources, reducing the availability of clean water
 for households, agriculture, and industry. This also contributes to marine pollution that degrades fisheries and deters
 tourism—two sectors that are vital for livelihoods, jobs and GDP. Flooding events, intensified by climate change, spread
 untreated waste across communities, increasing health risks and service disruptions. Meanwhile, water reuse is still at
 an early stage in most of the Caribbean, which is a missed opportunity to mitigate water stress particularly during
 droughts.
 6. Private Sector Participation (PSP) in the water sector across the Caribbean remains limited, yet it is increasingly
 critical to address the Region’s water sector challenges. While there are some emerging initiatives, overall private sector
 engagement has been scarce. Yet, private sector involvement is essential to close investment gaps, particularly in water
 security, wastewater management, and modernizing water utilities. Beyond mobilizing financing, the private sector can
 bring innovation, speed, and efficiency to a sector where most utilities face persistent operational and financial
 inefficiencies. Stepping up PSP could be pursued progressively and through diverse modalities in parallel to consistent


10
     IMF (2018). IMF Finance & Development Magazine: Bracing for the Storm
11 UNDP (2022). Climate Change and Human Development in the Caribbean.
12 For the document purposes, the term Caribbean refers to the English-speaking Small Island Developing States (SIDS) that form part of the wider Caribbean region.
13 13 Cashman, A. (2024). Caribbean sub-regional report to the world water forum, P.23 and P.52
14 FAO & UNEP report titled "Climate Change, Drought and Agriculture in Small Island Developing States" (2020)
15 Improved sanitation facilities are defined as those that hygienically separate human waste from human contact. Improved sanitation includes flush or pour-flush to

piped sewer system, septic tank pit latrines, ventilated-improved pit latrines, or pit latrines with slab or composting toilets. (JMP, 2025)


                                                                                                                                                                Page 3



                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


 efforts to strengthen the creditworthiness of water utilities and introduce higher accountability and results-based
 approaches in the sector
 7. Barbados stands out as one of the most water-scarce countries in the world, with per capita renewable freshwater
 resources estimated at just 304 m³/year, well below the international threshold of 1,000 m³/year for water scarcity
 and far beneath the 500 m³/year benchmark for absolute scarcity16. The country relies almost entirely on groundwater
 (90%) drawn from limestone aquifers, which are increasingly vulnerable to saltwater intrusion, over-abstraction, and
 contamination17, while in parallel, it is abstracting ~90% of its annual safe yield. Inadequate water storage is also a critical
 challenge in the Caribbean, where limited and deteriorating infrastructure constrains the capacity to build resilience to
 climate extremes and prepare for growing water demands - projected to increase by 30% by 205018. These issues are
 compounded by alarming water losses, representing an extraordinary waste of already scarce resources through high
 levels of non-revenue water (NRW) across the region.
 8. Barbados shares operational and financial efficiency challenges that are common across the Region. The Barbados
 Water Authority (BWA) is the sole institution responsible for water and sanitation service (WSS) provision in Barbados.
 However, it faces persistent challenges with operational inefficiencies, asset management, aging infrastructure, and
 capacity constraints. The BWA has taken steps to reduce NRW which is currently estimated to be 55% of water produced.
 Key among these is the creation of an NRW unit and the establishment of a first tranche of district metered areas (DMAs).
 The effectiveness of these efforts is constrained by shortfalls in technical, commercial, and operational systems and the
 lack of an NRW reduction strategy. Accordingly, the utility still relies heavily on reactive maintenance. Data from 2022
 reported to the Fair-Trading Commission (FTC), the water regulation body of Barbados, shows that although the BWA is
 very responsive to acknowledging customer complaints (>95%), less than 35% of investigations are completed within 20
 days, as per their corporate commitment. Although there is nearly 100% household metering with smart devices installed
 over 10 years ago, readings have never been automated. There are frequent customer complaints about reading errors
 and the use of ‘proxies’ to estimate consumption due to faulty devices or limited field readings. These shortcomings,
 coupled with outdated customer records and limited internal data sharing, make it difficult to control losses, improve
 efficiency and provide a reliable and resilient service to the population. High operating expenses —driven mainly by staff
 costs and rising energy prices for pumping and desalination— further constrain the utility. BWA’s revenues between 2018
 and 2024 were US$86 million annually, which covered direct operating expenses19. Yet, the BWA is unable to self-finance
 capital expenditures, with average annual investment at about US$15 million between 2021 and 2023—far below the
 more than US$1 billion investment needs estimated for the sector. It would require more than 70 years to realize BWA’s
 current WSS expansion objectives at this pace. This is compounded by the fact that, compared to other Caribbean nations,
 BWA tariffs are relatively high20, and tariff collection is still insufficient to reach full cost recovery levels. BWA has initiated
 some modernization steps, including the preparation of its 2025–2029 Strategic Plan, however, efforts remain limited in
 scope, funds and implementation capacity.
 9. Barbados’ sewerage covers about 15% of the population, with the remainder relying on septic tanks or suckwells.
 These are often serviced informally with conveyance and disposal of collected fecal sludge largely unknown. Promisingly,
 BWA’s two wastewater treatment plants are currently being upgraded to tertiary level and reuse capability, leading the

16
     FAO AQUASTAT (2021).
17 UNDP (2020). Human Development Report – Small Island Developing States. About 10% of the Islands water supply come from desalination plants.
18 In Jamaica, existing reservoirs provide only a fraction of national storage needs and are further constrained by sedimentation, leaving most of the country’s

freshwater resources uncaptured. Similarly, in Saint Lucia, sedimentation of the John Compton Dam has reduced its effective storage capacity by nearly 50%, severely
constraining the island’s principal surface water source. This loss of capacity, combined with a projected 25% increase in water demand by 2050, poses a critical
challenge for ensuring reliable and sustainable water supply.
19 However, once pensions and interest obligations are considered, the operating cost coverage ratio drops below full recovery (96.4% in 2024, down from an average

of 107%), exposing financial fragility.
20 According to Cashman 2024, citing Jansen, Burkhard and Jones 2021, BWA charges its users nearly USD 25 / 15m3, which is the second highest rate across a group

of 14 Caribbean Countries, only behind to the Cayman Islands, but followed close by Suriname and Jamaica. Caribbean Sub-regional report to the world water forum
2024.


                                                                                                                                                                   Page 4



                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


 region on circular economy. Stepping up Barbados’ efforts to manage wastewater pollution comprehensively is a pressing
 need due its high-dependance on groundwater and coastal resources. BWA needs to expand its sewerage coverage in
 critical areas (including exploring low-cost technologies) and to ensure that FSM is formalized and monitored to ensure
 waste conveyance to designated treatment plants.
 10. While BWA, through its Water Resources and Environmental Management Unit (WREMU), has a central mandate
 for managing Barbados’ water resources, its ability to fully carry out this role is constrained by limited resources,
 technical expertise, and weak institutional set up. Under the Barbados Water Authority (Amendment) Act 2023, the
 Water and Wells Management Committee (WWMC) was established to oversee wells licensing, with WREMU serving as
 its secretariat. However, the WWMC has not yet been operationalized, and WREMU’s limited resources and outdated
 data—no comprehensive inventory of private abstractions has been done in nearly three decades—constrains the ability
 to fulfill this mandate. Moreover, Barbados still lacks a coordination mechanism to provide inter-institutional
 coordination vis-à-vis broad water security, including steering not only policies, funds and planning on water resources,
 water supply and wastewater, but also linking water security to agriculture, floods and droughts management, energy,
 environmental and coastal protection, tourism and overall climate resilience. Considering Barbados’ ‘extreme water
 scarcity’ status, there is an urgent need to strengthen WREMU and to operationalize the WWMC, to establish a high-level
 water security coordination arrangement, update and modernize the Country’s water resources monitoring, and to instill
 a solid planning and reporting practice on water resources to support sustainable, transparent, and impartial
 management of the island’s water resources.
 11. Institutional capacity and efficiency constraints further hinder BWA’s performance. BWA’s overall capacity
 constraints are evident, including persistent delays in completing financial audits, lack of accountability mechanisms, and
 limitations on clear performance arrangements21. Staff reports being overstretched, and long, manual processes add to
 the burden. Information systems remain outdated and poorly integrated, creating inefficiencies and limiting
 transparency. These constraints make it difficult to improve customer service and commercial performance, further
 weakening BWA’s position. Modernizing the organizational structure, processes and systems, including deploying new
 digital tools could help ease workloads, enhance efficiency, strengthen accountability, and improve staff capacity by
 reducing administrative burdens. Such reforms are critical to building a more efficient, financially sustainable, and
 customer-focused utility able to deliver on its service mandate.
 12. The BWA has developed a 2025-2029 Strategic Plan (SP) with the overarching goal of positioning the utility to
 ensure safe, reliable, and sustainable water supply. This plan constitutes the first phase of a long-term transformation
 program seeking to reposition the BWA as a modern utility company that is fit for purpose and will assist the country in
 becoming climate resilient by 2035. The plan contains Key Performance Indicators KPIs) and centers on five strategic
 objectives: (i) improving Water Resource Management (WRM), including the reduction of NRW and enhancing capacity
 to efficiently deliver within the wastewater sector, (ii) transforming to a dynamic and secure Management Information
 Systems (MIS) and processes to enhance the operations of the Authority and deliver real time response and effective
 risk-based decision making, (iii) improving financial flexibility to increase capacity for ongoing re-investment and
 economic sustainability, (iv) enhancing institutional Human Resource (HR) capacity to foster increased internal technical
 capacity and workforce engagement, and (v) adapting and building resilience to climate change to ensure long term water
 security. The investment needs of the SP have been estimated at USD 208 million by 2029 to achieve its targets.


 Relationship to CAS/CPF
 13. The Program is aligned with the World Bank Group Barbados Country Engagement Note (CEN) FY25-27 approved
 by the Board in November 2024. The CEN outlines two focus areas: (i) strengthening climate resilience through disaster

21 Although there is a regulatory framework established by the Fair-Trading Commission (FTC), the established sets of standards are customer service oriented and do

not comprehensively assess BWA’s performance against its own plans or strategic objectives.


                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


risk mitigation and greening the energy and water sectors; and (ii) improving conditions for growth by attracting more
private investments and improving education and skills. The Program will contribute to both focus areas in the water
sector. Relatedly, the Program is also aligned with Barbados’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) which has the
goal of enhancing water security, protecting vital coastal ecosystems, and increasing energy efficiency. Constituent
activities aligned with these goals include: (i) climate change mitigation by reducing the volume of untreated septage,
wastewater and solid waste being discharged into the environment, thereby reducing greenhouse gas emissions; and (ii)
lower energy consumption from fossil fuel sources (currently the main energy source in the country) through energy
efficiency in electrical-mechanical equipment and lower water losses that can also reduce groundwater pumping needs.


  Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument
14.     In early 2024, in light of severe fiscal constraints and limited access to affordable external financing, the
Government of Barbados has requested renewed engagement with the World Bank. Despite having graduated from
Bank borrowing in 1994, Barbados has sought the Bank’s support in key strategic sectors for national development and
climate resilience, including disaster risk management, education, water, and climate change. The Bank’s re-entry as a
financing and knowledge partner to step up the water sector in the country responds directly to this demand, supporting
Barbados in addressing structural vulnerabilities while creating space for critical reforms and investments. In particular,
the Government has prioritized engagement to step up the country’s water sector, a sector central to climate adaptation,
economic resilience, and public health—where institutional fragmentation, inefficiencies, and growing resource
pressures pose mounting risks. The proposed Program with BWA is closely aligned with these priorities.
15.    This Caribbean Regional Water Security initiative will contribute to higher-level goals of promoting inclusive
and sustainable economic development and employment, strengthening climate resilience, and enhancing human
capital and environmental protection across the Caribbean. Improved water security and wastewater management has
multiplier effects on public health, tourism, agriculture, and ecosystem health—sectors that are essential for livelihoods,
jobs and economic stability in the region. Moreover, strengthening water governance, improving operational and
financial efficiency, and building more creditworthy water utilities will attract higher private sector participation. This will
generate more investments and jobs, and enable the sector’s workforce to increase their capacity to access better jobs.
By addressing water scarcity, pollution, and service delivery gaps, the initiative supports long-term resilience to climate
shocks and safeguards critical natural resources, in parallel to making local employment more climate-secure.
16. The Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument is considered the most appropriate financing modality to support
the Government of Barbados (GoB) to carry out a robust BWA performance improvement, in line with its Strategic
Plan. The PforR instrument, with a cleat result-orientation approach, will provide strategic incentives on (i) results
orientation: By linking disbursements to well-defined Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs), the PforR can incentivize
progress on operational efficiency (e.g., NRW reduction, improved asset management), digital modernization, and
institutional reforms, while supporting improvements in customer service and accountability; and (ii) systems
strengthening: The PforR supports the implementation of the Government’s water sector program as defined under
BWA’s Strategic Plan 2025–2029, including a close alignment with their own KPIs and the World Bank Program DLIs;
complemented by DLIs to incentivize the institutionalization of good practices and reforms.
17. In addition, the utilization of a regionwide Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) framework also allows it to
strategically leverage existing regional synergies and its convening power to facilitate peer to peer exchanges for capacity
enhancement.




                                                                                                                           Page 6



                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

   Program Development Objective(s)
 18.   The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to promote water secure and efficient services for Barbados.
 Water security is defined as securing sufficient quality and quantity of water resources to sustainably meet countries’
 water demands in a changing climate.

 PDO Level Results Indicators
 19. A preliminary list of PDO level results indicators for the project has been identified as follows:
     •    Improved operational performance of the BWA
     •    Improved safely managed sanitation
     •    Improved resilience to climate risks


 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary
 20.     The proposed PforR Program will contribute to the BWA Strategic Plan by supporting achievement of a subset
 of its key results during the period 2026-2029. As outlined in the table below, whilst the PforR will support the overall
 implementation of the BWA SP and the achievement of all its objectives, a particular effort will go to supporting results
 under efficiency, human capacity, water security and wastewater service provision. The Program will support PDO
 achievement through three Results Areas (RAs): (1) BWA performance and service delivery; (2) Foundations for long term
 water security; and (3) Pollution management through safely managed sanitation services.

                                         Table 1: PforR Program and Government Program Alignment
                                                                        PforR
                                         BWA Strategic Plan
             Item                                                     Program      Reason for alignment / non-alignment
                                       (Government Program)
                                                                     Alignment
Overarching objective             Lead to a resilient water sector
                                  that is able to deliver equitable                                  The PDO is closely aligned with the SP.
                                                                                   Aligned
                                  and reliable access to water for
                                  citizens
Results Areas (RAs) /                                                                                RAs 1, 2 and 3 aligned, as the Program will
                        SO1: Improving WRM, NRW
Specific      Strategic                                                                              directly support operational efficiency with
                        reduction, enhancing capacity                              Aligned
Objectives (SO)                                                                                      emphasis on NRW, in addition to WRM and
                        on wastewater management.
                                                                                                     wastewater management.
                                  SO2: Secure management                                             RA 1 aligned, as this RA supports a BWA-
                                  information systems and                                            Wide digital transformation and a
                                                                                   Aligned
                                  processes to deliver effective                                     thorough revision of the processes in the
                                  risk-based decision making.                                        various business domains22.




22 Organization and strategy, financial management, human resources, commercial operations and technical operations




                                                                                                                                               Page 7



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


                                  SO3:       Improved          financial
                                                                                                    RA 1 aligned, as financial, commercial and
                                  flexibility     to           increase
                                                                                   Aligned          technical activities are oriented to
                                  investments and             economic
                                                                                                    increasing revenues and reducing costs.
                                  sustainability.
                                                                                                    RA 1 aligned, as it focusses on HR actions
                                  SO4: Enhancing institutional
                                                                                   Aligned          and on-the-job training through the
                                  and human resources.
                                                                                                    Modernization Contract.
                                  SO5: Building resilience to                                       RA 3 aligned, as it strengthens WRM to
                                  climate change to ensure long-                   Aligned          protect groundwater and build a higher-
                                  term water security.                                              level water security institutional set up.
Duration                          2020-2029                                                         PforR will be from 2026 to 2032, thereby
                                                                                   Aligned
                                                                                                    covering the entire SP duration.
Geographic Coverage               Entire BWA / Entire Country                      Aligned          Entire BWA / Entire Country
Overall Financing                                                                USD 139
                                  USD 208 million23 from BWA
                                                                                million (of         PforR (IBRD) covers about 24% of the total
                                  own resources (including
                                                                               which USD 50         SP costs.
                                  loans) and transfers from GoB.
                                                                               million IBRD)


 21.    Details of the Results Areas (RAs) through which the PforR Program will support the Government Program are
 elucidated below. The program will target the development of no more than 8 DLIs under these RAs. These DLIs and
 their constituent Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs) will incentivize a mix of actions, outputs, and the achievement of
 outcomes.
 22.     Results Area 1 (RA1) – BWA performance and service delivery will support the modernization of BWA’s
 operations and service delivery through utility-wide digital integration and a modernization of its systems, processes and
 procedures. Digital integration will include cross-cutting financial and commercial systems, NRW and service delivery
 management, improved customer engagement, optimization of metering management, and professionalization of
 technical operations and asset management. It will help promote strengthened human resource capabilities. BWA’s
 planned digital transformation efforts will directly give the basis for stronger mechanisms for results-setting,
 accountability and performance monitoring. The results supported in this area will contribute to improved service
 delivery, greater operational efficiency, and enhanced financial sustainability of water services. The bulk of these results
 are to be attained by BWA joining efforts with an experienced water supply and sanitation (WSS) operator (possibly in
 association with a specialized consultancy firm) through a Modernization Contract that will provide clear targets on
 performance and service delivery outcomes. By embedding seasoned professionals alongside BWA’s management and
 staff for several years, it is expected that newly developed best practices will be institutionalized, thereby fostering long
 term sustainability. Moreover, the PforR would also incentivize the development and implementation of governance and
 accountability measures with relation to the wider water sector operating environment.
 23.    Results Area 2 (RA2) – Foundations for long term water security will incentivize improvements in the GoB’s
 capacity to manage its water resources sustainably and adapt to climate variability. This RA will support the
 operationalization of the WWMC, strengthen the WREMU, establish a high-level coordination mechanism across relevant

23 Expenditures estimated from 2025 to 2029. Future expenditures from 2030 to 2032 to be determined in 2028 when BWA develops their next Strategic plan and

budget.


                                                                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


 sectors, expand and upgrade water resources monitoring networks, and integrate water information systems with utility
 modernization efforts. The development of a comprehensive WRM plan will also be supported, including updating
 abstraction licensing analysis and instituting regular ‘state-of-water’ public reporting.
 24.    Results Area 3 (RA3) – Pollution management through safely managed sanitation services will support improved
 regulatory, operational and monitoring arrangements for septage collection and disposal at treatment plants24, scaling
 up sewerage systems by piloting low-cost sewers in existing catchment areas, and strengthening stakeholder engagement
 for wastewater reuse uptake25. The results supported under this area will contribute to reducing pollution loads,
 protecting water resources, and supporting climate-resilient sanitation services. This is expected to pave the way for a
 progressive impact on groundwater and ocean protection, also serving as a model on a country-wide sanitation approach
 that other Caribbean countries - with support from a regional phase of the overarching MPA - could embrace to generate
 a Caribbean-wide impact.
 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening
 25.     The overall environmental and social (E&S) risk of the Program is assessed as moderate at Concept Stage.
 Planned activities are not expected to cause significant or irreversible adverse impacts and are therefore eligible for
 financing. Most activities under RA1 and RA2 are of a technical assistance nature, with localized and temporary effects.
 Under RA3, moderate site-specific risks may arise from the scale-up of sewer systems, including temporary disruption to
 access, mobility, and business operations, as well as occupational health and safety risks. These impacts are expected to
 be manageable through standard mitigation measures and good international industry practices. Contextual factors such
 as dense urban areas, limited rights-of-way, and sensitive coastal ecosystems will be considered in Program design and
 implementation.
 26.     BWA does not have an E&S unit that can lead the stakeholder engagement with communities and foster
 behavioral change, but E&S mitigation measures are implemented and will be further enhanced through the Program’s
 Modernization Contract. BWA has a grievance mechanism in place that can be used for the Program. The task team has
 initiated the Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) for this Program and is already collaborating with the
 BWA to gather further information to bridge knowledge gaps, particularly on E&S implementation experience. Measures
 to strengthen E&S capacity of BWA, including stakeholder engagement, may be included in the Program Action Plan
 (PAP), as relevant. The task team will also develop a stakeholder mapping and engagement strategy in collaboration with
 the BWA. By program appraisal (targeted for mid-January, 2026), the task team will make the draft ESSA Report publicly
 available for consultation with PforR stakeholders


     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
     CONTACT POINT

     World Bank




24
  Disposal and treatment would be done at existing wastewater treatment plants.
25
  Investments in wastewater reuse infrastructure are currently underway supported by the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
and the Green Climate Fund (GCF). However, potential end users, such as rural producers, are still reluctant to adopt this water
source.

                                                                                                                            Page 9



                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Barbados Water Security and Sector Efficiency Program(P508674)


 Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss
 Lead Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Government of Barbados, Prime Minister's Office

Implementing Agencies
 Barbados Water Authority

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                             Page 10



                                                                      Official Use Only
