Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     ( ESRS Concept Stage)


       For Official Use Only
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04684




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 19, 2024                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                         A. Basic Operation Data

                         Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                         P508689                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       AICCRA III                 2026

                         Operation Name            Accelerating Impacts of Climate Change Research for Africa

                         Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                                   (borrower, recipient)

                         Multi-Regional                                                     Other                      Agriculture and Food


                         Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                         International Centre      International Centre of Insect           29-May-2025                15-Sep-2025
                         of Insect Physiology      Physiology and Ecology
                         and Ecology




For Official Use Only
                         Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                         Review Date

                         20-Feb-2025               100,000,000.00


                         Proposed Development Objective

                         To strengthen innovation capacities of relevant African stakeholders for enhanced use of climate information services
                         and adoption of validated climate-smart and nutrition-sensitive agriculture technologies in IDA-eligible countries in
                         Africa.


                         B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                         Policy, para. 12?
                         No


                         C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                         [Description imported from the Concept Data Sheet in the Portal providing information about the key aspects and
                         components/sub-components of the project]
                         The Project will have five main components: 1. Knowledge generation and sharing 2. Regional capacity strengthening 3.
                         Scaling-up inclusive uptake 4. Boosting human capital and innovation 5. Project management



                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                    Page 2 of 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                         D. Environmental and Social Overview
                         D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                         [Description of key features relevant to the operation’s environmental and social risks and opportunities (e.g., whether the
                         project is nationwide or regional in scope, urban/rural, in an FCV context, presence of Indigenous Peoples or other
                         minorities, involves associated facilities, high-biodiversity settings, etc.) – Max. character limit 2,000]
                         The AICCRA III project is regional in scope, with a focus on 6 countries (Kenya, Ethiopia, Ghana, Senegal, Mali, and
                         Zambia). It will predominantly fund “soft activities” under components 1,2 and 4, such as knowledge generation sharing
                         of products and tools related to climate-smart agriculture (CSA), soil health and fertility (life under ground – LUNG), and
                         nutrition-smart agriculture (NSmartAg ) (component 1), as well as capacity-building of key regional and national
                         institutions in Sub-Saharan Africa (component 2). The project will also support the testing, validation and identification
                         of scaling-pathways of Climate smart agriculture (CSA) and NSmartAg technologies and practices in research stations
                         and in farmers’ fields and project management functions (component 5). While research activities are expected to take
                         place in private or public research centers, demonstration activities to be implemented under component 3 will take
                         place in private individual farmers’ or cooperatives’ fields. Project activities are focused on relatively small sites
                         (averaging 0.03 - 0.5 acres). A negative list will be used to preclude investment of IDA funds in any activities, including
                         large scale works that could generate significant adverse social or environmental impacts, including involuntary
                         resettlement.

                         D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                         [Description of Borrower’s capacity (i.e., prior performance under the Safeguard Policies or ESF, experience applying E&S




For Official Use Only
                         policies of IFIs, Environmental and social unit/staff already in place) and willingness to manage risks and impacts and of
                         provisions planned or required to have capabilities in place, along with the needs for enhanced support to the Borrower –
                         Max. character limit 2,000]
                         The project will be implemented by the International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology (icipe) who will supervise
                         the activities of the “Grant Recipients” (partners) that are regional research organizations and national government
                         agencies.
                         As a regional research organization, icipe will hold ultimate accountability for technical, administrative, fiduciary, legal,
                         and environmental and social (E&S) risk management compliance functions. icipe is, already implementing a World Bank
                         project Africa Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund for Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (P165581) –
                         which was under the earlier Safeguard Operational Policies and therefore has no experience implementing the ESF. At
                         this point, the Bank task team has not been able to undertake E&S assessment to determine the icipe’s capacity for
                         implementation; but it is expected that icipe would need to hire environmental and social expertise for E&S due
                         diligence and monitoring requirements in East and West Africa.
                         icipe will establish grant agreements with partners across the 6 focus countries, with each partner agency identifying an
                         E&S focal point who would be responsible to oversee the implementation of the E&S requirements.

                         II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                         A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                         A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate



                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                         [Summary of key factors contributing to risk rating, in accordance with the ES Directive and the Technical Note on
                         Screening and Risk Classification under the ESF – Max. character limit 2,000]
                         The Environmental risks are expected to be moderate given the type and scale of activities which are neither large nor
                         complex, and nor are they expected to have signifcant adverse effects to the environment or to human health and
                         safety through pollution of air, soil and water. Small-scale testing, validation of CSA and NSmartAg technologies and
                         practices will be conducted in research stations and in farmers’ fields. Some moderate risk of pollution and
                         occupational hazards could be associated with the use and disposal of pesticides however the volumes are expected
                         to be small and contained within the pilot demonstration sites. Similarly other risks such as introduction of invasive
                         species and impact on biodiversity are also expected to be negligible given that the pilots will be conducted within
                         contained areas. A negative exclusionlist will ensure that no large scale activities are included which can have
                         significant Environmental impacts on biodiversity, cultural heritage, land degradation, flora and fauna or water, air
                         and soil pollution or activities involving genetically modified organisms, or unsustainable practices that may introduce
                         invasive alien species, etc.
                                                                                                                                          Moderate
                         A.2 Social Risk Rating
                         [Summary of key factors contributing to risk rating, in accordance with the ES Directive and the Technical Note on
                         Screening and Risk Classification under the ESF – Max. character limit 2,000]
                         Overall, the social risks have been assessed as moderate, as they are of low magnitude, small-scale, and can be
                         managed through adequate mitigation measures. Key social risks associated with the project include occupational
                         and health and safety risks, in particular related to exposure and/or the use of pesticide, the potential for the




For Official Use Only
                         exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and women from project benefits. The risks of forced and child
                         labor are low, as project workers are mostly staff from regional and national partners who are highly skilled (scientists
                         and researchers, but the use of family labor by farmers for the demonstration site activities cannot be entirely
                         excluded. Project activities have been screened for the risk of and sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment
                         (SEA/SH), which has been assessed as low. Moreover, any activities that lead to land acquisition, restrictions on land
                         use and involuntary resettlement, economic or physical, will be excluded from project financing.
                                                                                                                                                Low
                         A.3 Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Risk Rating
                         [Summary of key factors contributing to risk rating. This attribute is only for the internal version of the download
                         document and not a part of the disclosable version – Max. character limit 2,000]
                         Project activities have been screened for the risk of and sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH),
                         which has been assessed as low, due to the absence of labor influx, and the limited interactions with community
                         members during project implementation which will be focused on pilot demonstration sites


                         B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                         B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                          ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]




                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                          There is considerable experience gathered from the implementation of predecessor AICCRA projects. This included 80
                          E&S decision-making tools which were distributed to over 3 million farmers and an E&S Risk Management (ESRM)
                          Guide which included screening tools and template of ESMPs and E&S “checklists” and clauses. Icipe can build on the
                          extensive documentation prepared under the predecessor projects and customize, consult,adopt and disclose an
                          updated ESRM Guide for AICCRA III.Each Grant recipient will develop an Environmental and Social Management
                          System (ESMS) based on the ESRM Guide, including: (i) Environmental and Social Management Plan; (ii) E&S risk
                          management; (iii) Code of conduct and grievance grievance mechanism for workers); (iv)Occupational health and
                          safety procedures; (v) Waste management procedures; (vi) Pest management plan; (vii) Stakeholder engagement plan
                          and grievance mechanism.These due diligence measures will be proportional to nature and scale of activities

                          ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]

                          Key affected project stakeholders will include farmers and pastoralists who will directly benefit from new
                          technologies and demonstration activities, public and private national implementation partners (i.e. meteorological
                          departments, agricultural and livestock research organizations and agribusinesses),universities and private sector
                          agribusinesses. Other interested stakeholders include African governments and environmental management
                          agencies/authorities in participating countries, the local population benefitting indirectly from improved agricultural
                          products and food security, financial institutions, including agricultural banks and lending institutions, and
                          professionals involved in climate change adaptation initiatives.Disadvantaged and vulnerable stakeholders include




For Official Use Only
                          beneficiaries with disabilities, marginalized groups, female farmers, pastoralists, or female-owned agribusinesses.
                          icipe will develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be disclosed prior to project appraisal.

                          ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]

                          Community workers include labor hired by the farmers to work on demonstration sites. Potential risks include poor
                          working conditions, the use of child and familty labor, and SEA/SH. Relevant measures, such as minimum age
                          requirements, prohibition of child and forced labor, and the application of a Code of Conduct (CoC) to prohibit Sexual
                          Exploitation and Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) will be included in the project’s Manual of Operation (MOP).
                          The staff of regional and national partners will remain subject to the terms and conditions of their existing contracts,
                          which are governed by national labor laws. There will be no legal transfer of their employment to the AICCRA Project.
                          The project will use community workers through the hiring of daily labor by farmers during planting and harvesting
                          activities . Allworkers will be required by the terms of their contract to implement project activities in accordance
                          with ESS2 measures

                          ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]

                          There could be small volumes of pesticides and chemicals used in the demonstration pilots, which coul entail
                          potential risk of air, soil and water pollution due to poor use or disposal methods. AICCRA 1 had provided training on
                          best practice in sustainable pest and disease management programs and promoted Integrated Pest Management


                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                          approach and diversification of rotations and intercropping and maintenance of plant cover. These lessons could be
                          replicated under AICCRA III to ensure effective risk management.

                          ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]

                          While low to moderate in magnitude, there is minimal risk of community health and safety due to potential exposure
                          to pesticides, and dangers associated with a poor storage of pesticide. No security forces or the military are expected
                          to be used during project implementation. The SEA/SH risks are considered to be low

                          ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]

                          Any activities that lead to physical or economic resettlement or restriction of land use will be excluded from the
                          financing of the AICCRA III This requirement will be part of the exclusion list.

                          ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                    Not Currently Relevant
                          Resources

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]




For Official Use Only
                          Any activities that lead to land degradation or impact on biodiversity will be excluded from the financing of the
                          AICCRA III .This requirement will be part of the exclusion list.

                          ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                          Local Communities

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]

                          As ESS7 is relevant as project activities may involve such groups in Kenya. Should such groups be involved, as per the
                          requirements of the ESF, a specific SEP and grievance mechanism for this community will be preparated to ensure the
                          engagement process will be culturally appropriate.

                          ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]

                          ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                          [Optional Explanation - Max. character limit 1,000]



                         B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                           OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                             No


                           OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No



                         B.3 Other Salient Features

                           Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                 No
                           [Optional explanation – Max. character limit 1,000]



                           Use of Common Approach                                                                                                    No
                           [Optional Explanation including list of possible financing partners – Max. character limit 1,000]



                         B.4 Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                         [Description provided will not be disclosed but will flow as a one time flow to the Concept Stage PID – Max. character limit
                         5,000]




For Official Use Only
                         The environmental risks of the project are assessed as moderate due to the small-scale and low-complexity nature of
                         activities, which are not expected to cause significant adverse effects on the environment, human health, or safety
                         through pollution of air, soil, and water. Activities such as small-scale testing and validation of climate-smart agriculture
                         (CSA) and NSmartAg technologies will occur in research stations and farmers’ fields. Risks such as pollution and impacts
                         on biodiversity and flora and fauna are also expected to be minimal, as these will be limited to pilot demonstration sites.
                         Similarly, risks related to the introduction of invasive species and impacts on biodiversity are negligible, as activities will
                         be conducted in controlled environments. Social risks are also rated moderate due to their low magnitude and
                         manageable scale, provided adequate mitigation measures are implemented. Key social risks include occupational health
                         and safety concerns, particularly from pesticide use, and the potential exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups,
                         including women, from project benefits. Forced and child labor risks are low, given that project workers are primarily
                         skilled professionals such as scientists and researchers, although the use of family labor by farmers cannot be entirely
                         ruled out. The risk of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEA/SH) is considered low. A negative list will ensure
                         the exclusion of large-scale activities with significant environmental and social (E&S) impacts. This will include that all
                         activities that could lead to significant impacts on land acquisition, restrictions on land use, involuntary resettlement, or
                         economic or physical displacement, cultural heritage, land degradation and biodiversity loss etc will not be financed.
                         The project will build on the extensive experience and resources from earlier AICCRA initiatives, including decision-making
                         tools and an Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Guide with screening tools, templates for Environmental
                         and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and E&S checklists. These resources will be customized and updated for AICCRA
                         III, ensuring effective E&S risk management. Each grant recipient will develop an Environmental and Social Management
                         System (ESMS) based on the ESRM Guide, which will include ESMPs, E&S Procedures and protocols for assessing and
                         mitigating risks; Code of Conduct and Grievance Mechanism for Workers and procedures for Occupational Health and
                         Safety, Waste Management, Pest Management and Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Grievance Mechanism.


                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                          Page 7 of 9
                                   The World Bank
                                   Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                         These measures will be proportional to the nature and scale of financed works. This approach, grounded in lessons from
                         earlier AICCRA projects, provides a strong foundation for replicating good practices under AICCRA III and effectively
                         managing moderate E&S risks.
                         Icipe will customize and adopt an Environment and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Guide and a Stakeholder Engagement
                         Plan (SEP) to be disclosed prior to project appraisal.



                         C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                         C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                         required by Appraisal?
                         [Description of expectations in terms of documents to be prepared to assess and manage the project’s environmental and
                         social risks and by when (i.e., prior to Effectiveness, or during implementation), highlighted features of ESA documents,
                         other project documents where environmental and social measures are to be included, and the related due diligence
                         process planned to be carried out by the World Bank, including sources of information for the due diligence - Max.
                         character limit 3,000]
                         AICCRA III will build on the extensive work on E&S risk managed undertaken under AICCRA 1 and 2. Icipe will customize
                         and adopt an Environment and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Guide and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be
                         disclosed prior to project appraisal. Subsequently, prior to implementation, each Grant recipient will be develop an
                         Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) at its level based on the ESRM Guide.




For Official Use Only
                         III. CONTACT POINT

                         Contact Point
                          Task Team Leader:       Viviana Maria Eugenia Perego         Title:           Senior Agriculture Economist

                          Email:                  vperego@worldbank.org



                         IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                         V. APPROVAL

                         Task Team Leader(s):                                          Viviana Maria Eugenia Perego



                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                                  The World Bank
                                  Accelerating Impacts Of Climate Change Research For Africa (P508689)



                         V. APPROVAL

                         ADM Environmental Specialist:                               Ruma Tavorath

                         ADM Social Specialist:                                      Eloise Sophie Fluet




For Official Use Only




                        Dec 19, 2024                                                                       Page 9 of 9
