Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDDC01136




Public Disclosure Authorized
         The World Bank
         Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)        Operation ID                  Operation Name
Brazil                          P508221                       Santa Catarina Climate Resilience
Region                          Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND               02-Jun-2025                   31-Oct-2025                    Urban, Resilience and Land
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
Investment Project              State of Santa Catarina       Secretariat for Civil
Financing (IPF)                                               Defense and Protection
                                                              (SDC)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To reduce the risk of climate related disasters in targeted areas of Santa Catarina and to strengthen institutional
capacities to manage those risks

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            149.40

  Total Financing                                                                                                 149.40
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                119.20
  Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                  119.20
  Non-World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                       Page 1
        The World Bank
        Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)


       Counterpart Funding                                                                                        29.80
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                       29.80
       Trust Funds                                                                                                 0.40
         Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                       0.40




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                   Concept Review Decision
High                                                           The review did authorize the preparation to continue




Other Decision (as needed)

B. Introduction and Context

1. Brazil’s real GDP grew by 2.9 percent in 2023 and is projected to expand by 2.8 percent in 2024, driven by strong
   consumption, supported by a resilient labor market and fiscal transfers. Growth in 2023 was fueled by private
   consumption, fiscal stimulus, and declining inflation, while exports benefited from a record grain harvest and
   favorable external conditions. In the first half of 2024, GDP grew 2.9 percent, driven solid consumption and
   recovering investment. Growth is expected to moderate to 2.2 percent in 2025 and stabilize at 2.3 percent in the
   medium term, reflecting structural reforms. The government has made progress in reforms to improve the business
   environment, financial sector, and indirect taxes. However, faster, inclusive, long-term growth requires additional
   reforms to enhance competitiveness, reduce financial and market distortions, expand infrastructure investment,
   integrate into global value chains, and improve education quality.

2. In 2023, the poverty rate (US$ 6.85 per day) fell to 21.8 percent, linked to improvements in economic conditions
   and social protection policies. In July 2024, the unemployment rate fell to 6.8 percent (the lowest since 2014), and
   real household incomes rose 4.8 percent year-over-year. The rapid decline in the poverty rates from 2022 and 2023
   has slowed down in 2024 as Bolsa Familia transfers have stabilized. Still, the poverty rate (US$ 6.85/day per capita,
   2017 PPP) continued to decrease gradually to 21.3 percent in 2024, driven by a 3 percent increase in the real
   minimum wage and the strong labor market. Sustained job growth, strengthening the targeting of the social
   protection system and lowering inflation could support faster poverty reduction over the coming years.

3. Although deforestation decreased by 21.8 percent in the Amazon region in 2023 compared to the year before,
   climate change risks are still pressured by the high levels of land use emissions in the Amazon and Cerrado
   ecosystems. Brazil’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are dominated by land use change (40.1 percent) and
   agriculture (30.4 percent). Climate change is altering temperature and rainfall patterns in the country, resulting in
   reduced water availability and extended droughts; it could push another 800,000 to 3 million Brazilians into extreme
   poverty as soon as 2030.



                                                                                                                      Page 2
          The World Bank
          Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)


    Sectoral and Institutional Context
    4. Brazil faces recurrent climate-related shocks that cause significant social and economic impacts. Climate change
        is leading to more frequent and intense events that, when combined with unregulated urbanization and lagging
        investment in infrastructure, expose the most vulnerable Brazilians to increasing risks. Brazilian cities are on the
        frontline of this challenge, having grown rapidly since the mid-20th century, when less than half of Brazil’s population
        was urban. Today, 85% of Brazilians live in urban areas, seeking jobs, improved living conditions and opportunities.
        As land prices rise, poorer city residents settle in higher-risk areas, such as steep slopes, creeks, and flood plains.

    5. The State of Santa Catarina is one of the most climate-exposed states in Brazil. Between 1991 and 2023, flooding
       and landslides caused more than USD 7.2 billion in economic losses in the state, affecting more than 20 million
       people and displacing 1.3 million people.1 In absolute terms, Santa Catarina suffered more damages and losses from
       flooding and landslides than any other state during this period, while droughts also have serious economic impacts
       in agriculture. A major flood in 2008 was a watershed moment, when over 1.5 million people were impacted, and
       120,000 displaced. More recently, floods in October 2023 led to a state of emergency in 89 out of Santa Catarina’s
       295 municipalities. Between 2004 and 2014 there were 714 landslides events in the region, causing 138 deaths.

    6. The Itajaí-Açu river valley is the most disaster-prone region in the state, accounting for 25% of all recorded
       disasters and around half of economic losses. Around 1.9 million people live in the valley–a quarter of the state’s
       population– and the region produces around 22% of state GDP (US$15.5 billion in 2021). The region is one of the
       fastest urbanizing in Santa Catarina. The main urban areas are Blumenau (363,000 inhabitants), Itajaí (264,000
       inhabitants), Brusque (141,000 inhabitants) and Rio do Sul (73,000 inhabitants). Almost all are directly or indirectly
       exposed to the risks of floods and landslides. Itajaí city at the mouth of the Itajaí-Açu River is the largest city
       economy and a major beef export hub, generating a GDP of US$8.3 billion.2 The 2008 floods left this city 90%
       underwater and caused severe damage to the port. Revenue losses were estimated by the Brazilian Ports Ministry
       at more than $400 million, equivalent to $35 million per day, as vessels are diverted to neighboring states. The
       federal government provided over $100 million to repair damages, but this took years to rebuild. The Bank
       estimated losses and damages from the 2008 floods at US$ 1.7 billion3.

    7. Approximately 144,000 people live in high or very high risk areas in the Itajaí valley, as defined by the Brazilian
       National Geological Service, many from lower income families. Unplanned or poorly planned urbanization, the
       removal of native vegetation, inappropriate land use, all exacerbate disaster impacts. In a recent survey,4 women
       perceive higher vulnerability to disaster risks than men, with lower coping mechanisms and financial security in the
       event of a major crisis. Emergency awareness campaigns in general are biased towards men, who are the assumed
       decision-makers in the event of evacuation or other prevention actions. Education level is the other factor that
       most influences community perceptions of risks. The positive correlation between schooling and risk perception
       underscores the importance of investing in educational and awareness programs about socio-environmental risks.

    8. In this context, the Government of Santa Catarina, led by the State’s Civil Defense agency, has initiated a program
       of structural risk mitigation works and built strong institutional arrangements for disaster risk management
       (DRM). The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) has been a longstanding technical partner of the


1
  World Bank estimate based on government data (S2iD)
2
  according to 2021 IBGE data
3
  2023-adjusted values. See https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/fr/250881468232500513/pdf/NonAsciiFileName0.pdf
4
  Mello et al. (2024) Community resilience to socio-environmental disasters in Itajaí Valley, Brazil in International Journal of Disaster
Risk Reduction.

                                                                                                                                      Page 3
          The World Bank
          Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)


        Government in this effort, having helped prepare a Masterplan for Disaster Risk Reduction for the Itajaí-Açu River
        Valley5 after the 2008 floods, which remains an important reference point for the current investment plan. The
        World Bank has been a longstanding partner of this effort, through a series of technical engagements and analytical
        activities. Prevention strategies, such as the construction of dams, river channeling, and the modernization of
        meteorological forecasting systems, have had early successes, notably in protecting key urban areas such as
        Blumenau.

    9. In 2024, building on these initial efforts, the Governor of Santa Catarina announced6 an ambitious, multi-year
       investment plan totaling around US$ 1 billion over 10+ years to: (i) implement infrastructure to reduce risks and
       control floods and landslides in the Itajaí Valley; (ii) expand assessment of regional risks to better understand and
       prioritize adaptation needs under new climate scenarios; (iii) update and expand climate monitoring and early
       warning capacity; and (iv) improve communication and increase risk awareness at the local level, especially among
       vulnerable populations, and with the private sector.

    10. Institutional gaps exist and capacities must be reinforced to ensure Santa Catarina’s disaster resilience program
        is inclusive and sustainable. First, underpinning analytics must incorporate climate models to ensure investments
        are fit-for-purpose for the coming decades. Second, links to relevant sectoral policies are critical to ensure flood
        protection benefits are enjoyed by all. In particular, a strong link to housing policy is necessary to mitigate risks of
        exacerbating existing social inequalities, i.e. by gentrifying protected areas, and risking displacement of low-income
        residents to less safe areas. Understanding risks at a regional scale is crucial better manage land use dynamics and
        reduce occupation of high-risk areas. Third, there is scope to introduce greener, more nature-based solutions (NBS)
        to structural risk mitigation strategies in Santa Catarina, which are traditionally more “grey”. Federal policies do not
        typically incentivize NBS, although current Programs led primarily by the Ministry of Environment and Climate
        Change seek to scale up NBS approaches at the subnational level, but this remains ad-hoc. Finally, there is scope
        not only to replicate the Itajaí masterplan in other river basins in Santa Catarina, but also improve on it, and to seek
        positive spillover effects to neighboring states, for example in cooperation agreements for the generation and
        handling of climate monitoring data and early warning systems.
    Relationship to CPF
    11. The proposed operation aligns with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Brazil for FY24–
        FY28. It is aligned with the existing Higher Level Objectives (HLOs), specifically HLO3: Greener Economy with
        Reduced Vulnerability to Climate Shocks. The operation particularly contributes to objective 3.3 Promote Green
        and Resilient Cities & Communities, as it will increase resilience and reduce the impacts of floods through
        infrastructure works, risk assessment, risk monitoring and alerting and local resilience and institutional
        strengthening.


    C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

    12. The PDO is to reduce the risk of climate related disasters in targeted areas of Santa Catarina and to strengthen
        institutional capacities to manage those risks.

     Key Results (From PCN)


5
    https://openjicareport.jica.go.jp/pdf/12043642.pdf
6
    https://www.defesacivil.sc.gov.br/protecao-levada-a-serio/

                                                                                                                             Page 4
         The World Bank
         Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)


    I.     Mitigate public and private losses related to disasters in the Itajaí Valley through investments in flood control
           river works and river flow monitoring and control.
   II.     Increase understanding of disaster risks in a changing climate for the territory of Santa Catarina.
  III.     Improve the accuracy, timeliness and reach of climate risk information and early warning of adverse events.
  IV.      Increase local resilience by supporting municipalities and sectoral agencies in enhancing their capacity to
           manage risks and protect the most vulnerable households.


D. Concept Description
The proposed project will be structured as a USD149.00 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) operation comprising
a USD119.20 million IBRD loan and USD29.80 million in counterpart funding. The project will contribute to the State’s
multi-phase climate resilience investment program known in Portuguese as "Proteção Levada a Sério". The objective of
the project is to strengthen the Borrower’s capacity to manage climate-related disaster risks and reduce those risks in
targeted areas of the Borrower’s territory. To achieve the proposed development objective, the Project includes five
components described below:
      • Component 1: Infrastructure Works and Nature Restoration for Reducing Disaster Risks in Urban Areas of
          the Itajaí Valley - USD 105.00 million
      • Component 2: Enabling Municipal investment in adaptation and a resilient private sector - USD 20.00 million
      • Component 3: Climate risk monitoring and Early Warning - USD 9.30 million
      • Component 4: Climate risk analytics to establish DRM masterplans across the State - USD 7.20 million
      • Component 5: Program Administration - USD 7.50 million (5.0% of total).




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                        Policies                                                    Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No




                                                                                                                         Page 5
     The World Bank
     Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Jack Campbell
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 State of Santa Catarina

Implementing Agencies
 Secretariat for Civil Defense and Protection (SDC)
 Fabiano Souza
 Secretary for Civil Defense and Protection
 secretario@defesacivil.sc.gov.br

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Jack Campbell

Approved By




                                                                     Page 6
     The World Bank
     Santa Catarina Climate Resilience(P508221)



Practice Manager/Manager:               Federica Ranghieri   16-Nov-2024

Country Director:                       Sophie Naudeau       08-Dec-2024




                                                                           Page 7
