Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2026 | Report No: PIDDC01271




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID               Operation Name
Azerbaijan                     P508792                    Azerigas Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
EUROPE AND CENTRAL             23-Mar-2026                23-Apr-2026                   Energy & Extractives
ASIA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Azerigas                   State Oil Company of the
Financing (IPF)                                           Republic of Azerbaijan
                                                          (SOCAR)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to reduce fugitive methane emissions from the gas distribution network operated by
Azerigas, and to strengthen Azerigas' asset management capacity.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           15.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                15.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

DETAILS
  Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Trust Funds                                                                                                   15.00
      Trust Funds                                                                                                15.00




                                                                                                                    Page 1



                                                                                                            Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                               Concept Review Decision
Moderate                                                                   The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context


    1. Azerbaijan’s economy is heavily dependent on fossil fuels, with oil and gas accounting for about 90 percent of
    exports, 49 percent of its fiscal revenue, and one-third of gross domestic product. The 2000–2010 surge in oil and
    gas production led the country to upper-middle-income status in 2009. During 2022-2023, high energy prices have
    yielded significant fiscal revenues enabling the government to support growth in non-oil and gas sector through
    increased fiscal spending, particularly in public investment. However, exposure to global energy prices remains a
    fundamental risk for Azerbaijan’s economic development. The Azerbaijan 2030: National Priorities for Socio-Economic
    Development1 (Azerbaijan 2030) and the Republic of Azerbaijan Social and Economic Development Strategy for 2022-
    20262 lay out an ambitious program for economic diversification including notable energy transition investments.

    2. While the hydrocarbon-fueled growth model has delivered substantial gains, Azerbaijan today acknowledges
    its limits and as a part of the strategy to diversify the economy is shifting toward a clean energy transition. Global
    climate action, particularly net zero emission pathways in key oil and gas importing economies, has increased the
    urgency for Azerbaijan to diversify its economy through low-carbon activities and has led the Government of
    Azerbaijan (GoA) to position the country as a clean energy producer and exporter. Azerbaijan aims to replicate its
    success story in oil and gas through the establishment of green energy corridors for clean energy exports from Central
    Asia and the South Caucasus to Türkiye and Europe establishing itself as a reliable exporter of RE.2

    3. The GoA has clearly recognized the changing global energy landscape. Its Presidency of the 29 th Conference of
    the Parties (COP) in 2024 and the adoption of a Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)3 demonstrate its
    commitment to a clean energy transition while remaining a leading energy exporter. In the power sector, the GoA’s
    goal is to increase the share of RE sources in installed generation capacity from 20 percent, including large hydropower
    plants (HPPs), in 2024 to 30 percent by 20304. Azerbaijan is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change,
    especially to heatwaves, droughts and higher-frequency and higher-intensity floods. Awareness about these events
    has increased in recent years, as the GoA has started taking action toward climate change mitigation and adaptation.


1 Approved in 2021, https://president.az/en/articles/view/50474
2 The Green Corridor Initiative is part of a memorandum of understanding (MoU)signed with Romania, Hungary, and Georgia to export green energy

supplies to Europe and builds upon the World Bank’s Enhancing Energy Security through Power Interconnection and Renewable Energy Program
(P179950) approved on May 21, 2024.
3 Azerbaijan aims to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 35 percent by 2030 and 40 percent by 2050 (compared to 1990).
4 The capacity of the power plants on renewable energy sources, including large HPPs is 1687.8 MW, which is 20.3 percent of the total capacity.

https://minenergy.gov.az/en/alternativ-ve-berpa-olunan-enerji/azerbaycanda-berpa-olunan-enerji-menbelerinden-istifade

                                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)


    4. Azerbaijan has set out a compelling vision for developing a green energy corridor embedded in national
    strategies and aligned with international commitments. Azerbaijan has a large untapped RE potential, particularly in
    onshore and offshore wind energy.5 The development of large regional transmission infrastructure, such as the Black
    Sea Submarine Cable, could allow Azerbaijan to leverage these extensive resources to pivot its global role on the
    energy stage toward being an exporter of green energy. However, as set out in the Azerbaijan Country Climate and
    Development Report,6 the clean energy transition must be accelerated to meet the country’s NDC targets and
    economic ambitions.

    5. Cutting methane emissions is one of the fastest and most cost-effective tools available to limit global warming.
    Due to the high global warming potential of methane compared to carbon dioxide, reducing methane emissions has
    a significant impact on global warming. Azerbaijan’s energy-related methane emissions have increased quickly and
    are about 6% above 1990 levels. As the country continues to develop, so does its need for energy provision. However,
    inefficiencies in the system cause ‘easily avoidable’ emissions such as fugitive methane emissions from leaks in the
    country’s legacy oil and gas infrastructure.

    6. The Presidential Administration, the Cabinet of Ministers, and the Ministry of Energy (MoE) are the sector’s
    main governing institutions. The oil and gas sector is almost entirely state controlled, with state-owned enterprises
    such as SOCAR7 (oil and gas production and transmission) and its business unit Azerigas (gas distribution and supply)
    as the key operators in the country. SOCAR produces oil and gas from onshore and offshore fields in the Azerbaijan
    segment of the Caspian Sea. It operates the country's only oil refinery, one gas processing plant, and several oil and
    gas export pipelines throughout the country. The company also owns fuel filling stations in several countries. SOCAR
    Upstream or “Azneft” is responsible for exploration, development, and production of onshore and offshore oil and
    gas fields, transportation, processing, refining and sale of oil, gas, condensate and other related products. SOCAR has
    several fully owned producing assets and has a participating interest in all production sharing agreements with private
    companies. SOCAR is a profitable company that serves as a major source of revenues for the state.

    7. Azerigas is a separate business unit within SOCAR, with unbundled accounts, responsible for distribution and
    sales of natural gas to the domestic market. The gas distribution system spans 73,000 km, serving approximately 2.6
    million customers across the country. Gas distribution in Azerbaijan is a regulated business; gas sales prices are
    proposed by SOCAR, reviewed by the Azerbaijan Energy Regulatory Authority (AERA), but ultimately decided by the
    Tariff (Price) Council, chaired by the Minister of Economy. Currently the weighted average gas sales price is about 155
    manat/1000 m3. Negotiated gas purchase prices are based on the cost of gas supply from various fields, and currently
    average about 135 manat/1000 m3.

    8. Azerbaijan is in the process of unbundling and reforming its gas sector. In 2025, the Government of Azerbaijan
    took important steps that are crucial for gas sector reform, including the creation of an independent regulator for gas
    under AERA, and the adoption of a new tariff model for gas that would allow Azerigas to recover the cost of necessary
    maintenance and replacement in the future. Specifically, a new Law on Gas Supply (No. 233-VIIQ) was passed by the
    National Assembly (Milli Majlis) on July 8, 2025, and signed by the President of Azerbaijan on August 19, 2025. The
    Law provides for two critical policy reform steps in the gas sector of Azerbaijan, specifically:


5 Offshore wind technical potential is estimated at 35 GW in shallow waters and 122 GW for deep waters (World Bank Group, Offshore Wind Roadmap

for Azerbaijan, 2022).
6 Azerbaijan’s 2030 emissions target (−35 percent compared to 1990) and its target of 30 percent RE in the power generation mix by 2030 would

require ramping up annual investments in clean energy quickly over the next decade to about US$0.8–1.0 billion per year by 2030. World Bank Group,
Azerbaijan - Country Climate and Development Report (English). Washington, D.C.
7 The State Oil Company of the Republic of Azerbaijan (SOCAR)



                                                                                                                                             Page 3



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)


         i.    Unbundling of the gas sector to establish a clear distinction between storage, transmission, distribution, and
               retail, and their functional and operational separation by separate legal entities. The deadline for the full
               implementation of unbundling was set for January 1, 2027; and

         ii.   Gas tariffs regulation and setting authority to be fully transferred to the energy regulatory agency (AERA).
               The deadline for the regulatory transitional period was set for July 1, 2028. The counterparts informed that a
               special purpose law is being drafted in follow up to the new gas law, which will provide the legal background
               for the establishment of a new interim authority for gas tariffs regulation during the transitional period
               (however, not yet named publicly). From July 1, 2028, onwards AERA is expected to take full control of tariffs
               setting and regulation across all levels of the gas sector.

    9. More than 60 percent of the distribution network of Azerigas is a legacy from the Soviet era, and long past its
    technical lifetime. Leaks are significant and must be urgently repaired to reduce the financial burden of lost gas. In
    fact, all legacy assets would require replacement to avoid further gas leaks, but the full replacement cost of the
    distribution network is estimated at Manat 1.526 billion. Azerigas would like to replace its distribution network in
    batches starting with the most urgent parts first and has made plans to use the outcomes of the gas leak baseline
    program that the company is currently undertaking to inform investment decisions. However, these plans can only
    commence after investment decisions have been made, which stands to be a multi-year endeavor. As such, interim
    efforts to address leakage remain critical and necessary to not only reduce the financial burden caused by lost gas,
    but also to address the emissions released before replacement.

    10. SOCAR is keen to rehabilitate Azerigas’ assets and to turn the company into a technically and financially healthy
    utility, but Azerigas needs short-term financial support to commence gas leak repair activities. Therefore, SOCAR
    has committed to ensure the long-term sustainability of Azerigas by establishing, with the proposed project’s support,
    a mechanism for Azerigas to retain a portion of financial savings resulting from gas leak repairs for reinvestment into
    the proposed financial facility for further rehabilitation of Azerigas’s gas distribution system beyond the horizon of
    proposed Global Flaring and Methane Reduction Partnership (GFMR) grant, thus maximizing the impact of the
    proposed project. SOCAR indicated that they are interested in and willing to consider follow-up financing by the World
    Bank and other financiers for modernization of Azerigas’s gas assets that are beyond repair, which will also be included
    in letter of commitment that SOCAR will send to the Bank. Additionally, both AERA and MoE confirmed that the full
    implementation of the new law would allow Azerigas not only to become technically and financially healthy, but also
    financially independent, which in turn may open the floor for so much needed investments and commercial financing.
    AERA also expressed its support for potential structural investments and concurs with modernization needs of
    Azerigas.

    11. The proposed project aligns with the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
    Azerbaijan for the period FY25-29.8 The project will contribute to Higher Level Outcome 1: Increased Resilience and
    Sustainability. Azerbaijan’s economy remains heavily dependent on fossil fuels. The proposed project will help
    Azerbaijan accelerate its transition from a hydrocarbon-based economy to a greener and more climate resilient one.
    The government recognizes the limits of the hydrocarbon-fueled growth model and has set a goal to diversify the
    economy and shift away from hydrocarbons. This will require, among other things, investing in reducing emissions.
    The urgent need to accelerate the transition to greener economies to create new economic opportunities and
    overcome the limits of the current fossil fuel-dependent model in a sustainable and inclusive way was also discussed
    in the Systematic Country Diagnostic Update.9

8 Report No 195625-AZ; discussed by the WBG Board of Executive Directors on January 29, 2025.
9 June 27, 2022; https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/1d57e70f-6b61-55ac-b1cd-af641fd05e6c/content



                                                                                                                                   Page 4



                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)


    12. The proposed project is in line with Azerbaijan’s climate change strategies and sectoral decarbonization
    pathways. As identified in the World Bank’s Azerbaijan Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR)10, the
    reduction of methane emissions will play an important role in achieving the country’s NDC targets, which seek to
    reduce GHG emissions by 40 percent by 2050 compared to 1990.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The development objective is to reduce fugitive methane emissions from the gas distribution network operated by
 Azerigas, and to strengthen Azerigas' asset management capacity.

 Key Results

     Baseline                                                          Closing Period
     Cumulative fugitive methane emissions reduced from the gas distribution network operated by Azerigas (cubic meter)
     June/2026                                                         June/2029
     0                                                                 107,657,000
     Azerigas is ‘OGMP 2.0 ready’ (text)
     June/2026                                                         June/2029
     No                                                                Yes


      The project assumes that 80% of current methane emissions can be reduced over a period of 8 years through the
      proposed 3-year GFMR grant funding and the financing Facility (753,600,000 cubic meter, cumulative). This is
      equivalent to 14,067,000 tonnes CO2e.

 D. Concept Description

    13. Azerigas has initiated a program to repair leaks in the gas distribution network, including low pressure gas
    pipelines, pressure reduction stations, gas flow meters, connectors etcetera. The program will cover the entire legacy
    gas distribution network. The program will be part of a larger set of initiatives spearheaded by Azerigas addressing gas
    losses more broadly, including administrative losses due to inaccurate and missing metering, such as a full-scale roll-
    out of a ‘digital factory’ comprising a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system, smart meters, and
    predictive maintenance systems. The Azerigas Gas Leak Detection and Repair (LDAR) Facility will be established as a
    recipient-executed trust fund (RETF) project with funding by the GFMR grant of US$ 15 million and implemented by
    Azerigas for methane leak detection and repair activities that will be conducted by Azerigas in the gas distribution
    system it operates. The proposed financial Facility will start with the savings accumulated during the initial period of
    GFMR grant. SOCAR will be the Recipient of the grant and holder of the grant and Facility accounts, and Azerigas will
    be the Beneficiary and the implementing entity responsible for day-to-day implementation and project management.
    The scope of the project has been informed by a pilot project initiated by Azerigas in the larger Sumqayit area based
    on its existing LDAR practices. Repair activities will be proposed and executed by Azerigas on a rolling basis and upon
    pre-agreed eligibility criteria and will be prioritized based on the estimated cost, complexity, potential for emission
    reduction, and other relevant aspects, with the goal to maximize efficiency of the grant funds. Detailed criteria for
    activity prioritization will be developed by Azerigas together with the Bank prior to approval of the project.

    14. The proposed financial facility will enable activities that would otherwise not be prioritized due to budget
    constraints. At the same time, a clear technical and financial commitment to operational excellence from the

10 World Bank Group, Azerbaijan – Country Climate and Development Report, 2023.



                                                                                                                                  Page 5



                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)


   beneficiary Azerigas and its mother company SOCAR will ensure that the grant funds will be used for significant
   emissions abatement. To guarantee longer-term impact, a key aspect of the proposed financial Facility will be that
   majority of financial benefits from gas savings resulting from leak repair to the recipient will be re-invested into the
   facility to mobilize additional capital to the initial GFMR grant, to further reduce methane emissions. Azerigas, with
   Bank support, will develop a protocol for measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) of leak repairs prior to
   approval of the project, including the establishment of a methane emission baseline, to determine the volume of
   abated methane emissions. The methane will be valued at the Azerigas purchase price, which is currently 135 manat
   per 1000 m3.

   15. The detailed scope of repair work eligible for funding by the grant and the financial Facility will be developed
   by Azerigas prior to approval of the project. It is envisaged that this will include the purchase and installation of
   cluster meters, methane emission detection and metering equipment, small spare parts (e.g. connectors, valves, small
   pipe sections), adequate clothing and PPE for LDAR crews, as well as contract services for the leak repair program,
   capacity building activities to carry out monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions in line with the OGMP 2.0
   standard, and digital solutions (e.g. the integration of leak data in the GIS system). Funds will be allocated from the
   GFRM grant and from the financial Facility on a regular basis to carry out a series of activities to repair gas leaks based
   on pre-defined criteria. These criteria will include but not be limited to: (1) a ‘whitelist’ of standard replicable leak
   repair activities pre-assessed as eligible for grant funding, such as for example replacement of certain types of
   connectors; and (2) an appropriate threshold for the estimated cost per tonne of methane emissions abated through
   the proposed activities. In practice this means that repair interventions will be on the low end of the cost-abatement
   curve. It is estimated that the repair activities funded by the Facility will be conducted from July 2027 through July
   2035 (over an eight-year (8) period), while the GFMR Grant will finance the activities during the first three (3) years.

   16. Based on the above, the proposed Project is suggested to finance the following activities grouped into three
   components:

   Component 1. Equipment for gas leak detection and repair. This component will finance the procurement and
   installation of cluster meters, methane emission detection and metering equipment, small spare parts (e.g.,
   connectors, valves, small pipe sections), adequate clothing and PPE for LDAR crews.

    Component 2. Technical services for LDAR activities. This component will finance the procurement of contractual
    services for the leak detection activities.

    Component 3. Capacity building for Azerigas. This component will finance activities aimed at advancing Azerigas’s
    capacities in conducting monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions in line with the OGMP 2.0 standard, and
    digital solutions (e.g., the integration of leak detection and repair data in the GIS system).

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                       Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No




                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



 17. The environmental and social risks estimated at concept stage are due to the implementation of physical works
 for fixing gas leakages in the existing gas distribution network and include those related to the generation of some
 amounts of waste, temporary disturbance to communities and habitats due to noise, fume and vibration, and safety
 risks if safety measures are not implemented properly. Labor and OHS risks are relatively low as the project will only
 involve minor repair works. Overall, the project will lead to improved community safety, due to capturing gas leaks in
 the existing network. An additional positive externality is that gas leak detection and repairs in the gas distribution
 sector is a labor-intensive process involving a large number of field staff walking along the pipe and carrying out simple
 repair works; the accelerated program of leak detection and repair unlocked by this operation is expected to generate
 significant additional local employment over the extended program period through 2035.Based on the above, the
 project is assessed as Moderate risk both from the environmental and from the social side.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Sandu Ghidirim
 Senior Energy Specialist

 Robert Van Der Geest
 Senior Gas Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Azerigas

 Azerigas

Implementing Agencies
 State Oil Company of the Republic of Azerbaijan (SOCAR)

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


                                                                                                                       Page 7



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Azerbaijan Gas Leak Detection and Repair Facility(P508792)



Task Team Leader(s):                    Sandu Ghidirim, Robert Van Der Geest

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Zubin Bamji                            24-Apr-2025

Country Director:                       Rolande Simone Pryce                   28-Jan-2026




                                                                                                     Page 8



                                                                                             Official Use Only
