Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)




                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Project Information Document (PID)


            _For Official Use Only_
                                                       Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01333




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)        Region                       Operation ID                Operation Name
                                                                                                                   Amazon and Cerrado
                                                          LATIN AMERICA AND                                        Bioeconomy, Forest
                          Brazil                                                       P508202
                                                          CARIBBEAN                                                Restoration, and Climate-
                                                                                                                   Smart Agriculture Project
                          Financing Instrument            Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                          03-Oct-2025                  24-Feb-2026                 Agriculture and Food
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
                          Banco do Brasil                 Banco do Brasil




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Expand access to finance for the bioeconomy, forest restoration, and climate-smart agriculture, and enhance climate
                          adaptation and mitigation of targeted beneficiaries

                          Components
                          Credit lines to finance bioeconomy, forest restoration and climate-smart agriculture
                          Carbon fund
                          Technical Assistance
                          Project Management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                          701.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                               701.00
                                          of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             400.00



                                                                                                                                             Page 1
                                 The World Bank
                                 Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)



                             Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                               400.00
                             Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Trust Funds                                                                                                 28.00
                                 Global P'ship for Sust. and Resilient Landscapes - PROGREEN                                               14.00
                                 IBRD Fund for Innovative GPG Solutions                                                                    14.00
                               Commercial Financing                                                                                       270.00
                                 Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                        270.00
                               Counterpart Funding                                                                                           3.00
                                 Borrower/Recipient                                                                                          3.00




_For Official Use Only_
                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Moderate


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context

                          1.     Brazil’s real GDP grew by 3.4 percent in 2024, driven by robust private consumption, bolstered by a tight labor
                          market and fiscal stimulus through expanded social transfers, and by recovering investment. The poverty rate declined
                          from 21.7 to 20.9 percent (US$6.85 per day, 2017 PPP) in 2024, driven by strong labor market conditions. However, it is
                          expected to decline more slowly from 2025 onward due to moderated economic growth and limited fiscal space for social
                          spending. A recent deterioration in inflation expectations led to a more contractionary monetary policy, which in turn is
                          expected to contribute to a lower GDP growth of 1.8 percent in 2025, stabilizing at 2.0 percent in 2026 and 2027.
                          Uncertainty in trade policy is also weighing on investment and exports. Household consumption is projected to slow down
                          due to higher inflation, lower transfers, and fading labor market gains. Recent structural reforms have improved the
                          business environment, the financial sector, and indirect taxation. However, achieving faster, more inclusive, long-term


                                                                                                                                               Page 2
                                  The World Bank
                                  Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                          growth will require further reforms to enhance competitiveness, reduce financial and market distortions, expand
                          infrastructure investment, deepen integration into global value chains, and improve the quality of education.



                           Sectoral and Institutional Context


                          2.       The Amazon and Cerrado biomes are critical areas for biodiversity conservation and agriculture importance and
                          are key to unlocking Brazil’s climate adaptation and mitigation agenda. The Amazon biome spans 420 million hectares,
                          representing over 40 percent of Brazil’s national territory. Recognized for its critical biodiversity importance, it is a vital
                          global climate regulator, functioning as a major carbon sink. About 83 million hectares of primary forests have already
                          been deforested in the Amazon.1 Considering the entire Legal Amazon2, approximately 23 percent of the original cover
                          has been deforested, with 59 million hectares of primary forests and Cerrado areas lost in the past 36 years.3 The Cerrado,
                          a tropical savanna covering over 200 million hectares (23.3 percent of Brazil’s territory), is the second-largest biome in
                          Latin America. It serves as a major agricultural hub, driving Brazil’s global exports of soy, cattle, corn, and sugarcane, and
                          accounted for 60 percent of the country’s agricultural output in 2022, including 22 percent of global soybean production
                          and 23 percent of global sugarcane production.³ However, over 30 million hectares of the Cerrado’s native savanna have
                          been converted in recent decades, threatening its crucial roles as a carbon sink, freshwater source, habitat for Indigenous




_For Official Use Only_
                          peoples, and sanctuary for 5 percent of all species on Earth.4 Alarmingly, deforestation in the Cerrado increased by 43
                          percent in 2023 compared to the previous year, even as deforestation in the neighboring Amazon declined by 62 percent.5
                          Agricultural expansion, particularly for soy and livestock, is a major driver of deforestation in both biomes, and, together
                          with wildfires, intensifies climate vulnerabilities. The maintenance of native vegetation is crucial for regulating the water
                          cycle and mitigating heatwaves, and its removal heightens the regions’ vulnerability to prolonged droughts and extreme
                          weather events. These rapid changes underscore the urgent need for sustainable land management to mitigate Brazil’s
                          emissions and safeguard its critical ecosystems.
                          3.       The bioeconomy6, forest restoration initiatives, and adoption of Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA)7 practices
                          offer a sustainable pathway to fostering resilient and inclusive growth in these biomes. The bioeconomy represents a
                          solution for conservation-friendly economic development, in particular in the Amazon. In the Legal Amazon, the
                          bioeconomy is estimated to generate value added of US$1.9 billion, a GDP of US$2.4 billion, and support around
                          347 thousand jobs.8 The bioeconomy not only values biodiversity products but is often also linked to broader territorial
                          conservation measures in the Amazon and Cerrado biomes. This sector offers significant potential for further economic
                          growth, especially under scenarios focused on zero deforestation and optimized land use, which could substantially
                          increase value aggregation and job creation in the region. In both biomes, there is a significant opportunity for the
                          restoration of pastures and forests. Over 90 million hectares of degraded pastures with very low agricultural productivity

                          1 Nobre, C.A. et al. (2023) New Economy for the Brazilian Amazon. São Paulo: WRI Brasil. Based on data from Prodes, 2022.
                          2 Legally defined area established by Law N. 1.806/1953, covering the Brazilian Amazon Basin, including tropical forests and adjacent Cerrado

                          regions. It extends over approximately 5 million square kilometers—representing 59 percent of Brazil’s territory.
                          3 Nobre, C.A. et al. (2023) New Economy for the Brazilian Amazon. São Paulo: WRI Brasil. Based on data from Mapbiomas, 2022.
                          4 World Economic Forum. 2024. The Cerrado: A Critical Biome for Sustainable Transition.
                          5 Ibid.
                          6
                             The bioeconomy is the production, utilization, conservation, and regeneration of biological resources, including related knowledge, science,
                          technology, and innovation, to provide sustainable solutions (information, products, processes and services) within and across all economic sectors
                          and enable a transformation to a sustainable economy. (International Advisory Council of the Global Bioeconomy Summit, 2018).
                          7 CSA is an integrated approach to managing landscapes—cropland, livestock, forests and fisheries--that address the interlinked challenges of food

                          security and climate change. It is a set of agricultural practices and technologies which simultaneously boost productivity, enhance resilience and
                          reduce GHG emissions.
                          8 Nobre, C.A. et al. (2023) New Economy for the Brazilian Amazon. São Paulo: WRI Brasil



                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3
                                  The World Bank
                                  Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                          require restoration through CSA practices. These practices can enhance productivity, promote sustainable agri-food
                          production, and reduce pressure on forest areas. Alongside ecological forest restoration with native species, the
                          implementation of productive forest restoration and agroforestry systems is proposed to foster CSA and forestry
                          production. Restoration of native forests on private lands is mandated by Brazil’s Forest code (Federal Law No. 12,651 of
                          May 25, 2012), but enforcement remains limited and fragmented.
                               4. There is a significant funding gap for CSA in Brazil, which poses a major barrier to the widespread adoption of
                          sustainable practices by rural producers and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)9. Access to adequate
                          financing is essential for enabling investments in CSA, the bioeconomy, and forest restoration. Credit availability plays a
                          critical role in shaping agrifood systems, influencing decisions ranging from crop and livestock choices to the uptake of
                          sustainable technologies. Although the public sector remains a key player in Brazil’s formal agrifinance market—
                          contributing approximately 33 percent of total credit, or about US$ 90 billion through the 2025–2026 Plano Safra10—only
                          3 percent of its investment credit in the Legal Amazon is directed toward CSA. Alarmingly, even if all agricultural loans in
                          the region were redirected exclusively to CSA, they would cover only 40 percent of the sector’s estimated financing needs
                          for a sustainable transition.11 Moreover, despite the existence of dedicated subsidized credit schemes, only 15 percent of
                          family farmers currently access formal credit. This highlights a substantial and urgent need to expand access to targeted
                          agrifinance solutions to close the gap and support a large-scale shift toward CSA, the bioeconomy, and forest restoration
                          across Brazil.
                               5. However, the challenge extends beyond capital availability to include multiple bottlenecks in access to finance
                          for CSA, forest restoration, and the bioeconomy. To foster a transition towards CSA, existing financing is largely limited




_For Official Use Only_
                          to Plano Safra subsidized lines, which mostly cover short-term working capital needs—while CSA models require long-
                          term financing with extended maturities and grace periods. Financial products must be redesigned to better match the
                          investment profiles of CSA transitions, including blended finance mechanisms that integrate carbon finance or other green
                          incentives to lower investment costs. Technical assistance is equally critical to de-risk CSA adoption for rural producers
                          and improve project bankability. In the bioeconomy, access to finance is constrained by structural challenges such as high
                          informality, limited financial literacy, fragmented value chains, and the remote location of producers. These factors not
                          only suppress demand but also hinder financial institutions' ability to assess risk, highlighting the need for specialized
                          credit agents and tailored financial solutions. Forest restoration faces similar barriers: despite legal mandates under the
                          Forest Code, weak enforcement, low regulatory pressure, and the absence of appropriate financial products and technical
                          assistance have stunted the development of restoration value chains. Banco do Brasil (BB) has embedded sustainability –
                          with special focus on bioeconomy – at the core of its strategy by financing R$ 1.7 billion12 (approximately US $310 million)
                          in bioeconomy projects in the Amazônia Legal—a 55 percent increase from 2024 to 2025, resulting from increased
                          technical capacity building producers and BB credit agents. Yet, systemic challenges must be addressed to unlock the full
                          potential of private and public investment in nature-based solutions.
                          6.        Carbon finance can play a key role in unlocking investments into CSA and forest restoration by mobilizing funds
                          from private investors. Farmers who restore native vegetation and adopt CSA technologies and practices also contribute
                          to carbon removal, measured as tons of carbon dioxide (tCO2e) that can be verified according to international carbon
                          standards and issued as carbon credits. Payments for carbon credits are fundamental to the financial viability of most
                          landowners and companies’ forest restoration activities and contribute to sustainable development through climate
                          mitigation and social co-benefits. Private companies purchase carbon credits for compliance with domestic legal
                          requirements or for corporate social responsibility reasons (e.g., net-zero commitments or voluntary climate claims).

                          9 Pursuant to Complementary Law No. 123/2006, Brazilian micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) are stratified by annual gross‐revenue

                          thresholds established therein. Individuals are classified using the same criteria on gross revenue.
                          10
                             Plano Safra is the Brazilian government annual plan to support the agriculture sector through subsidized credit lines for medium farmers
                          (PRONAMP) and family farmers (PRONAF).
                          11
                             Nobre, C.A. et al. (2023) New Economy for the Brazilian Amazon. São Paulo: WRI Brasil



                                                                                                                                                                        Page 4
                                  The World Bank
                                  Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                          Demand for carbon credits from nature-based removals is increasing. In 2024, retirements of forestry and land use carbon
                          removal credits issued by independent voluntary carbon standards increased by nearly 25 percent and issuances from
                          improved forest management and afforestation/ reforestation activities increased 20 percent compared to 2023 levels.13
                          Nature-based removal credits trade at a premium to other types of credits and forward prices for these types of credits
                          commonly exceed US$ 20 per tCO2e.14 Brazil is projected to have the largest potential for supplying nature-based offsets
                          for the period of 2024-2050 (30.5 million offsets).15 In 2024, Brazil enacted a legal framework for carbon markets —
                          Federal Law No. 15.042/2024 — which establishes a national cap and trade emissions trading system, the Brazilian System
                          of Trade of GHG Emissions (Sistema Brasileiro de Comércio de Emissões de Gases de Efeito Estufa - SBCE). While the SBCE
                          will not be fully operational for six years and excludes AFOLU sectors for the time being, discussions are ongoing on
                          whether SBCE-regulated entities will be allowed to use AFOLU carbon credits as offsets within the system.16
                          7.       The Brazilian Government has set ambitious targets to reduce its GHG emissions, restore 12 million hectares of
                          forest, and recover 40 million hectares of degraded pastures in 10 years.18 Brazil’s updated Nationally Determined
                                 17

                          Contribution (NDC 3.0) sets the ambitious economy-wide target of reducing net greenhouse gas emissions by 59 to 67
                          percent below 2005 levels by 2035. This goal is supported by the ongoing revision of the National Plan on Climate Change
                          (“Plano Clima”, revised version to be published in 2025) and sector-specific plans. In the land use and forestry sector, this
                          includes the promotion of economic incentives to maintain and restore native vegetation on private rural properties, as
                          foreseen in the National Plan to Restore Native Vegetation (Plano Nacional de Recuperação da Vegetação Nativa -
                          Planaveg). With over 90 million hectares of cattle ranching land showing signs of degradation — half of which are in severe
                          condition, including areas within the Cerrado and Amazon — policies like Renovagro19 and the National Program for the




_For Official Use Only_
                          Conservation of Degraded Pastures (Programa Nacional de Conversão de Pastagens Degradadas em Sistemas de Produção
                          Agropecuários e Florestais Sustentáveis - PNCPD) are crucial for driving efforts to restore degraded pastures and convert
                          them to sustainable and productive agricultural uses. The Brazilian Government has further published a National
                          Bioeconomy Strategy20 and is working on the development of the National Plan for Bioeconomy Development (Plano
                          Nacional de Desenvolvimento da Bioeconomia - PNDBio), which will include a pillar on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
                          and the sociobioeconomy.21


                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           Expand access to finance for the bioeconomy, forest restoration, and climate-smart agriculture, and enhance climate
                           adaptation and mitigation of targeted beneficiaries


                          13 World Bank. 2025. State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2025. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                          14 Abatable, “Decoding the VCM in 2024 and Beyond.”
                          15   Carbon Knowledge Hub, 2024. How countries could scale up their role in the voluntary carbon market: Brazil.
                          https://www.carbonknowledgehub.com/factsheets/scaling-up-role-in-vcm-brazil
                          16 Currently, Brazilian companies mostly rely on voluntary carbon markets.
                          17 Ministério do Meio Ambiente e Mudança do Clima, n.d. Plano Nacional de Recuperação da Vegetação Nativa (Planaveg).

                          https://www.gov.br/mma/pt-br/composicao/sbio/dflo/plano-nacional-de-recuperacao-da-vegetacao-nativa-planaveg
                          18 Ministério da Agricultura e Pecuária, 2023. Governo Federal institui Programa Nacional de Conversão de Pastagens Degradadas.

                          https://www.gov.br/agricultura/pt-br/assuntos/noticias/governo-federal-institui-programa-nacional-de-conversao-de-pastagens-degradadas
                          19 Subsidized credit line for Low-Carbon Agriculture
                          20
                             Ministério do Desenvolvimento, Indústria, Comércio e Serviços, 2024. Governo Federal lança a Estratégia Nacional de Bioeconomia.
                          https://www.gov.br/mdic/pt-br/assuntos/noticias/2024/junho/governo-federal-lanca-a-estrategia-nacional-de-bioeconomia
                          21 Ministério da Fazenda, 2025. Comissão avança na estruturação do Plano Nacional de Bioeconomia. https://www.gov.br/fazenda/pt-

                          br/assuntos/noticias/2025/fevereiro/comissao-e-avanca-na-estruturacao-do-plano-nacional-de-bioeconomia

                                                                                                                                                           Page 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                            Key Results
                              PDO Outcome                          PDO Indicator
                              Expanding access to                  Volume of sub-loans disbursed under the Project (cumulative, value in US$).
                              finance                              Number of as MSMEs and rural landowners supported through loans provided via
                                                                   the Project’s credit lines (Number)
                                Enhancing climate                  Area under enhanced conservation/management (hectares) – (Scorecard)
                                adaptation and                     Amount of GHG emissions avoided, reduced or sequestered through activities
                                mitigation                         financed by the Project (Metric tons)

                            D. Project Description

                          8.       The proposed Project is a financial intermediary project that seeks to expand access to finance for the
                          bioeconomy, sustainable agricultural practices and the restoration of degraded forests and pasturelands, while
                          simultaneously advancing the climate resilience of the targeted beneficiaries. The proposed operation would be a US$
                          698 million project financed with a US$400 million IBRD loan, US$ 1422 million grant funding from PROGREEN and US$14
                          million from the IBRD Framework for Financial Incentives (FFI), and at least US$270 million of private capital financing. BB
                          will be the Borrower and Project Implementing Agency of the IBRD loan. It will be implemented in 6 years. The Project
                          directly supports reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by enabling land-use models that avoid deforestation and




_For Official Use Only_
                          increase carbon sequestration. Through the restoration of Legal Reserves (Reservas Legais – RLs) and Permanent
                          Preservation Areas (Áreas de Preservação Permanente – APPs), sustainable intensification of degraded pastures, and
                          integration of native vegetation into productive landscapes, the project reduces land-use emissions while creating new
                          carbon sinks
                          9.       The Project will promote innovations to further facilitate access to credit and financing instruments and
                          leverage private finance to scale-up impact in support of Brazil’s net-zero target in the agriculture and land-based
                          sectors. It advocates enhanced credit access with longer maturities, extended grace periods and will test and/or expand
                          supplementary support measures such as payment for environmental services, carbon credit mechanisms for forest
                          restoration and conservation, and initiatives aimed at creating new income opportunities, jobs, climate resilience, and
                          social inclusion. The Project will capitalize on BB's extensive customer service and relationship network to steer the
                          distribution of financial products to eligible MSMEs and rural producers, benefitting from the largest proprietary service
                          network within the Amazon and Cerrado biomes. BB expressed its interest in innovative financing instruments to promote
                          activities on the entire property, including productive and conservation aspects, like payments for environmental services
                          (e.g. carbon payments) into the financial packages and/or include enhanced and differentiated technical assistance to
                          rural producers. During the duration of the Project several of those integrated financing solutions are expected to be
                          tested and evaluated.
                          10.      The proposed project consists of four components: (1) Credit lines to finance bioeconomy, forest restoration and
                          CSA investments, (2) Carbon Fund, (3) Technical Assistance, and (4) Project Management.
                          11.      Component 1: Credit lines to finance bioeconomy, forest restoration and climate-smart agriculture (US$399
                          IBRD, US$200 million private capital financing). This component will finance BB’s expansion of lending targeted toward
                          bioeconomy, forest restoration, and CSA. Eligible operations must meet three criteria: (a) be located within Brazil’s
                          Amazon and Cerrado biomes and comply with the exclusion list in the Project Operations Manual (POM); (b) align with
                          the Positive Indicative List of Bioeconomy, CSA, and Forest Restoration activities (to be included in the POM); and (c)
                          contribute to at least one of the following outcomes: climate mitigation (emissions reductions/increased carbon stocks),

                          22 The exchange rate of 1 EUR = 1.053 US$, as published by the European Central Bank on November 27, 2024, was applied. From the total grant of

                          20 million euros (equivalent to approximately 21 million US$), 7 million US$ will be allocated to the Additional Financing of the Brazil Climate Finance
                          project (P503762), while 14 million US$ will be directed toward Component 3 of the proposed project.

                                                                                                                                                                             Page 6
                                    The World Bank
                                    Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                          climate adaptation through ecosystem protection and regeneration, or climate adaptation through diversification of
                          productive systems and sustainable resource use.
                          12.      Component 2: Carbon fund (US$70 million23 private capital financing). Component 2 will not receive direct
                          financing from the IBRD and will seek market financing. BB will mobilize upfront carbon finance for activities under
                          Component 1 by establishing a Carbon Fund and promoting carbon finance mechanisms to support activities under
                          Component 1. The Fund’s primary objective will be to address the financing gap that prevents MSMEs and rural producers
                          from implementing afforestation, reforestation, revegetation (ARR) and CSA / agricultural land management projects
                          (ALM) with high carbon removal potential. It will do so by advancing or guaranteeing payments to eligible projects —based
                          on future carbon removals— via Emission Reduction Purchase Agreements (ERPAs) for carbon credits. BB will support the
                          development of a robust carbon project pipeline from its borrowers to aggregate and supply carbon credits to the carbon
                          fund. BB will blend carbon fund advance payments with IBRD loan proceeds when originating sub-loans, as needed, so
                          that the sub-loan terms make land use investments viable. This approach will help unlock the credit lines financed by the
                          operation, driving greater adoption of sustainable land-use practices and investments. The World Bank will advise on the
                          design of the carbon fund and on the development of market strategies for the sale of carbon credits in domestic and
                          international markets. In the future, the fund’s offtake agreements may be used to raise additional investment from
                          capital markets investors, drawing on the World Bank’s experience with the Amazon Reforestation-Linked Outcome Bond
                          issued by IBRD in 2024. Finally, the Carbon Fund will account for Brazil’s regulatory framework to ensure alignment with
                          domestic and international carbon markets.
                          13.      Component 3. Technical Assistance (US$ 14 million Progreen grant funding and US$14 million from FFI).24 This




_For Official Use Only_
                          component will (i) finance technical assistance for project beneficiaries, complementing the credit lines in Component 1
                          and carbon market access in Component 2 and (ii) invest in the development of strategic financing mechanisms and
                          innovation to bring financing lines to scale. The component aims to address market failures by equipping beneficiaries
                          along the value chains with the necessary knowledge and skills to adopt CSA practices effectively and at scale; developing,
                          and implementing ecological and productive forest restoration models, and helping develop bioeconomy businesses that
                          are sustainable and climate resilient. By doing so, Component 3 contributes to building a pipeline of bankable projects in
                          the short run and improving the enabling environment in the long run. By leveraging BB’s extensive network, the
                          component will also foster market access and value chain development, including initiatives like nurseries and seed
                          collection networks.
                          14.      Component 4. Project Management (BB: US$ 3 million). Under this component, BB, in its role as implementing
                          entity, will form a Project Management Unit (PMU). This team, supported by the technical areas of the institution, will
                          comply with the terms and conditions established in the Loan Agreement regarding financial management, E&S
                          management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation of Project activities, results monitoring, and other management
                          related activities. Strategic coordination and monitoring of impact indicators will be carried out by BB’s Environmental,
                          Social, and Governance (ESG) area, while oversight of credit disbursement to borrowers will be the responsibility of the
                          managing areas of the products, under the respective directorates. BB will develop management tools included in the
                          Project Operation Manual (POM), an annual work plan, procurement plan, and disbursement projections. Activities under
                          Component 3 will be also managed by the ESG department relying on internal procurement and management units,
                          operational costs will be specificized in the procurement plan. Cooperation with Ministries and agencies will be regulated
                          by Technical Cooperation Agreements (Acordo de Cooperação Técnica). Activities under component 2 will be managed by
                          the fund manager Regia Capital in close cooperation with BB’s ESG department.




                          23
                               Minimum amount estimated by BB to make land-use investments of Component 1 viable.
                          24
                               BB will also execute funds granted by the Global Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP).

                                                                                                                                                 Page 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          The combined E&S risk rating of the project is Moderate. Overall environmental positive impacts are expected as
                          outcomes of the Project, such as boosting of sustainable human development, the reduction of deforestation, restoration
                          of degraded pastures and reduction of GHG emissions. There are no civil works envisaged under the projetct, and key
                          physical interventions are mostly linked to Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices, land management, forest
                          preservation and restoration. Although the Amazon and Cerrado biomes include a vast amount of environmental
                          protected areas, conservation units, and internationally recognized as high biodiversity value area (KBA), interventions
                          will target the generation of positive environmental outcomes and will most likely be located in the already modified
                          habitats, such as pastures and degraded lands. Potential environmental risks and impacts are not likely to be significant




_For Official Use Only_
                          and do not have a high potential for harming the environment, nor are envisaged to result in the conversion of natural
                          habitats. The environmental risks and impacts are expected to be predictable, temporary and/or reversible; low in
                          magnitude and site-specific; of low probability of serious adverse effects to the environment and able to be mitigated in
                          a predictable manner, with well-known control and mitigation measures. The project’s interventions could include waste
                          and wastewater generation, handling of chemicals and pesticides, and disturbances to local fauna. The use of integrated
                          pest management (IPM) or integrated vector management (IVM) approaches will be further assessed during preparation,
                          as well as the potential risk of accidental introduction of alien, or non-native, species of flora and fauna. The main social
                          concerns associated with the project refer to: a) occupational health and safety risks that project workers providing
                          technical assistance may face in remotely located and hard to supervise areas ridden by endemic diseases; b) the risk that
                          incidents of SEA/SH and cultural conflicts may eventually occur due to close/without supervision interactions between
                          project workers and vulnerable and culturally distinct local communities (including Indigenous Peoples); and c) three
                          context-related challenges: i) the lack of access of many of many intended beneficiaries to financing institutions and their
                          risk aversion to make debts and invest in unknown practices and technologies; ii) the roles children traditionally play in
                          bioeconomy value chains; and ii) local population’s lack of understanding about carbon markets and potential resistance
                          due to recent harmful experiences with carbon cowboys they may eventually have. These risks will be further assessed
                          during preparation. They can be mitigated through communication/awareness raising measures and enforcement of
                          behavioral standards.

                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          15.     BB, financial institution owned by the Brazilian Federal Government, acting as the financial intermediary (FI)
                          will implement the proposed Project. BB is the largest financial institution, listed on the São Paulo and New York stock
                          markets, constituted by Decree-Law 759/1969, in the form of a public company, and linked to the Ministry of Finance.


                                                                                                                                                   Page 8
                                 The World Bank
                                 Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                          BB’s objectives are to perform all active, passive, and accessory bank transactions, provide banking, intermediation, and
                          financial support services in their multiple forms. The Ministry of Finance will provide a sovereign guarantee to the World
                          Bank on behalf of the Federative Republic of Brazil. BB will act as both borrower and implementing agency, overseeing
                          components to meet Brazilian and WB standards. It will report fiduciary, technical, and safeguards data, appraise and
                          monitor sub-loans, and manage eligibility and compliance. BB will provide periodic reports, including fiduciary, technical,
                          and safeguards reports to the Ministry of Finance and the World Bank. An assessment of BB from the perspective of
                          financial intermediation (OP10.00), financial management, procurement, environmental and social standards has been
                          undertaken.
                          16.      BB will be the direct lender under Component 1. BB will identify and select sub-loan beneficiaries based on
                          predefined eligibility criteria and conduct detailed due diligence on technical, economic, environmental, financial, and
                          social feasibility, as well as other project-related assessments. BB will have the responsibility to appraise sub-loans and
                          make credit decisions. BB will also monitor the compliance of beneficiaries with the eligibility criteria, as well as fiduciary,
                          environmental, and social requirements for the sub-loans under Component 1, both prior to making the sub-loans and
                          throughout implementation.
                          17.      BB will establish the Component 2 carbon fund through a fund manager, Régia Capital, which is a specialized
                          sustainable investment firm formed through a joint venture between BB Asset, Brazil’s largest fund manager, and JGP, an
                          independent asset manager. The fund will be established according to the laws of Brazil and the jurisdiction in which it is
                          domiciled. The Fund will be privately capitalized through commitments from corporations seeking long-term access to




_For Official Use Only_
                          high-quality nature-based carbon removals. The World Bank and BB will not contribute capital or financing to the fund but
                          will provide support during the design phase, facilitate access to international carbon buyers and support analytical work.
                          18.      BB will also be responsible for implementing the technical assistance activities under Component 3. Private
                          services providers will be contracted by BB to implement the defined technical assistance activities as needed, following
                          the Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers. BB shall appoint a procurement coordinator to manage STEP and the
                          procurement activities, which under Component 3 consist mainly of hiring consulting services. An initial procurement plan
                          as well as a simplified Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) are being prepared.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Werner L. Kornexl
                             Senior Natural Resources Management Specialist

                             Marie Caroline Paviot
                             Senior Agriculture Economist

                             Gabriel J D Sensenbrenner
                             Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Banco do Brasil




                                                                                                                                                     Page 9
                               The World Bank
                               Amazon and Cerrado Bioeconomy, Forest Restoration, and Climate-Smart Agriculture Project (P508202)


                          Implementing Agencies
                           Banco do Brasil

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                   Werner L. Kornexl, Marie Caroline Paviot, Gabriel J D Sensenbrenner




_For Official Use Only_
                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:              Diego Arias Carballo                   19-Sep-2025

                          Country Director:                      Jorge A. Coarasa                       10-Oct-2025




                                                                                                                                       Page 10
