Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 06/09/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04988




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 13, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508930                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         BFP4SI                       2026

                     Operation Name            Blended Finance Platform for Sustainable Infrastructure

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     South Africa              South Africa                               EASTERN AND                  Finance, Competitiveness
                                                                                          SOUTHERN AFRICA              and Innovation

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                   Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     National Treasury         National Treasury                          08-Sep-2025                  17-Nov-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     13-May-2025               2,510,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Program Development Objective is to mobilize private capital for sustainable infrastructure.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Proposed Operation will develop and establish a Blended Finance Platform to mobilize private capital to invest in
                     critical and sustainable infrastructure such as the electricity, transport and logistics, and water and sanitation sector.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The multi-phased project (MPA) aims to establish a Blended Finance Platform to mobilize private capital, deliver
                     infrastructure services, reduce carbon emissions, and create jobs. The first phase, through an Investment Project


                    Jun 13, 2025                                                                                                         Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)



                     Finance (IPF), will support establishing a Credit Guarantee Vehicle (CGV) to demonstrate effective leverage and
                     mobilization of private capital for critical infrastructure including in the electricity, transport, water and social sectors,
                     while subsequent phases will support upscaling of the CGV. CGV will be a non-bank financial entity structured as a
                     private corporation, with equity participation via the South African National Treasury (NT), followed by other bilateral
                     Development Financial Institutions’ (DFIs) participation. The CGV will offer partial credit guarantees to facilitate de-
                     risking of private sector participation in the above mentioned critical infrastructure.The initial focus will be on the
                     transmission subsector. Preparatory work relevant to the transmission network, to identify transmission corridors with
                     least environmental risks and impacts have already been completed. Support to transport, water and social sector,
                     including port terminals, rail and airports, water augmentation, waste water treatment works and bulk water supply,
                     health care, housing and mixed used will follow as . The project will be implemented on a national and provincial level in
                     coastal, rural, peri-urban and urban areas. Social sector projects are anticipated to take place largely within existing
                     urban areas. Locations of rail and water projects are not yet known. South Africa has diverse landscapes, varying
                     climates, and is a water-scarce country. The country is vulnerable to climate change. It has a wide variety of biodiversity
                     sensitive areas located in terrestrial and marine protected zones.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by NT under the Ministry of Finance. A Project Implementing Unit (PIU) will be
                     established in NT. The PIU will have a dedicated environmental and a social specialist. NT has no prior experience with
                     implementing Bank supported Investment Project Finance operations and no experience with the Environmental and
                     Social Standards (ESS). The PIU will be responsible for establishing the CGV and development of CGV operational policies
                     and procedures including an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) to assess, manage and monitor




Public Disclosure
                     portfolio E&S risks. The CGV will be a non-bank financial entity structured as a private corporation and will be managed
                     by an independent and professional team consisting of a Board, Chief Executive Officer and environmental and social
                     specialists, among others. The CGV E&S specialists will be responsible for implementing the Environmental and Social
                     Action Plan (ESAP) and CGV ESMS. Downstream investment projects supported by the CGV, will likely be executed with
                     oversight from state owned entities such as Eskom for energy, Transnet for rail and port projects and the South Africa
                     National Roads Agency limited for roads projects. These entities have experience with implementing large complex
                     infrastructure projects under national requirements. The Bank has supported IPF projects in the energy sector under
                     Eskom (P177398) applying the ESF of which the environmental and social performance is overall satisfactory. South
                     Africa has a robust legislative framework with environmental matters related to assessment of environmental effects,
                     enhancement of environmental quality and protection of water and biodiversity resources being highly regulated.
                     Legislation and regulations for worker health and safety are particularly well-developed, especially occupational health
                     and safety (OHS) regulations related to the construction industry.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                           High
                     The environmental risk category under OP4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities is
                     Category A (High risk). The risk rating has been assigned due to the anticipated downstream financial exposure
                     associated with the large infrastructure developments, facilitated by guarantees from the CGV, that have a potential


                    Jun 13, 2025                                                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)



                     to cause significant adverse environmental risks an impacts that are considered diverse and irreversible if not
                     properly mitigated. Component 1 of the IPF (first phase of the MPA) will support the capitalization of the CGV through
                     NT. Component 2 will support technical assistance were needed and further development of the project pipeline
                     implemented by private sector. Key environmental risk associated with the CGV financial exposure due to its project
                     pipeline include (i) capacity of private and public sector to assess and manage environmental, health and safety (EHS)
                     risks and impacts, (ii) complex contractor and supply chain EHS management, (iii) poor compliance and enforcement
                     of EHS requirements project developers and contactors, (iv) loss of biodiversity and natural habitats (marine and
                     terrestrial), (v) increased air emissions including green house gasses, (vi) soil and water pollution, (vii) generation of
                     large quantities of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, (viii) fatalities and disabling injuries due to construction
                     related occupational health and safety hazards and (ix) community health and safety risks including traffic related
                     incidents, exposure to construction hazards such as dust, noise, hazardous substances, (x) life and fire safety risks due
                     poor structural integrity and public space safety considerations, and (xi) poor emergency preparedness and response
                     planning. The EHS risk will be managed through the establishment of an environmental and social management
                     system (ESMS) in line with national requirements and applicable IFC Performance Standards (PSs).
                                                                                                                                              High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk category under OP4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities is Category A
                     FI-1 (High risk). Potential social impacts are associated with: (i) community health and safety; (ii) displacement and
                     resettlement risks; (iii) labor influx; (iv) inclusion of vulnerable groups into decision-making processes; (iv) challenges
                     in ensuring adequate stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism; and (v) SEA/SH risks. In addition to
                     these risks, the institutional capacity of NT and future CGV is limited to non-existent when it comes to managing




Public Disclosure
                     social risks. Establishing a new institutions like CGV requires building capacity from scratch, including hiring and
                     training social specialists. Ensuring compliance with national laws and IFC Performance Standards (PSs) might be a
                     significant challenge for a new institution like CGV that does not have ESMS in place yet. NT will need to ensure that
                     CGV has adequate resources for CGV to establish its ESMS. The CGV will also support a wide range of infrastructure
                     projects across different sectors, with each sector potentially posing unique social risks, making it difficult to develop
                     a one-size-fits-all ESMS.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      The project will require that the CGV establishes and implements an ESMS appropriate to the nature and scale of the
                      FIs portfolio risk. The ESMS will incorporate the following elements: (a) environmental and social policy; (b)
                      procedures for identifying and assessing E&S risks and impacts; (c) organizational structure; (d) monitoring and
                      reviewing of portfolio E&S risks and impacts, (e) emergency response and preparedness, (f) stakeholder engagement
                      including provisions to ensuring inputs in project design, site selection and alternatives and (g) provisions for setting
                      up GRM, as set out in PS1. The ESMS will incorporate requirements of all relevant PSs and will allow for screening to
                      exclude activities with significant irreversible, cumulative and unprecedented E&S risks. The timelines for establishing
                      the ESMS will be set out in the ESAP. The E&S policy will be disclosed by Appraisal and summary of ESMS prior to
                      issuing of guarantees.


                    Jun 13, 2025                                                                                                          Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)



                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      OP/BP 4.03 applies. Hence, stakeholder engagement issues are addressed under ESS1/PS1 section.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      PS2 will apply to CGV and the downstream implementation of the proposed pipeline projects. The project will involve
                      direct, contracted, and supply chain workers. CGV will establish human resources policy and procedures and
                      workplace health and safety procedures in line with national legislation, WBG ESHGs and PS2 as part of the ESMS.
                      Downstream private sector supported activities under CGV have a potential to cause labor and occupational health
                      and safety risks. The ESMS procedures should provide for contractual OHS requirements to be imposed on
                      contractors, fair labor practices, including non-discrimination, freedom of association, and collective bargaining
                      rights.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      PS3 will apply to the downstream implementation of the proposed pipeline projects by private sector supported by
                      guarantees from CGV. Risks and impacts including air, soil and water pollution and generation of general and
                      hazardous waste. Future infrastructure project related to wastewater treatment facilities and activities under the
                      transport sector are likely to contribute to Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. In the energy sector the project will
                      facilitate reduction in GHG emissions. Pipeline operations may produce hazardous (batteries solar panel, medical),
                      general, and effluent waste, potentially causing soil and water pollution. The risks and impacts will need to be
                      assessed and mitigated through the establishment of the CGV ESMS as set out in PS1. The ESMS will encompass all



Public Disclosure
                      requisite processes and procedures to ensure that site-specific considerations related to resource efficiency, pollution
                      prevention, and waste management are identified, addressed, and effectively managed.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      PS4 is relevant to the downstream pipeline projects supported by guarantees from CGV that may pose a risk to
                      community health and safety. Potential risks include traffic related incidents due to construction activities or highway
                      expansion projects, exposure to construction hazards such as dust, noise, hazardous substances, life and fire safety
                      risks due poor structural integrity and public space safety considerations, and poor emergency preparedness and
                      response planning. The risks and impacts will need to be evaluated and mitigated through the implementation of the
                      ESMS in line with PS4. The ESMS will include processes to identify, address, and manage community health and safety
                      considerations.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      ESS5 is not considered relevant to the Borrower as OP 04/03 triggers PSs. PS5 will apply to the downstream
                      implementation of the proposed pipeline projects. The pipeline infrastructure projects may lead to the physical and
                      economic displacement including loss of livelihoods. South Africa has a robust legislative system that would act as a
                      safeguard that serves to ensure that alternatives to displacement are considered prior to project authorization. The
                      CGV ESMS should therefore consider alternative designs that avoid any significant land acquisition and physical
                      displacement. The ESMS will have to include a comprehensive resettlement/land acquisition program that addressed,



                    Jun 13, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)



                      among others, impacts and risks related to livelihood such as interference with pastoral uses and other access to
                      collective resources, and business interruption or disruption even if land not directly or fully acquired.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources

                      PS6 is relevant to the downstream pipeline project supported by CGV guarantees in particular the port, transmission
                      lines, rail and road, water abstraction, treatment and supply projects that may have an adverse impact on
                      biodiversity. Linear projects may result in habitat losses, fragmentation, and disruption of ecological systems while
                      the water sector projects may impact on environmental flows and water pollution. Wind energy and transmission
                      projects may have a particular impact on migratory birds and bat species. The development of ports may affect
                      sensitive marine ecosystems, while housing and mix development infrastructure may lead to loss of habitats. Impacts
                      on biodiversity will be screened and evaluated through the implementation of the ESMS, and assessed and mitigated
                      through the preparation of national environmental impact assessments and application of national laws.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                             Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      PS7 is relevant. It is estimated that in South Africa around 4 million people lack reliable access to clean water and
                      other basic services. The infrastructure crisis magnifies income inequality, by disproportionality affecting vulnerable
                      households and small firms who do not have the means to develop alternatives such as off grid electricity solutions
                      and road transport. The project partly aims to address this crisis and benefit communities by bringing positive




Public Disclosure
                      outcomes. At the same time, the infrastructure projects supported by the CGV, such as renewable energy generation,
                      transmission, and water augmentation, may have significant impacts on vulnerable and disadvantaged communities
                      during construction. To address risks associated with inclusion of vulnerable communities into project decision-
                      making, CGV, through measures and procedures established as part of its ESMS, will need to ensure that they are
                      adequately consulted and provided with access to grievance redress mechanism.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      PS8 will apply to the downstream private sector pipeline project supported by CGV guarantees. Large scale
                      infrastructure development may have a direct impact on any cultural heritage, due to its national scale, large scale
                      earthworks, linear infrastructure activity covering long distances in rural, peri-urban and urban areas, which may
                      result in impacts on unmarked and marked graves, and other structures or artifacts of cultural and heritage
                      importance. The ESMS must establish procedures for screening of potential impacts on cultural heritages and for
                      contractual requirements for contractors to develop and implement procedures to handle accidental findings in
                      accordance with the South African national heritage protection laws.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                Relevant

                      The IPF (first phase of the MPA) will support the establishment of a CGV that will function as financial intermediary to
                      issue partial credit guarantees to facilitate de-risking of private sector participation in infrastructure development.
                      Due to the involvement of private sector, OP4.03 World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities will
                      apply. An Environmental and Social Management System will be developed as set out in PS1. All relevant aspects of



                    Jun 13, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)



                      PS 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 will be addressed in the ESMS. The ESMS will set out how CGV will monitor E&S compliance of
                      its guarantee. The timing of preparing the ESMS will be stipulated in the ESAP.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part
                       South Africa has a robust and comprehensive legislative framework for assessing environmental impacts and
                       managing workplace occupational health and safety issues which are largely in line with the objectives of the relevant
                       PSs. The nature of the project will require the CGV to establish an ESMS in line with national requirements and those
                       set out in PS1. National legislative requirements and relevant IFC Performance Standards will apply to the assessments
                       and mitigating environmental impacts and occupational health and safety risks associated with the downstream
                       pipeline projects supported by the CGV guarantees.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             Yes
                       The exact financing partners have not yet been identified. The use of a common approach will be discussed and



Public Disclosure
                       agreed once the proposed financing partners are onboard.




                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     By Appraisal:

                     Draft Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP)
                     Draft CGV Environmental and Social Policy

                     Aspects that will be captured in the Environmental and Social Action Plan for implementation by NT after project
                     approval:
                     a) Prepare and submit for Bank review a Terms of Reference for the development of an Environmental and Social
                     Management System in line with national requirements and PS1.
                     b) Prepare a terms of reference for the appointment of an environmental and social specialists/ managers to be
                     appointed as part of the CGV management team, which will be responsible for the implementation of the CGV ESMS.

                     Aspects that will be captured in the Environmental and Social Action Plan for implementation by CGV once established:


                    Jun 13, 2025                                                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Blended Finance Platform For Sustainable Infrastructure (P508930)



                     a) Prepare, adopt and implement an Environmental and Social Management System in line with national requirements
                     and IFC PS1 and to the satisfaction of the Bank. No guarantee will be issued prior to the establishment of the ESMSs and
                     no objection from the Bank.
                     b) Publicly disclose a summary of the Environmental and Social Management System
                     c) Appoint environmental and social specialists/ managers which will be responsible for the implementation of the CGV
                     ESMS.
                     d) All guarantee business activities need to be screened against the exclusion criteria to determine eligibility for support
                     under the project.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Hermanus Johannes Marc Schrijver        Title:          Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  mschrijver@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Joonkyung Seong                         Job Title:      Senior Energy Economist

                      Email:                  jseong@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                          Hermanus Johannes Marc Schrijver, Joonkyung Seong

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                 Johanna Martina Whitfield, Anne Olufunke Asaolu

                     ADM Social Specialist:                        Aimonchok Tashieva




                    Jun 13, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 8
