Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/17/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04673




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 19, 2024                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508221                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        SC Resilience                2026

                     Operation Name            Santa Catarina Climate Resilience

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                    LATIN AMERICA AND            Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                         CARIBBEAN                    Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     State of Santa            Secretariat for Civil Defense and         02-Jun-2025                  31-Oct-2025
                     Catarina                  Protection (SDC)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     15-Jan-2025               149,400,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To reduce the risk of climate related disasters in targeted areas of Santa Catarina and to strengthen institutional
                     capacities to manage those risks


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Santa Catarina Climate Resilience project will implement the first phase of an ambitious, multi-year integrated
                     climate and disaster risk management investment program led by the Santa Catarina Civil Defense Agency. The project
                     will support risk mitigation infrastructure works, increase institutional capacity to assess and monitor disaster risks,
                     develop strategies to support the most vulnerable populations and increase participation of the private sector disaster
                     recovery. Specifically, the project will carry out various river improvement, control and slope stabilization works to
                     mitigate the impacts of floods and landslides on the residents of the rapidly urbanizing Itajaí Valley, and other priority
                     locations. The Project will also establish a foundation for future DRM investments in other parts of the state, through

                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)



                     supporting the development of disaster risk reduction plans, which will identify specific investment priorities and
                     estimated costings. The focus through these plans will be on the protection of vulnerable communities, public
                     infrastructure, health and school facilities. Finally, the project will expand the climate monitoring and early warning
                     capacities in Santa Catarina, with the aim of increasing radar coverage to the entire state, and cooperation with
                     neighboring states, and improving the interface between climate monitoring and local civil defense agencies at the
                     municipal level. Support to the private sector will be explored through existing emergency support programs for SMEs.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Located in the Southern Region of Brazil, the state of Santa Catarina covers an area of 95,346.181 km² (1.12% of the
                     national territory) and has a population of 7.61 million inhabitants (3.75% of the Brazilian population), of which 7.3%
                     live in poverty and 5.2% currently benefit from conditional cash transfer programs (including 2,486 indigenous peoples).
                     The population density is 79.50 inhabitants/km². Its Human Development Index (HDI) is 0.774, the 3rd highest in the
                     country.

                     The Project’s area of influence – the Itajaí-Açu River valley – comprises 54 municipalities (IDHM ranging between 0.670
                     and 0.845) and hosts a population of 1,985,340 people in a total area of 11,687 km² (152.8 inhabitants/km²), of which
                     420,000 people—mostly in conditions of greater socioeconomic vulnerability—live in 2,878 high/very high-risk areas for
                     climate disasters. In 2021, the valley accounted for 22% of the state's GDP, but per capita GDP widely [BRL 5,769: BRL
                     166,226].




Public Disclosure
                     The state and the valley have been facing a variety of extreme hydrological events and geological disasters and,
                     historically, is among the Brazilian states facing the greatest socioeconomic impacts related to the occurrence of
                     climatic events. It ranks 2nd in the number of people directly affected by the occurrences recorded between 1991 and
                     2022 in the country, in damages involving public infrastructure, and in total material damages; the 4th in private and
                     total damages and losses; the 5th in combined damages and losses; and the 7th in public losses. Floods, flash floods,
                     inundations, and landslides account for approximately 47% of these occurrences and are responsible for 56% of
                     material damages and economic losses. Considering only these disasters – of which a quarter occurred in the valley –
                     the state ranks first in damages and losses and second in direct impacts. The valley concentrates 30% of the people
                     affected by climatic disasters recorded in the state and approximately half of the economic losses.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Borrower – the Government of the State of Santa Catarina – has recently enhanced its experience with the
                     Environmental and Social Standards of the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework through the preparation
                     of two operations: the Santa Catarina Rural Development Project for Sustainability and Innovation (P506142) and the
                     Brazil Proactive, Safe, and Resilient Road Asset Management Program - State of Santa Catarina Project - Phase 3
                     (P504253).

                     The assessments conducted by the Bank in preparation for these two operations highlighted the client's high
                     institutional capacity for managing environmental and social risks and impacts and concluded that the use of the
                     Borrower’s Environmental and Social (E&S) Framework allows for the achievement of outcomes materially consistent
                     with the objectives and requirements of the World Bank's Environmental and Social Standards.

                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                    Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)




                     The State Secretariat for Protection and Civil Defense (SDC) will be the central executing agency for the Project and has
                     a broad and skilled technical staff, consisting of 126 employees. Project activities will be licensed by the State Institute
                     of Environment (IMA), which operates under the country and state robust regulatory framework and –for the types of
                     the proposed works– requires environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA) and public consultations with
                     potentially affected populations (some of which have already been carried out).

                     During project preparation, the task team will assess the ESIAs conducted in compliance with the Borrower’s law and
                     the procedures in place to manage E&S risks and impacts to check whether they can be used (in a whole or in part) for
                     E&S risk management under the Project and to define additional material measures for E&S risk management (as
                     needed).


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                           High
                     The project includes both structural and non-structural measures for disaster risk reduction and enhancing local flood
                     resilience. Activities for risk assessment and planning, early warning systems, and local resilience and institutional
                     strengthening will benefit community and environment by reducing vulnerability to climate-related risks and



Public Disclosure
                     minimizing potential disaster impacts. Implementing these components may cause impacts from construction
                     activities, such as resource use, air and water pollution, and waste generation. These impacts are expected to be
                     short-term, localized, and easily mitigated with simple procedures standardized by the applicable environmental
                     legislation. However, the works planned for infrastructure for flood mitigation, as such river improvement works and
                     the construction of large flood control dams in rural areas, can have significant environmental impacts. Those
                     construction activities can cause air and water pollution, generate waste and noise, and lead to soil erosion. The use
                     of raw materials and heavy machinery can exacerbate environmental degradation. Dams disrupt ecosystems by
                     fragmenting habitats, impeding river flow, and impacting aquatic migration. Reservoir creation will flood protected
                     areas, and vegetation removal will be necessary. Dredging increases water turbidity, releases pollutants, and requires
                     proper management of contaminated dredged material. These works are classified as complex under federal and
                     state legislation, requiring a three-stage environmental licensing process, an ESIA, and specific plans for mitigation
                     and compensation (ESMP). During the preparation phase, the task team will assess whether the potential impacts and
                     risks were sufficiently addressed in the environmental licensing process and the associated ESIA. They will also
                     identify any additional measures, studies, or activities needed for proper assessment and management of the
                     project's impacts.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Project comprises works in existing, new and under construction dams (located in rural areas), dredging works on
                     the Itajaí-Açu river channel, and sloping containment works for reducing areas exposed to floods and landslides in the
                     Vale do Itajaí mesorregion. It also comprises technical assistance activities that will reduce exposure and enhance
                     response to climate-related disasters –institutional capacity building and the acquisition of equipment for state and


                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)



                     municipal agencies in charge of disaster risk-prevention and response and enhancing the state disaster warning and
                     monitoring system, risk mapping studies, and awareness raising campaigns and community mobilization and
                     preparedness for disaster response. It expects to benefit around 420,000 people from 54 municipalities. These
                     benefits will reacht the most the low-income and socially vulnerable population living in at risk flooding areas at peri-
                     urban and rural settings that are increasingly exposed to climate-related disasters and hold lower capacity to cope
                     with adverse impacts. On the negative side, social risks and impacts commonly associated with the typology of the
                     proposed construction works include: a) Temporary disturbances on neighboring communities due to the traffic of
                     heavy machinery with adverse impacts on road safety, the generation of noise, vibration and dust and the temporary
                     project induced labor influx; b) Land expropriation, cyclical or permanent land use changes and restrictions, physical
                     and economic displacement; c) Landscape change and compromising of cultural heritage (particularly, unknown
                     archeological sites); and d) Potential community health and safety risks caused by emergency situations during the
                     dam’s operation phase. Given the location of the proposed works, none of these risks is expected to be of high
                     magnitude and they can be avoided, minimized or mitigated through well-known measures.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The project aims to invest in infrastructure to prevent and mitigate floods, including dams and river improvement
                      works. The focus will be on the Middle and Upper Itajaí-Açu River Valleys, part of the Itajaí-Açu River basin,



Public Disclosure
                      characterized by hilly terrain, fragmented Atlantic Forest areas, urbanization, agriculture, and significant flood risks.
                      During due diligence, the team will emphasize analyzing studies on cumulative impacts in the basin and assess the
                      presence of vulnerable groups and whether the projects have associated facilities that need consideration. In SC,
                      environmental licensing for complex works follows CONSEMA No 98/2017, which involves evaluating activities based
                      on their environmental impact on physical, biological, and socioeconomic environments and requires various studies
                      and detailed mitigation and compensation measures. The team will review the licensing process and ESIA to identify if
                      additional activities or studies are needed to meet ESS1 objectives.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      During preparation, the Borrower will prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) comprising: a) the identification
                      of key stakeholders (including potentially affected people and, among them, the presence of disadvantaged and
                      vulnerable social groups), b) the need to make relevant information about the project available to each relevant
                      stakeholder in a timely and culturally adequate manner as well as to promote their engagement during Project
                      preparation and implementation, and c) the establishment of an accessible channel through which all stakeholders
                      can raise their concerns and grievances with regards to the Project and reach resolution. The task team will assess if
                      the Grievance Mechanism the Borrower has in place can be used as the channel mentioned in (c). The Borrower will
                      begin a public consultation of a draft version of the SEP prior to Appraisal and then updated, and the final version of
                      the SEP will be disclosed within 30 days after the Project date of effectiveness.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant



                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)



                      The Project will involve direct and contracted workers, which contingent cannot be estimated yet. The Brazilian labor
                      legislation addresses all elements considered under ESS2 – working conditions, management of worker relationships,
                      protection of the work force, veto to child and forced labor, occupational health and safety standards, and well-
                      established channels for raising concerns related with workplace conditions – in a manner consistent with its
                      objectives and requirements. This legislation is well enforced and overseen by state and judicial agencies. During
                      preparation, the task team will assess the risks project workers are expected to face under ongoing and future works,
                      assess how adequately they are protected of these risks under the country labor laws and procedures, and identify
                      additional measures needed to ensure their protection (if needed). These material measures will be included in the
                      Project’s ESCP.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      Flood management and river improvement projects can lead to air pollution, construction waste, noise, and water
                      pollution. Riverbank stabilization and construction activities can cause land degradation and increased soil erosion.
                      The use of raw materials and machinery can further contribute to environmental degradation. Modifying river
                      channels can result in erosion and sedimentation both on-site and downstream. Additionally, significant amounts of
                      dredged material, often contaminated, must be properly managed throughout the dredging process, including
                      storage, transportation, and disposal. During the preparation phase, the task team will evaluate whether these
                      potential impacts and risks were adequately addressed in the environmental licensing process and the ESIA prepared
                      for each project. This assessment will help identify any additional measures or studies needed to ensure proper
                      assessment and management.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      The project encompasses dredging works in the Itajaí river channel and four new/under construction flood
                      contention dams and improvements in two existing dams. These dams are defined as large dams and located in rural
                      areas. According with the Brazilian law, the licensing of construction and operation of dams require ESIA and ESMP.
                      The Brazilian technical standards for construction of dams (Interministerial Ordinance 246/1998) and the National
                      Policy on Dam Safety (Laws 12,334/10 and 14,066/20) are mostly in line with the requirements of ESS4. Measures
                      taken by the Borrower to ensure dam safety will be assessed and an independent panel of experts will be hired for
                      reviewing their design, construction, and start of operations. The expected temporary project induced labor influx will
                      not occur in hard-to-supervise or extremely poor areas and potential adverse impacts on environmental services will
                      be assessed during preparation. The ESCP will include measures to address these risks.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      The construction of flood containment dams, dredging and slope stabilization works require land acquisition and may
                      lead to involuntary resettlement. The information gathered at this concept stage shows that some of land acquisition
                      has already been carried out. During project preparation the task team will a) gather further information on the
                      number of affected people, the processes and procedures followed according the country’s law and the eventual
                      existence of pending cases and b) assess their material consistency with ESS5 objectives/requirements. The ESCP will
                      require the Borrower to a) provide a “de facto report” on these previous processes within 90 days after the date of
                      Project effectiveness and agree on taking corrective measures (as needed), b) prepare Resettlement Plans following




                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)



                      ESS5 principles/requirements whenever new works require land acquisition leading to physical and economic
                      displacement and c) complete their implementation prior to start these works.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      The construction of dams and river dredging significantly impact biodiversity and protected areas. All project
                      activities are within the Atlantic Forest Biome and must comply with Law 11,428/2006 (including forest inventories,
                      fauna and flora assessments, forest fragmentation analysis) during environmental licensing. The Botuverá dam will
                      flood 2 hectares of the Serra do Itajaí National Park. An environmental compensation, approved by IBAMA and
                      Congress, expanded the park by nearly 160 hectares. During preparation, the task team will evaluate if impacts were
                      properly addressed in the licensing process and the ESIA prepared for each work. Proposed offsets will be verified to
                      meet ESS6 requirements. Additional measures to ensure proper impact assessment and management will be added
                      to the ESCP.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                     TBD
                      Local Communities

                      Holding an area of 37,018 hectares, the Laklãno Indigenous Land (IL) extends over four municipalities within the
                      Hercílio river (a tributary of the Itajaí-Açu river) basin. It hosts a population of around 3,800 inhabitants, who belong
                      to the Xokleng and the Guarani peoples. The existing flood management system of the Itajaí-Açu river encompasses
                      one dam (the North Dam) owned by the federal government and constructed in the early 1990’s nearby the Laklãno




Public Disclosure
                      IL. This dam is not included in the scope of the Project and is not an Associated Facility. Thus, the Laklãno is outside of
                      the footprint or area of influence of Project activities. During the due diligence process, impacts in the whole Itajai-
                      Açu river basin will be assessed in detail, and it will be confirmed whether IPs are present in the project's area of
                      influence.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      The Project will not interfere with intangible cultural heritage. However, its construction works involve excavations,
                      movement of earth and flooding of areas where previously unknown cultural heritage may be encountered. The
                      probability of finding archaeological sites is high as there are already 2,111 archaeological sites registered by IPHAN –
                      the federal agency in charge of cultural heritage register and protection– in Santa Catarina
                      (https://sicg.iphan.gov.br/). Hence, a chance finds procedure –in line with the requirements of the country’s
                      legislation and ESS 8– must be defined and include in all bidding documents for hiring the contractors that will
                      implement construction works that involve excavations, movement of earth, flooding or other changes in the physical
                      environment.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      There are no Financial Intermediaries involved in Project implementation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                         Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           TBD
                       An Overview Assessment of the Brazilian Environment and Social Framework (BESF) –exclusively considering the
                       regulatory framework approved at the federal level– is ongoing. Its early findings point out a few gaps with the ESF on:
                       a) community workers (ESS2); b) the requirements of i) replacement costs in situations lacking a functioning real-
                       estate marketing, ii) consultation with host communities in resettlement programs and iii) assistance for temporary
                       loss of wage of affected commercial business employees (ESS5); and c) concepts of “modified, natural and critical
                       habitats” (ESS6), though the BESF requires adherence to the “like-for-like or better” principle for biodiversity offset.
                       The relevance of these gaps under the framework of the subnational borrower will be further assessed and any
                       material measures to address them agreed on the ESCP. The BESF will be used as far as it allows the achievement of
                       outcomes materially consistent with the objectives of the ESF.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       There are no financing partners.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities




Public Disclosure
                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     In accordance with the E&S approach described above, the Bank’s due diligence will include a thorough review of all
                     ESIA and related documents prepared during the project design, as well as their respective environmental licenses.
                     Based on current information, it is assumed that all works will require the preparation of an ESIA, by Brazilian
                     environmental legislation and most of the works planned in the project already have ESIA and ESPM evaluated and
                     approved by the responsible state agency. In some cases, the ESIA are still being prepared. In this context, the task
                     team will evaluate, on a case-by-case basis, either the terms of reference or the studies conducted to ensure they
                     address all relevant aspects of the applicable standards. This review will encompass documents prepared directly by the
                     Borrower or conducted by independent specialists, with the assistance of retained E&S consultancies.

                     If the preparation process identifies that the ESIAs require gap-filling measures, the E&S team will develop a tailored
                     study preparation timeline for each case. This approach will prioritize ongoing projects and expedite the completion of
                     studies for new projects. The agreed milestones for preparing the studies and finalizing the compensation and
                     mitigation programs will be detailed in the ESCP.

                     The Borrower will propose, publicly disclose and start consultation with relevant stakeholders on the Stakeholder
                     Engagement Plan (SEP).




                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Santa Catarina Climate Resilience (P508221)



                     As mentioned, the task team will also further assess – during project preparation – the potential (though unexpected)
                     impacts of the project in the whole Itajai-Açu river basin and consider potential interferences in the Laklãno Indigenous
                     Land, which is located outside the direct geographic area of intervention.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Jack Campbell                           Title:         Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  jcampbell2@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                    Jack Campbell

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                           Ana Carolina Rodrigues Velloso Cordeiro

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                  Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa




                    Dec 19, 2024                                                                                                     Page 9 of 9
