Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Mar-2026 | Report No: PIDPC00207




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                   Operation Name
                               WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                           ALAFIA I - Nourishing
Benin                                                         P509225
                               AFRICA                                                        Benin's Future Program
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results                                                                          Health, Nutrition &
                               20-Apr-2026                    26-May-2026
Financing (PforR)                                                                            Population
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Agence Nationale de
Ministère de l'Économie et
                               l’Alimentation et de la
des Finances
                               Nutrition (ANAN)

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To improve the utilization of quality integrated nutrition, health, and child development services in targeted areas.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                           750.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                              150.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                           140.00
    IPF Component                                                                                                   10.00
  Total Financing                                                                                                   150.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                  150.00

                                                                                                                        Page 1



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


        World Bank Lending                                                                                                                          150.00

    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

    1. Benin has had strong economic growth, with Gross Domestic Product (GDP) reaching 7.5 percent in 2024—the
    highest rate since 1990—driven by robust expansion in services, industry, and agriculture, but constraints remain.1
    The services sector contributed 3.6 percentage points of overall growth, while industry, supported by the Glo-Djibé
    Industrial Zone and major construction projects, grew by 9.7 percent. Agriculture continues to make a strong
    contribution since 2019, thanks to cotton and export-crop outputs. This growth was underpinned by rising net exports,
    strong private consumption, and dynamic private sector investments. On the fiscal front, Benin has strengthened its
    debt profile by meeting the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) fiscal deficit target of 3.0 percent of
    GDP in 2024 and reducing public debt to 53.4 percent of GDP.2 Benin's debt management and fiscal consolidation efforts
    have improved its debt rating, allowing better access to international financial markets. Nevertheless, vulnerabilities
    remain due to a high share of external debt and ongoing security and fragility, climate, and global economic risks that
    could threaten continued progress and exacerbate regional disparities.


    2. Moreover, sustained economic growth has yet to translate into accelerated poverty reduction, as structural
    human capital inequities limit the ability of the poor to benefit from growth and to be more productive. Benin’s
    growth elasticity between increases in GDP per capita and decreases in poverty is lower than the Sub-Saharan Africa
    (SSA) average.3 Poverty reduction could be accelerated by enhancing labor productivity growth. The level of “vulnerable
    employment,” which stood at 77.6 percent of total employment in 2022, declined by only 0.8 percentage points over
    2013–2022.4 The proportion of vulnerable employment is also higher among women, reaching 82.7 percent in 2022.5
    About 95 percent of Beninese youth are in low-quality (precarious) jobs and youth underemployment is at 92 percent.
    Inequality in youth employment is driven by rural–urban gaps (98% vs. 90% precarious), gender dimensions (97% vs.
    92% precarious), skills-matching issues, weak protection for informal workers, and unpaid care that cuts paid work time
    and harms family nutrition and health. In 2020, a child born in Benin was only 40 percent as productive as he or she


1 World Bank. Benin Economic Outlook 2025: Raising Domestic Revenue Mobilization While Protecting the Poor. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2025
2
  World Bank.2025. Sub-Saharan Africa - Macro Poverty Outlook Country-by-Country Analysis and Projections for the Developing World : Spring Meetings 2025.
Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.
3 World Bank.2024. Macro Poverty Outlook - Country-by-country Analysis and Projections for the Developing World : Annual Meetings 2024 . Washington, D.C. :

World Bank Group
4 The level of “vulnerable employment,” which stood at 77.6 percent of total employment in 2022, declined by only 0.8 percentage points over 2013–2022
5 World Bank. World Development Indicators (based on ILOSTAT, International Labour Organization, ILO Modelled Estimates Database). “Vulnerable Employment,
Female (% of Female Employment) – Benin,” 2022.


                                                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


  could be if they had access to quality health and education.6 To address these gaps, the Government of Benin (GoB)
  needs to prepare people for: (i) the jobs of today by making the informal sector and micro-enterprises more productive
  through skills building and (ii) the jobs of tomorrow by reducing stunting (alarmingly high—36.5 percent of children
  under five were stunted in 2022), learning poverty and investing in the “right skills.” Undernutrition and malnutrition
  among children can cost countries in SSA up to 16.5 percent of their national GDP annually.7 Therefore, support to
  microenterprises to provide better quality and nutritious foods at affordable prices is critical. Moreover, children who
  experience stunting face lifelong deficits in physical growth and cognitive development, which translate into lower
  educational attainment, reduced earnings, and diminished productivity.

  3.    Fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) in Benin are increasingly intertwined with the impacts of climate change
  and the challenge of malnutrition. Benin is particularly vulnerable to heat stress, decline and increased variability in
  rainfall partners leading to higher frequency and severity of drought and floods, as well as sea-level rise.8 Temperatures
  have already increased by 0.78 °C between 1971 and 2020, and are expected to increase by 0.28°C per decade by mid-
  century, with higher impacts in the northern regions.9 The country ranks 150 out of 187 countries on the Notre Dame
  Global Adaptation Index (ND-GAIN) on climate vulnerability and readiness, a score influenced in part by low projections
  for cereal yield changes and limited agricultural adaptive capacity.10 These hazards are projected to intensify in the
  coming decades, threatening the livelihoods of smallholder farmers and pastoralists who rely on rain-fed agriculture
  and grazing lands.11 Further, growing insecurity is affecting agriculture and livestock, with impacts food security, and in
  areas affected by insecurity, rising food prices combined with a drop in local production are further exacerbating food
  insecurity.12 These compounded effects also undermine the efforts to address malnutrition, especially among
  vulnerable populations.13 For example, between March and May 2023, over half-a-million Beninese faced crisis or
  emergency levels of food insecurity, with the northern departments of Atakora and Alibori more affected given the
  poverty rates being well above the national average.14 Population resilience could continue to be severely affected by
  the gradual loss of livelihoods and overexposure to food insecurity. Furthermore, the risks of food insecurity are
  increasing alongside growing forced displacement. There is an estimated 30,000 refugees, a tenfold increase since 2022
  and over 27,000 internally displaced persons.15 The majority of refugees reside alongside host communities in rural
  areas. Considering the growing regional insecurity and heightened vulnerability to climate shocks, refugee arrivals are
  expected to increase.

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program

  4.    Despite considerable investments and policy advancements, Benin continues to encounter significant
  challenges in improving nutrition outcomes. The country faces persistently high rates of stunting, anemia, and food
  insecurity among women and children. Stunting, which is defined as impaired linear growth resulting in a height-for-age

6 https://databankfiles.worldbank.org/public/ddpext_download/hci/HCI_2pager_BEN.pdf
7 African Union Commission, UNECA, and World Food Programme. The Cost of Hunger in Africa: Implications of Child Undernutrition for Africa’s Social and Economic
Transformation. Addis Ababa: African Union/UNECA/WFP, 2017.
8 World Bank Group. (2023). Climate Risk Country Profile: Benin.
9 Idem
10
   University of Notre Dame. (2023). Benin | ND-GAIN Index. https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/benin#vulnerability
11 Benin Risk and Resilience Assessment, 2023
12 Khalfaoui, Mathias. 2025. A Front Line with Jihadism Drawn in the Sand of the Sahel: The Population of Northern Beni and Togo Wait for a Solution. Konrad

Adenauer Stiftung: 12.
13 Benin Country Climate and Development Report, 2023
14 Food Security Information Network. 2023. West Africa and The Sahel: https://dev.fsinplatform.org/sites/default/files/resources/files/GRFC2024-country-BJ.pdf
15 UNHCR Data, December 2025




                                                                                                                                                              Page 3



                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


  more than two standard deviations below the WHO’s Child Growth Standards median, remains a critical concern due to
  poor nutrition, diet and frequent illnesses, especially during the first 1,000 days. In 2022, stunting prevalence for
  children under five increased from 34 to 36.5 percent between 2014 and 2022,16 compared to 23.6 percent in structural
  peers and 32 percent in SSA. Stunting accounts for approximately 45 percent of the high under-five mortality rate (per
  1,000 live births), which was estimated at 77.9 in 2023, compared to 45.6 among structural peers.17 Anemia also remains
  pervasive—affecting 72 percent of children aged 6–59 months and 58 percent of women of reproductive age, with
  adolescent girls’ anemia increasing from 41.6 percent in 2012 to 57.4 percent in 2017.18


  5.    Moreover, the population considered severely food insecure in Benin increased from 10.4 percent in 2014-2016
  to 15.8 percent in 2021-2023.19 Northern parts of the country are most affected, and forcibly displaced communities
  face acute vulnerabilities. Food insecurity is driven by limited economic access to nutritious foods—stemming from
  unemployment, underemployment, low and unstable wages (often in the informal sector), and high prices—
  compounded by climate shocks and weak food systems. These pressures push households, especially women and
  children, to cut meal frequency and diet quality. Persistently high rates reflect structural barriers to decent jobs and
  women’s economic power (limited assets, credit, and decision-making), coupled with inadequate social protection and
  poor market access and storage, which together heighten vulnerability during seasonal lean periods and crises.


  6.    Malnutrition, and in particular high stunting rates, are driven by four main constraints. First, limited service
  delivery and unequal access to services due to financial and geographical barriers as well as limited health personnel
  and competency levels of frontline workers at the national level. Benin has, on average, one health facility and 5 beds
  per 10,000 persons and a geographical imbalance in health professionals with 21 percent in rural areas versus 79 percent
  in urban areas; the north is disproportionately less equipped with health infrastructure and has less health professionals
  than the south due to insecurity in the region.20 The GoB has invested in new health facilities, ambulances, and
  laboratory systems and is implementing several health policies, including the NHDP 2024-2030 and the National
  Community Health Policy, which emphasizes UHC and community-based service delivery with a renewed health
  promotion strategy at the community level.21 This will use of Community Relays (RCs) by proposing better-structured
  packages of activities, including the Key Family Practices to be implemented by RCs. However, it is important to note
  that although nutrition is expected to be well-integrated in RCs package of activities, competency levels in RCs and other
  health professionals have been found to be low and training/incentives will be needed to ensure adequate service
  delivery. Moreover, demands on primary health care (PHC) services increase, while medication/supplementation
  stockouts and variability in service readiness negatively affect the continuity and quality of Reproductive, Maternal,
  Neonatal, Child, Adolescent Health, and Nutrition (RMNCAH-N) services.22




16 UNICEF, World Health Organization (WHO), and World Bank Group. Levels and Trends in Child Malnutrition: UNICEF / WHO / World Bank Group Joint Child

Malnutrition Estimates (JME), 2023 Edition. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2023
17 Black, R. E., Victora, C. G., Walker, S. P., Bhutta, Z. A., Christian, P., de Onis, M., Ezzati, M., Grantham‑McGregor, S., Katz, J., Martorell, R., & Uauy, R. (2013).

Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in low‑income and middle‑income countries. The Lancet, 382(9890), 427–45
18
   Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse Économique (INSAE) & ICF. Enquête Démographique et de Santé au Bénin 2017–2018. Cotonou, Bénin, et
Rockville, Maryland, USA: INSAE et ICF, 2019.
19 FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO. 2024. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2024 – Financing to end hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition in

all its forms. Rome.
20 RRA, 2023. The World Health Organization’s (WHO) standard is two facilities with 25 beds per 10,000 people.
21 National Policy on Community Health in Benin, May 2020 (Politique nationale de santé communautaire au Benin, Mai 2020)
22 World Bank Group. Benin – Country Climate and Development Report. Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 2023.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4



                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


  7.    Second, there is a limited uptake of effective practices that support reduction in malnutrition due to prevailing
  social and genders norms. Harmful norms can constrain women’s decision-making power over healthcare and food
  purchases, limit men’s engagement in childcare and nutrition, and perpetuate time and mobility constraints for mothers,
  especially during pregnancy and the first 1,000 days. In some households, norms around food for pregnant and lactating
  women, preferential feeding of adult men and older children, and early introduction of water or porridge can reduce
  nutrient intake for infants and young children. For instance, Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) practices require
  attention: only 42 percent of infants are exclusively breastfed until six months; among children aged 6–23 months, only
  28 percent achieve minimum dietary diversity and 15 percent meet the minimum acceptable diet standards.23 Economic
  constraints present a major barrier; the cost of a healthy diet is estimated at USD 4 (about XOF 2,177) per household
  per day—more than three times higher than an energy-sufficient diet—while at least 60 percent of households cannot
  afford it. Around 40.5 percent of households experience poor dietary consumption.24 WASH deficits also remain
  pronounced - 36 percent of households rely on unimproved or potentially unsafe water sources, which may be exposed
  to microbiological contamination, and only about 10 percent of households have a handwashing facility with both water
  and soap available at home.25, 26 Open defecation persists at 47 percent in 2024 according to the WHO/UNICEF Joint
  Monitoring Program for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP) - adversely impacting nutrition and child survival.

  8.     Third, there is insufficient support to communities and Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME) to deliver
  diverse, quality, and nutritious foods. Historically, fragmented policy leadership and reliance on NGO-led delivery
  created gaps in community-level nutrition capacity and multi-sector coordination, reinforcing the need to contract local
  MSMEs and to strengthen nutrition and agricultural supply chains and quality assurance for higher-quality nutritive
  products and nutrition services. Nonetheless, various obstacles limit the private sector's role in enhancing nutrition for
  children and pregnant women: (a) high out-of-pocket expenses for households and insufficient public risk-pooling
  reduce affordable access to preventive nutrition;27 (b) frequent shortages of key maternal and child therapeutics and
  inconsistent supply chain performance affect the steady supply of essential nutrition products; (c) limited quality
  assurance through regulation and accreditation, but there are ongoing efforts to implement robust quality systems and
  incorporate data from private providers; and (d) nutrition-related MSMEs—such as those involved in therapeutic foods,
  fortified products, and distribution—struggle with financing challenges (low domestic credit, collateral hurdles)28 and
  few specialized financial tools, even though new guarantee and credit line initiatives are increasingly targeting local
  businesses, particularly that are women-led, including through the Benin’s Women’s Entrepreneurship Development
  and Access to Finance (WEDAF, P500561).

  9.    Last, due to nutrition’s multisectoral scope, there is weak governance, fragmented coordination and limited
  accountability. Benin's nutrition sector is overseen by the National Agency for Food and Nutrition (Agence Nationale de
  l’Alimentation et de la Nutrition - ANAN), under the Presidency of the Republic of Benin since 2023. The GoB has been
  highly committed to the multisectoral nutrition agenda for decades starting in 2009 with the Food and Nutrition Council
  (Conseil de l’Alimentation et de la Nutrition, CAN), also under the Presidency, which oversaw the Bank-financed EYNCDP

23 UNICEF, World Health Organization (WHO), and World Bank Group. Levels and Trends in Child Malnutrition: UNICEF / WHO / World Bank Group Joint Child

Malnutrition Estimates (JME), 2023 Edition. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2023
24 DHS; MICS; WHO/UNICEF IYCF indicators; FAO Cost of a Healthy Diet analysis; WFP Food Security & CARI assessments
25
   Demographic and Health Survey (DHS-V). Enquête Démographique et de Santé du Bénin 2017–2018. Cotonou, Bénin: Institut National de la Statistique et de
l’Analyse Économique (INSAE) & ICF, 2019
26 WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP). Progress on Household Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 2024 Update. Geneva: World Health Organization

(WHO) and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 2024
27 World Bank.2023. Creating Fiscal Space to Build Human Capital : Public Finance Review - Benin. Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.
28 World Bank.2023. Country Private Sector Diagnostic : Creating Markets in Benin - Leveraging Private Investment for Inclusive Growth. Washington, D.C. : World

Bank Group.


                                                                                                                                                           Page 5



                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


  (2019-2024) to ensure the implementation of policies, strategies, standards and regulations in all areas of food and
  nutrition, in accordance with the PNAN , and participation in the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement since 2011.
  However, with ANAN engaging in this new role, operational capacity and vertical coordination remain uneven, and
  multisectoral platforms are still not fully in place. Accountability at municipal level is also a challenge: recent social
  accountability work29 in six communes found weak transparency and limited responsiveness of local authorities to the
  population on nutrition and ECD services necessitating targeted mechanisms to strengthen oversight and follow-
  through. With ANAN’s mandate to coordinate four multi-sectoral programs on improving food environments, support
  to pregnant women and ECD, support to the National School Feeding Program (Programme National d’Alimentation
  Scolaire Intégré – PNASI), and food insecurity, technical support will be needed to translate the oversight and
  coordination role into proper budgeting, monitoring and execution.

 Relationship to CAS/CPF

  10. The MPA, ALAFIA: Nourishing Benin’s Future (P512948), is fully aligned with the World Bank’s Country
  Partnership Framework (CPF) for Benin (FY19–23; Report no. 123031), Performance and Learning Review of the CPF
  (FY19-23; Report no. 170821) and remains consistent with the direction of the forthcoming CPF (FY26–35),30 which
  prioritizes human capital, reducing child stunting, and strengthening resilience.. At the Program level, the Program
  Development Objective (PrDO) and the results chain integrate nutrition into primary health care and expand
  community‑based platforms to improve access to essential health, nutrition, WASH, and ECD services for women,
  adolescent girls, and young children, targeting vulnerable communities while supporting both the PNAN (2024–2033)
  and the National Food and Nutrition Strategy (Stratégie Nationale de l’Alimentation et de la Nutrition, SNAN, 2026–
  2030) to strengthen systems across sectors. Sequenced across two phases, Phase 1 establishes core systems and service
  delivery improvements, while Phase 2 consolidates and scales interventions nationwide. Across phases, the MPA
  contributes to select CPF outcomes—improved Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) service coverage, reduced
  stunting and anemia, and strengthened community resilience—with IFC engagement calibrated over time, providing
  advisory support in Phase I and expanding to potential investment and private‑sector financing instruments in Phase II
  to catalyze local agrifood and nutrition markets and address regional disparities.


  11. The proposed MPA is designed to make a measurable contribution to the WBG’s Corporate Scorecard Indicators
  (CSI) and to advance global commitments in line with the HNP regional strategy. The Program aims to align with the
  WBG CSIs: for the Client Context indicator, a focus on children under five years of age stunted and the WBG Results
  Indicators include: (i) the number of people receiving quality HNP services, contributing to the corporate target in this
  area to reach 1.5 billion people, including reaching 200 million people in the West and Central Africa region; (ii) the
  number of people with strengthened food and nutrition security, (iii) people provided with water, sanitation, and/or
  hygiene, and the number provided with safely managed services; and (iv) People and businesses using financial services,
  including the number of women thereby contributing to Benin’s broader development agenda and the SDGs. By
  integrating nutrition into PHC and strengthening community-based delivery platforms, the proposed MPA aligns with
  the HNP regional strategy on equitable access, quality of care, and financial protection. The MPA will also contribute to
  gender equality by prioritizing interventions for women and adolescent girls, and to climate resilience by supporting
  nutrition-sensitive agriculture and food systems. The MPA will also contribute to achieving a key pillar of the PREP, in
  support of PRA objectives, to improve food security and community resilience, with a focus on the most vulnerable.

29 World Bank.2024. Final Evaluation of the Social Accountability for Nutrition and Early Childhood Services in Benin Project (SA4N). Washington, D.C. : World Bank

Group.
30 Expected approval date: May 2026




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 6



                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


Through robust monitoring and evaluation, the proposed MPA will ensure accountability for results and provide
evidence to inform policy and scale-up, reinforcing Benin’s commitment to global nutrition targets and the WBG’s
corporate priorities.

12. The WBG’s More and Better Jobs Framework is expected to be well integrated in the proposed MPA. It
emphasizes three foundational enablers—human capital (health, nutrition, food security, education), business-enabling
policies, and private capital—across five high-potential job sectors, including health care. Nutrition is foundational for
improving health, learning, and productivity as it is both a driver and a measure of human capital. It will be critical to
address nutrition, as it forms the foundation for cognitive development, physical health, and overall productivity. Well-
nourished children are more likely to succeed in school, develop essential skills, and reach their full potential as adults.
Addressing nutrition and ECD, especially during the first 2,000 days, helps prevent stunting, anemia, and other forms of
malnutrition that can limit learning capacity and future earnings. More investments in the nutrition sector could also
catalyze job creation and improve productivity, generating opportunities for frontline health workers, nutritionists,
supply chain specialists, and agriculturalists.

13. The proposed MPA is fully aligned with both adaptation and mitigation goals of the Paris Agreement and Benin’s
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). The Benin NDC sets out a conditional target of 20.15 percent reduction
in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in key sectors of energy, agriculture and waste compared to a business-as-usual
scenario. Project activities will not increase GHG emissions or create persistent barriers to transition low-GHG emissions
over existing levels. The MPA is aligned with Benin’s commitment to reducing GHG emissions, as outlined in the country
policies. Adaptation measures outlined in the NDC include strengthening climate risk forecasts and early warning
systems, improving health infrastructure, promoting climate-resilient agricultural practices, enhancing water resource
management, increasing the capacity of health personnel to manage climate-sensitive diseases, reinforcing emergency
preparedness, and investing in climate-adapted infrastructure and services. The Benin Country Climate and Development
Report (CCDR; Report no. 186227) places strong emphasis on adaptation, recognizing Benin’s high vulnerability to climate
change impacts—especially floods, droughts, and coastal erosion—which threaten food security, water resources, and
public health. While climate vulnerability in Benin remains high, the operation is explicitly designed to reduce these risks
through targeted adaptation measures embedded in nutrition service delivery, health system strengthening water
resource management, and climate-resilient agriculture. The program is also consistent with Benin’s National
Adaptation Plan (NAP), which identifies health, nutrition, water resource management, and climate-resilient agriculture
as priority sectors for adaptation investment, particularly for vulnerable populations exposed to floods, droughts, and
climate-related health risks. The MPA is expected to address the recommendations of the NDC and Benin’s CCDR by
enhancing access to nutrition services for climate-vulnerable population groups, promoting climate-resilient agricultural
practices, providing training for healthcare workers on climate change and the role they can play to mitigate its
detrimental impacts on nutrition.

14. Adaptation and Mitigation goal and risk reduction measures: Adaptation: Benin is highly vulnerable to risks from
climate hazards (as described in the country and sectoral context). The project is designed to reduce these risks to
moderate through the following measures: The Program will fund community-based nutrition services, especially in
remote areas prone to service disruption from climate hazards (RA1). Community health workers (CHWs) and health
staff will receive training on climate vulnerability, particularly nutrition and self-protection measures from climate
shocks. They will also be provided with real-time climate hazard updates to plan outreach during safer periods and raise
awareness about climate-related health risks, especially malnutrition. The CHWs will use the information from the
training to educate communities on personal protection from extreme heat, and floods during homestead gardening
(RA2). The Project will finance solar powered cold chains for food and health products (RA2). To protect solar panels
from damage by heavy rainfall, strong storms, floods, extra measures will be used such as use of resilient designs and

                                                                                                                        Page 7



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


proper installation including steady poles and frames, extreme weather suitable fasteners, weatherproof sealant and
regular maintenance of the solar power panels. Combined, these measures ensure residual risks are acceptable.
Mitigation: All digital equipment purchased withing the project will use energy efficiency above national standards as a
rated criteria for procurement. All other Program activities are universally aligned.

Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

15. There is a strong development rationale for the WBG’s engagement, given the persistent structural constraints
that continue to hinder progress in reducing stunting and improving human capital outcomes in Benin. Over the past
decade, the WB has supported the GoB through multisectoral nutrition and ECD operations – including the Benin
Multisectoral Health and Food Nutrition Project (P143652, 2014-2019) and the EYNCD project (P166211, 2019-2024)
which demonstrated that effectiveness and sustainability of the life-course continuum depend on several interrelated
factors: scaling up evidence-based interventions, fostering community ownership, building decentralized capacity, and
strengthening multisectoral coordination at institutional levels . A key lesson from these operations, reinforced by the
recent rise in stunting, is that scale alone is insufficient: weak coverage, inequitable targeting, delays in identifying
vulnerable households and geographies, and limited competency of frontline delivery significantly limit impact.
Addressing these barriers requires stronger delivery systems; clearer accountability across sectors; and improved
integration of nutrition, PHC, WASH, education, and food systems interventions along the continuum from early
childhood through adolescence.

16. Engaging both women and men in nutrition and ECD activities, and addressing social and gender norms, is critical
for family‑ and community‑level behavior change—an area where the Bank’s global experience and analytical depth
provide substantial value‑add. The proposed Program therefore builds directly on these lessons and on the priorities of
the PNAN (2024–2033) and SNAN (2026–2030) by investing in (i) more precise, data‑driven targeting using geospatial
analytics and government social registries; (ii) early case‑finding and referral for growth faltering; (iii) continuous quality
improvement and supportive supervision; and (iv) strengthened supply chains and last‑mile delivery to reduce service
drop‑offs. Integrating social and behavior change with strong monitoring systems—real‑time dashboards, routine
growth monitoring, and equity‑sensitive indicators—will enable adaptive learning and rapid course correction,
particularly for the hardest‑to‑reach populations. Given the multisectoral nature of the Program, Bank engagement is
also essential to strengthen decentralized implementation and reinforce institutional coordination and governance
through ANAN, ensuring that national systems, not parallel structures, drive delivery, accountability, and long‑term
sustainability.


17. An MPA was adopted as the financing instrument to provide the predictability and continuity needed to address
the structural constraints that continue to slow progress in reducing stunting in Benin. Previous operations show that
expanding coverage alone is not enough; persistent gaps in service quality, targeting, identification of vulnerable
households, supply chains, and multisectoral coordination require a phased, long‑term approach. The MPA enables the
Government and the WBG to first strengthen the core delivery systems for nutrition and PHC—community engagement,
climate‑resilient supply chains, and improved data and verification systems—and then expand and refine these efforts
in a second phase.

18. The MPA also provides a coherent platform for a One WBG approach. In Phase I, IFC will focus on targeted
upstream advisory—food‑safety (IFC Global Food Safety Program) and quality standards, strengthening MSME
capabilities, improving market access, and preparing firms for investment. As systems mature and market conditions
improve, Phase II may introduce investment or blended‑finance instruments, in line with guidance to sequence advisory


                                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


 before investment and expand private‑sector engagement only when conditions allow. Through this phased structure
 and its emphasis on strengthening systems across sectors, the MPA offers the most strategic pathway to achieving
 sustained reductions in stunting and building a resilient, multisectoral delivery system in Benin

 19. To support this phased approach, the first phase of the MPA uses a hybrid structure that combines a PforR with a
 focused IPF component. The PforR anchors implementation in country systems and links disbursements to measurable
 improvements in service utilization, quality, and equity, building on Benin’s growing experience with results‑based
 operations under the BHSE Program. In parallel, the IPF component provides essential technical and institutional
 support—policy and systems reforms, capacity building, the digital MIS backbone, real‑time dashboards, expenditure
 tracking, independent verification, and analytics to operationalize the PNAN (2024–2033) and SNAN (2026–2030).

 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

  Program Development Objective(s)


 To improve utilization of quality integrated nutrition, health, and child development services in targeted areas.


 PDO Level Results Indicators
Proposed PDO level results indicators are:
   • Prevalence of stunting among children under five (%)
   • Children under five who participate in age-appropriate stimulation activities (Number)
   • Women in post-partum attending Post Natal Care (Number) (also a DLI)

 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary

 20. Anchored in the draft SNAN 2026–2030 (the “program”) that builds on the PNAN (2024–2033), the Program will
 support targeted components of this strategy. The approved PNAN document sets the strategic vision and multisectoral
 framework for improving nutrition, while the SNAN translates this vision into concrete, cost interventions across sectors
 such as health, agriculture, education, and social protection. Both documents emphasize a comprehensive approach
 that includes nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive actions, strong governance and coordination, adequate financing
 with transparent resource tracking, robust monitoring and evaluation systems, capacity building, stakeholder
 engagement, and alignment with national development goals. Together, they provide an integrated and accountable
 roadmap for achieving national nutrition objectives. Also building on the Government Action Program (PAG 2021–2026)
 and the National Vision 2060 for inclusive economic and social transformation notably through the PSN and the
 innovative “1,000 Days+” approach, the Program will leverage the approved SNAN’s strategic objectives and pillars to
 guide investments, ensure alignment of budget lines and expenditures, and promote coherence in implementation
 timelines and targets.

 21. The Program aims to support all four strategic priorities of the SNAN: (i) Institutional Support Program for
 Improving Food Environments, (ii) Nutrition Program for Pregnant Women and ECD, (iii) PNASI, and (iv) Program to
 Combat Malnutrition and Food Insecurity (PMIA). This will be done through two RAs: (i) Increase utilization of quality

                                                                                                                      Page 9



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


  integrated nutrition, health and child development services, (ii) Enhance community resilience and access to quality
  nutritious food supply through local engagement and private sector partnerships. There will also be an IPF component
  for technical assistance that will focus on strengthening multisectoral coordination, governance, data systems, and local
  capacities.

  22. Results Area 1 (RA1): Increase utilization of quality integrated nutrition, health and child development services.
  RA1 is about scaling the proven, high‑impact nutrition, health and child development package and maternal/child health
  within the first 2,000 days. Benin’s nutrition sector is anchored in a life-course approach that ensures a continuum of
  care across time (life cycle including the first 1,000 days) and space (institutions and service delivery levels). The
  Government’s strategy prioritizes the critical window from preconception through 6–23 months, which is well-
  supported by global evidence:31,32 with the Flagship PSN launched in 2024, exclusive breastfeeding is promoted for 0–6
  months, while lipid-based nutrient supplements (SQ-LNS) are provided to pregnant and breastfeeding women and to
  children 6–23 months to prevent irreversible deficits in growth and neurodevelopment. Other interventions that will be
  scaled up including IYCF, growth monitoring, rehabilitation centers, deworming and Vitamin A, sexual and reproductive
  health, and antenatal/postnatal consultations. These interventions are also linked with primary care, referral systems,
  and enabling policies. The continuum is designed to operate seamlessly from households and community platforms
  through community relays, supported by social and behavioral change efforts and parental education, frontline primary
  health facilities and referral hospitals, up to national policy and financing.
   Systematic prevention of Gender-Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), and Sexual Harassment
  (SH) will be embedded in school and community services. Lessons from previous projects in collaborative governance
  and social accountability will guide the integration of health, nutrition, and education services from early childhood
  through secondary school. This RA harmonizes nutrition curricula in pre-service training with specific modules on climate
  change and strengthens SBCC tools, ensuring consistent, evidence-based messaging and practices across community
  and institutional settings. Moreover, to improve access to nutritious foods and food safety and reduce disease risk, this
  RA through conditional cash transfers will: (a) in Phase I, provide coupons for enriched flour, fruits and vegetables and
  (b) in Phase II, expand private water connections (WASH cash-for-connection for vulnerable households)—working with
  the National Water Utility of Benin.

  23. RA1 will also support the Prior Action No. 7 under Pillar 2 (Investing in building human capital) of the First Benin
  Accelerated Economic Transformation and Jobs Development Policy Financing (DPF) (P510638/2025–2028; expected to
  be approved February 27, 2026) aiming to address key barriers to reducing stunting. A decree on the modalities for
  implementing mandatory health insurance in the Republic of Benin (Decree No. 2023-327 of June 21, 2023) has been
  revised to institutionalize financial coverage of antenatal consultation fees, reducing out-of-pocket barriers, which is
  expected to increase utilization of health and nutrition (micronutrient supplementation are also free of charge for
  pregnant women and children 6-23 months) reducing maternal mortality and stunting rates. The DPF establishes the
  enabling policy shift (coverage of ANC fees), whereas the PfoR disburses on verified improvements in utilization and
  quality of ANC, PNC and micronutrient supplementation in targeted areas.




31 Keats, E.C., Das, J.K., Salam, R.A. et al. (2021). Effective interventions to address maternal and child malnutrition: an update of the evidence. The Lancet, Child &

Adolescent Health, Volume 5, Issue 5, P367-384.
32 Suri S, Verlato G and Ray S (2025) Editorial: The first 1000 days: window of opportunity for child health and development. Front. Nutr. 12:1673003. doi:

10.3389/fnut.2025.1673003


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 10



                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


24. Results Area 2 (RA2): Enhance community resilience and access to quality nutritious food supply through local
engagement and private sector partnerships. This RA will strengthen community nutrition and resilience by
empowering women, engaging local stakeholders, and catalyzing private sector participation. It will establish nutrition
gardens and promote small-scale livestock across households, schools, and community platforms. With IFC's support,
upstream advisory services will be provided through capacity strengthening to MSMEs owned by women and youth to
advance both bio-fortification and fortification of resilient crops and local livestock producers to provide better feed
quality and ensuring use of the One Health approach (vaccinating, deworming, and better biosecurity measures).
Moreover, the Program will finance in Phase I targeted business mentoring and enterprise development—covering
financial literacy, record-keeping, food safety, quality and fortification standards, aggregation and logistics, digital
market access, and basic business planning— and in Phase II connect women- and youth-led agrifood MSMEs to
microfinance services, savings groups, and producer associations. Clean cooking technologies—such as modern stoves
and solar cookers—will be promoted at the household and school level to reduce health risks and environmental
pressures. In parallel, the Program will link schools to reliable supplies of nutritious fresh foods through digital sourcing
platforms to deal with a key challenge around the quality of the meals which will help to address micronutrition
deficiencies. Community risk management and early warning/early action systems will be strengthened to enhance
preparedness for climate and food security shocks. Early warning systems that track rainfall, crop conditions, prices,
disease outbreaks, and malnutrition trends enable rapid, targeted responses—such as timely distribution of
supplements and therapeutic foods, cash or food assistance, support to smallholders with drought-tolerant seeds or
livestock feed, and pre-positioning of supplies.

25. IPF component: Strengthening multisectoral coordination, governance, data systems, and local capacities. The
IPF component will enable technical assistance to support the Program by driving innovation and reforms essential to
the objectives. Building strong institutions is key for long-term success, as it prevents service disruptions, expands
access, and ensures lasting positive outcomes. By strengthening multisectoral, decentralized governance, procurement,
supply chains, and data and knowledge management, including scaling best practices across communes and leveraging
synergies with IFC— the IPF will not only ensure effective stewardship but also build the capacity of institutions to adapt
and thrive in a dynamic environment. Robust budget and financial management, nutrition budget tagging, and evidence-
based advocacy for sustainable funding will be central to this approach, alongside climate-responsive planning and
multisectoral operational plans at every level. Crucially, the IPF component will prioritize the digitalization of monitoring
and evaluation systems, support research, and advance capacity building, all of which are essential for resilient service
delivery. It will also support operations management as well as technical support to ensure compliance with
environmental and social standards.

26. Support from other WBG Programs: The ALAFIA MPA will be complemented by other WBG programs reflecting
the multisectoral nature of nutrition in the targeted communities. This includes Benin Rural Water Supply Universal
Access Program (AQUA-VIE, P164186), which will help bring water sources closer to ALAFIA targeted communities to
strengthen WASH; the BSEP (P172940), which is leading the community health strategy and scaling RMNCAH+N services
in ALAFIA targeted communities; WEDAF (P500561) and IFC, which will enhance women’s economic empowerment
through capacity building, improved access to finance, productive assets, and markets; the Agricultural Competitiveness
and Export Diversification Project (PACOFIDE, P168132), which will provide access to newly irrigated lands and deliver
training and grants to support income-generating activities in coordination with Benin Youth Inclusion Project (ProdIJ,
P170425) for ALAFIA beneficiaries; and the Gulf of Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project (COSO, P175043),



                                                                                                                       Page 11



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


where ALAFIA can leverage the project’s community-driven mechanisms and local planning structures to reinforce
community ownership, leadership, and social accountability to avoid parallel systems.

27. Geographic coverage: ALAFIA I is expected to cover at least 46 of the 77 communes of Benin with the highest
needs in terms of health and nutrition services, maintaining a focus on equitable coverage while prioritizing areas with
the greatest health and nutrition disparities. ALAFIA II will expand and cover the country at a national level.

28. Beneficiaries: In accordance with ALAFIA I’s target population, the primary beneficiaries of the PforR are women,
newborns, children under five, and adolescents/youth.

29. Exclusions: In keeping with PforR Financing guidelines, the appraisal process will assess whether any activities
present high environmental or social risks or involve high-value contracts.


E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

30. PforR: Environmental and Social (E&S) risks are assessed as Moderate at concept-stage. Environmental risks are
mainly associated with increased volumes of nutrition- and health-related waste at facility and community levels,
alongside safety risks tied to supply chains for micronutrients and other inputs (e.g., traffic and fire safety, appropriate
storage), the pest management associated with the MSME agriculture production. These risks are site-specific,
predictable, and readily mitigable through existing country systems strengthened by the operation. Social risks relate
primarily to equitable access for poor and remote households; potential exclusion of marginalized groups; SEA/SH risks
in schools and community outreach; stakeholder engagement quality; and data privacy and cybersecurity as health and
nutrition information systems are digitalized, and security risks related to insecurity in some of the targeted areas,
particularly the northern regions. Nevertheless, the Program is expected to generate significant positive social outcomes
by improving nutrition, health, and livelihoods, and targeting underserved areas. Citizen engagement will be
strengthened by using community scorecards in priority communes along with and integrated, accessible Grievance
Redress Mechanism (GRM) which will operate in coordination with the National Adaptive Social Protection Program
(PNASI).


31. Under the PforR, high-risk activities will be excluded by design, and an Environmental and Social Systems
Assessment (ESSA) will identify gaps and define system-strengthening actions for safe waste management, inclusive
targeting, SEA/SH prevention and response, supply chain safety, and a functional, accessible Grievance Redress
Mechanism. The assessment will also consider the results from the Overview Assessment of the environmental and
social management system performed for Benin in 2025. The ESSA Report will be consulted upon and disclosed prior to
Appraisal.

32. IPF. The proposed IPF Component is expected to provide strategic TA support and finance key inputs
to facilitate the Program’s implementation such as strengthening multisectoral coordination, governance, data systems,
local capacities, and institutional reforms, including digitalization of data, budget management, public-private
partnerships, and quality assurance. The IPF TA component is not expected to fund any construction or rehabilitation.
Therefore, the associated E&S risks are expected to be low at concept-stage. In addition, the “downstream” impacts
associated with the TA outcomes will be mostly positive with the assurance of sound design and the provision of

                                                                                                                       Page 12



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


 sufficient quality assurance. In addition, all TA-type activities will be subject to the application of Environmental and
 Social Standards 1 (paragraphs 14-18) and the Operations Environmental and Social Review Committee advisory note
 on TA (May 21, 2019). An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) for the IPF/TA will be prepared and include
 measures for SEP, addressing potential labor and SEA/H risks. The Project Coordination Unit, ANAN, will be staffed
 with dedicated E&S specialists to manage these risks associated with the IPF component as well as for the Program
 itself. Third-party monitoring will also be needed in areas where there are security concerns.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                   Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component



1. Environmental and Social (E&S) Risks: Overall E&S risk is considered moderate at the concept stage. Environmental
   risk mainly stems from ongoing nutrition waste management issues, despite current regulations. The Program aims
   to improve waste management in health facilities. Social risk is moderate, largely due to concerns about equitable
   access, inclusion of vulnerable groups, and effective stakeholder engagement. Nonetheless, the multisectoral Program
   targeting nutrition, health, social protection, WASH, education, jobs, governance, and service quality is expected to
   deliver substantial social benefits.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Fatima Barry
   Senior Health Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministère de l'Économie et des Finances

 Implementing Agencies
  Agence Nationale de l’Alimentation et de la Nutrition (ANAN)




                                                                                                                     Page 13



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)


FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                    Page 14



                                                             Official Use Only
