Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development (P509756)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDDA00182




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development (P509756)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)         Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                               BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and
Brazil                           P509756
                                                               Fostering Sustainable Economic Development
Region                           Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
LATIN AMERICA AND                                              Macroeconomics, Trade          Development Policy
                                 09-Jan-2026
CARIBBEAN                                                      and Investment                 Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                      Implementing Agency
Government of Piauí              Secretariat of Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To support reforms in the State of Piauí by (i) strengthening fiscal sustainability and the quality of public expenditure,
and (ii) promoting private sector participation in water and land resource management for sustainable economic
development.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                                  390.21

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                 390.21
    World Bank Lending                                                                                             390.21

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                                                                                                                        Page 1



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development (P509756)



 Explanation
 The team was cleared to prepare for the Regional Operations Committee (ROC) review, subject to refinements in the
 macroeconomic framework, program design, and risk assessment. While the macro framework was deemed
 adequate, reviewers requested deeper analysis of GDP growth drivers, fiscal risks, trade tensions, and
 intergovernmental fiscal arrangements, along with an updated IMF Assessment Letter or Article IV. The reform
 program was seen as strong, but the team was asked to better justify the DPF title, clarify linkages and evidence for
 prior actions, particularly under Pillar II, and enhance the narrative on results indicators. Specific improvements were
 recommended for prior actions on private sector participation in the water sector, and land regularization. The risk
 level remains “Moderate”. The team will also strengthen the corporate commitments.




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

The Brazilian State of Piauí, located in the Northeast, faces significant development challenges, particularly in the
management of its natural resources but also demonstrates strong economic potential. It has the country’s second-
lowest per capita GDP, about half the national average, and a poverty rate of 41.1 percent, the fourth highest nationally.
Key long-standing structural constraints faced by Piauí were clearly identified more than two decades ago, especially the
water and land management, yet remain unsolved and continue to limit development opportunities. In 2024, only 13.5
percent of households had access to sanitation (the lowest in Brazil), while 15.6 percent lacked access to the public water
network, ranking the State 17th position out 27 federative units. Water security is further strained by recurrent droughts,
reducing agricultural output (15 percent of GDP) and deepening rural poverty. Land governance is also weak—Piauí ranked
18th of 24 states in 2021 — deterring investment, limiting access to credit, and constraining agricultural development.
Despite annual GDP growth of 2.9 percent from 2000–2022, sustaining progress will require fiscal space for stronger public
investment and a regulatory environment that attracts private capital for sustainable natural resource management and
development.

Brazil’s macroeconomic policy framework is deemed adequate for the proposed operation. Activity remained robust in
2024, driven by recovering investment and strong private consumption, supported by a buoyant labor market. Real GDP
growth is expected at 2.4 percent in 2025 and 2.2 percent in 2026 amid the resilience of the Brazilian economy versus
global headwinds, before converging to its potential of about 2.3 percent (table 1). The Federal Government has made
progress in implementing consistent, growth-oriented structural reforms to improve the business environment, enhance
financial sector performance, and is advancing with a comprehensive reform to streamline indirect taxes. Fiscal policy,
anchored in a new framework, supports gradual consolidation and is expected to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio by the
decade’s end. The Federal Government reached the primary balance target in 2024, signaling its commitment to improve
fiscal outcomes. Public debt remains sustainable, and the country’s external position resilient, with a low share of foreign
currency-denominated debt and ample reserves. Additionally, the Federal Government is committed to a medium- and
long-term debt management strategy to extend the maturity of its debt portfolio. Brazil’s macroeconomic framework is
underpinned by an independent and credible Central Bank, a resilient financial system, an inflation-targeting regime, and

                                                                                                                        Page 2



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development (P509756)


a flexible exchange rate. Liquidity risks remain low, supported by the Government’s strong cash buffers and limited
exposure of public debt to exchange rate fluctuations.

 Relationship to CPF

The two pillars of the proposed DPF are closely aligned with the Government’s priorities, the guiding themes of the
Government’s Multiannual Plan (Plano Plurianual - PPA) for 2024-2027, and with the long-term strategic development
plan for the State of Piauí (Guidelines for the Long-Term Development of the State of Piauí) and the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF). Pillar 1 directly supports the Government’s top priority of strengthening fiscal discipline and institutions
and is closely aligned with the public sector management axis of the PPA, specifically addressing fiscal management and
modernizing public administration practices. Additionally, it also underpins one of the three core guidelines of Piauí’s long-
term strategy to achieve fiscal stability and boost investment capacity and is closely aligned with Objective 1.1 of the CPF,
which aims to strengthen fiscal management. Pillar 2 focuses on promoting sustainable growth with participation of the
private sector. It supports Objective 1.2 of the CPF, which seeks to enhance competitiveness in a greener manner, and
Objective 3.1, which aims to improve the management of natural resources under Pillar 2. These objectives collectively
foster an enabling environment for sustainable private sector participation. Furthermore, Pillar 2 is consistent with the
World Bank Group's Climate Change Action Plan for 2021-2025.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 To support reforms in the State of Piauí by (i) strengthening fiscal sustainability and the quality of public expenditure,
 and (ii) promoting private sector participation in water and land resource management for sustainable economic
 development.


 Key Results

The proposed measures are expected to yield significant fiscal gains, improve service delivery in water and sanitation,
and streamline the land tenure regularization process. By 2026, current savings are projected to reach the equivalent of
8 percent of revenues, supported by improved public expenditure management. At least 60 percent of new public
investment projects are expected to undergo cost-benefit analysis, and public procurement is set to become more
competitive. In the water sector, reforms aim to mobilize greater investment and expand access for poor women, while
doubling the volume of raw water subject to usage fees. Finally, the digitalization of land tenure regularization is expected
to significantly accelerate processing times, reducing the duration from 90 to 30 days.

 D. Project Description

The standalone DPL supports the state of Piauí to: (i) strengthen fiscal sustainability and the quality of public
expenditure, and (ii) promote private participation in the delivery of water services and strengthening land
regularization processes. The proposed DPL is articulated around two pillars.




                                                                                                                          Page 3



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development (P509756)


The first pillar supports reforms that strengthen fiscal sustainability and the quality of public expenditure through (i)
the adoption of a fiscal framework aimed at controlling current expenditures which ensures fiscal space for public
investment; (ii) enhancing sustainable procurement processes; and (iii) the introduction of a new public investment
management framework.

The second pillar supports reforms to promote private participation in water and land resource management for
sustainable economic development by: (i) strengthening the financial autonomy of the water and sanitation state
regulator to enhance regulatory certainty and investor confidence; (ii) improving the raw water charging system to
encourage efficient use; and (c) digitalizing land tenure regularization system to improve land security and support
sustainable agriculture growth

 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

The Piuaí State Secretariat of Planning (SEPLAN) is responsible for collecting and monitoring information related to
program implementation and progress toward the achievement of the results. SEPLAN is responsible for coordinating
all necessary actions among the agencies involved in the reform program supported by this DPF, under the two pillars. For
Pillar 1, SEPLAN will be responsible for PA3 and will coordinate with other State agencies responsible for PA1 and PA2,
respectively, the SEFAZ, and the Secretary of State Administration (SEAD). For the second pillar, SEPLAN will coordinate
with AGRESPI, the Secretary of State for the Environment and Water Resource (SEMARH) and INTERPI. The World Bank
team has worked closely with the above agencies as well as Brazil’s Federal Government to define results indicators that
are clearly spelled out and measurable, giving preference to those that are already collected by the State Government on
a regular basis to avoid duplication. In addition, the World Bank Progestão Piauí: Public Sector Management Efficiency
Project (P178663), and the Piauí Pillars of Growth and Social Inclusion Project – Phase 2 (P177474) aims to strengthen
institutional capacity in the Government of Piauí (GoPI) by supporting capacity-building initiatives and implementation.

 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

Prior actions (PA) under Pillar I might have positive poverty and social impacts if the fiscal space generated by them is
channeled to investments in public services. PA1 aims to increase current savings. PA2 is expected to reduce the costs of
public contracts by increasing the efficiency of public procurement. PA3 can promote savings related to a lower risk of
delays and cost overruns. Together, they will generate fiscal space that can benefit the poor if the additional fiscal
resources translate into higher public investments, especially in areas such as health and education. In Piauí, health and
education expenditures account for 15 percent and 12 percent of the State’s budget, respectively. Such expenditures
more than proportionally benefit the poor, as 94 percent of poor households with a child in school age use public schools,
while among non-poor households this reaches 64 percent. Similarly, 93 percent of poor households in Piauí use the public
health system (SUS), while among the non-poor this is 63 percent. PA3 may have additional poverty impacts thanks to the
climate risk assessment in approved projects under the new PIM framework. Since the poor tend to be disproportionally
affected by these events , PA3 can indirectly contribute to mitigate poverty in Piauí.


                                                                                                                      Page 4



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development (P509756)




Prior actions under Pillar II are expected to have poverty and social impacts in the medium-term. These effects might
emerge from households’ enhanced resilience associated with land regularization and the State’s better management of
water resources. Depending on the price setting mechanisms, PA5 is anticipated to have negligible poverty and social
impacts due to existing exemptions to vulnerable groups - including small-scale users, individuals registered in CADÚnico,
traditional communities, and land reform settlements. The strengthened regulation environment which aims to promote
better private sector outcomes in water and sanitation services (PA4) is expected to have positive social impacts. The
benefits of greater water and sanitation access are well documented in the literature, from lower disease burden to lower
stunting , and improved cognitive test scores . PA6 helps small landholders obtain land titles, and is projected to provide
legal security, promote soil conservation , increase land values , and improve access to credit.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

The policies supported by this proposed series are expected to have positive impacts on the environment, forests, and
other natural resources. Under Pillar I, policies are expected to ensure that public investments in the State undertake
environmental considerations, and publicly procured goods are sustainable and do not contribute to environmental
degradation. Policies under Pillar II are expected to improve water management, improve sanitation and wastewater
treatment contributing to reduce environmental pollution. Pillar II policies will also contribute to the conservation of
important ecosystems.

 G. Risks and Mitigation

The overall risk of this proposed operation is assessed as moderate. The main risks to the objectives of this operation
include institutional capacity constraints and the complexity of systems and reforms that will be implemented and risks
from stakeholders. Administrative capacity remains limited, particularly in carrying out complex policy reforms However,
the Progestão Piauí: Public Sector Management Efficiency Project (P178663), and the Piauí Pillars of Growth and Social
Inclusion Project – Phase 2 (P177474) aims to strengthen institutional capacity in the Government of Piauí (GoPI) by
supporting capacity-building initiatives and implementation. Stakeholder risks are also substantial. These include
sensitivities related to specific prior actions in the reform agenda of water services and land regularization. To mitigate
these risks, the Government has conducted extensive consultations with affected stakeholders, secured approval from
the Water Resources Committee, and exempted the most vulnerable groups—such as smallholder farmers and traditional
communities—from the raw water charges. Regarding land, the reform aims to reduce the incidence of land conflicts by
accelerating the regularization process and incorporating geospatial references to prevent duplication and boundary
overlaps




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank




                                                                                                                       Page 5



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development (P509756)


 Luigi Butron Calderon
 Economist

 Mariana Iootty De Paiva Dias
 Senior Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Government of Piauí

Implementing Agencies
 Secretariat of Finance
 Emílio Joaquim De Oliveira Júnior
 Secretary of Finance
 emiliojj@sefaz.pi.gov.br

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Luigi Butron Calderon, Mariana Iootty De Paiva Dias

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Shireen Mahdi                           07-Jul-2025

Country Director:                       Jorge A. Coarasa                        04-Sep-2025




                                                                                                                 Page 6



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
