Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Project Information Document (PID)

                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01328




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID               Operation Name
                               EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                  Kenya Watershed Services
Kenya                                                     P509738
                               AFRICA                                                Improvement Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date    Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                     Environment, Natural
Investment Project
                               17-Mar-2025                12-Jun-2025                Resources & the Blue
Financing (IPF)
                                                                                     Economy
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               State Department of
Republic of Kenya
                               Forestry

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable land and watershed management
and to improve livelihoods of communities in the project areas.

Components
Roots of Resilience: Policy, Legal, and Regulatory Framework
Green Horizons: Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management
Project Management, Training & Capacity Building

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                  200.00

  Total Financing                                                                                       200.00
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                         200.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                             0.00



                                                                                                             Page 1
          The World Bank
          Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)


    DETAILS
      World Bank Group Financing
        International Development Association (IDA)                                                                      200.00
          IDA Credit                                                                                                     200.00




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
High


    Decision
    The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context
    1. Over the past decade, Kenya has seen substantial economic growth, yet faces challenges particularly debt, climate
    change, and degradation of natural resources that threaten its economic and social development opportunities. Real
    gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of 4.8 percent (2015–2019), with the poverty rate decreasing from 47
    percent to 34 percent, largely due to private consumption growth at 5 percent annually. Public investment aimed at
    reducing infrastructure gaps raised debt, with interest payments rising from 2.7 percent of GDP in 2014 to 4.1 percent in
    2022, limiting priority spending. Recent droughts exposed vulnerability, reduced agricultural growth, increased rural
    poverty, and highlighted risks associated with rainfall-dependent livelihoods and external credit reliance.

    2. Climate change poses a significant risk to Kenya’s natural resources that are central to the employment, food
    security, and energy of its 54 million people. They support over 80 percent of livelihoods, make up 35 percent of total
    wealth, 42 percent of GDP, and nearly 70 percent of jobs. The agriculture sector employs 48 percent of workers and is
    highly climate-sensitive, with limited labor shifting to other sectors. A more climate resilient agricultural sector will help
    Kenya face the jobs and development challenges. Without climate mitigation, Kenya could see temperature increases of
    1.5°–3°C by the century’s end, with variable rainfall and more intense droughts and floods. The 2021–2023 droughts left
    6.4 million people food insecure which increased migration and potential conflict.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context
    3. Land degradation puts Kenya’s economic and social gains at risk and if not reversed could drive conflict. Kenya’s
    Land Assessment Report1 highlights that high levels of land degradation are likely to occur on approximately 88.6 percent
    of Kenya’s total land area. The degradation of approximately 38.8 million hectares of Kenya’s land is driven by a
    combination of deforestation, overgrazing, soil erosion, poor agricultural practices, and population pressure. The

1
 Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (2016). Land Degradation Assessment in Kenya. Republic of Kenya, Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources (MENR), Nairobi.

                                                                                                                              Page 2
      The World Bank
      Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)


degradation is a leading cause of declining agricultural productivity, biodiversity loss, livelihoods disruptions, and conflict
particularly over grazing land. It has reduced ecological functionality and caused productivity and socio-economic and
ecological losses estimated at US$1.3 billion annually (the National Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration Programme
Strategy 2023-2032, NLERS). Kenya’s gazetted forests have over the last two decades undergone considerable
deforestation and forest degradation because of encroachment for agricultural expansion, infrastructure extension, and
mining (Indufor 2023), unsustainable fuelwood and charcoal production, uncontrolled livestock grazing, and forest fires.
Climate change exacerbates these effects, particularly in arid and semi-arid regions, where droughts and extreme
weather worsen land degradation. Insecure land tenure, poor agricultural practices, and invasive species further degrade
land quality. Rapid urbanization, infrastructure development, and pollution add to the complexity.

4. The GoK has developed the National Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration Strategy 2023-2032 (NLERS), targeting
to restore and conserve 10.6 million hectares of degraded landscapes and ecosystems by 2032 through the 15 billion
trees growing initiative. These results are expected to enhance biodiversity conservation, environmental sustainability,
sustainable livelihoods, climate resilience, and socio-economic development. The Kenya Watershed Services
Improvement Project (KEWASIP, Project) responds to the critical need to restore degraded landscapes, strengthen the
management of Kenya’s natural resources, and enhance ecosystem services to improve climate resilience and provide
access to diversified livelihoods in Kenya. The Project will support Kenya’s efforts to better align institutional structures
and incentives; economic, social, and environmental goals; priority-setting modalities; and financing levels.

5. The Project’s design reflects the importance of the participatory process in the planning and managing of natural
resources including sustainable land and water management (SLWM) tradeoffs. Many communities, especially those in
ASAL regions, have traditional knowledge and practices that can contribute to effective natural resource management.
KEWASIP aims to empower communities through capacity-building and access to diversified livelihoods to incentivize
landscape restoration and sustain landscape management practices. Endeavors that integrate local communities’
perspectives on “access to, and reliance on, the benefits of ecosystem services as well as competing priorities” are likely
to foster more effective tradeoff management. To support the integration of local communities in the governance,
prioritization, and implementation process, KEWASIP will provide technical assistance (TA) to improve information
collection and sharing as well as financing resources at the local level to support implementation of SLWM activities.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable watershed and landscape
management for livelihoods and conservation in the project areas.
 Key Results
 Outcome. Improved Watershed Management
   • PDO1: Hectares of terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management (WB SC)
       o PDO1a: Private and Community lands with SLM applied and under improved management
       o PDO 1b: Rehabilitation of degraded gazetted forests
   • PDO 2: Net GHG emissions per year (WB SC)
 Outcome. Livelihoods
   • PDO 3: Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (of which female) (WB SC)
       o PDO 3a: Beneficiaries adopting at least one additional SLM practice (of which female, youth)
       o PDO 3b: Beneficiaries participating in livelihood diversification and income generating activities (of which
          female, youth)

 D. Project Description

                                                                                                                          Page 3
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)


  6. Component 1. Roots of Resilience: Policy, Legal, and Regulatory Framework. (IDA US$30 million): The objective of
  this component is to establish the foundation for programmatic and sustained investments in SLWM by enhancing
  the capabilities of institutions and fortifying natural resource management governance structures in Kenya. It
  comprises of three subcomponents: (i) Subcomponent 1a will support efforts to strengthen watershed management
  institutions, water resources, and watershed governance; (ii) Subcomponent 1b will support the development and
  implementation of an integrated watershed and landscape restoration monitoring system; (iii) Subcomponent 1c will
  promote the establishment of sustainable finance mechanisms for community-based restoration activities.

  7. Component 2. Green Horizons: Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management (IDA US$150 million): The
  component will support the restoration and management of degraded landscapes through investment in selected
  hydrosheds and help build resilient livelihoods for the communities in the project area. It comprises two
  subcomponents: (i) Subcomponent 2a will support SLMW in private and community lands; and (ii) Subcomponent 2b
  will support the restoration of Gazetted Forests. The project will adopt a participatory approach for planning and
  implementing SLWM investments, using the watershed as the management unit. It will also support targeted
  households and vulnerable communities in transitioning to sustainable and diversified livelihoods. To guide strategic
  investment, a Kenya-adapted Investment Prioritization Tool (IPT) will be used, integrating data on land degradation,
  water resources, biodiversity, socio-economic factors, and climate risks.

  8. Component 3. Project Management, Training & Capacity Building. (IDA US$20 million): It will aim to ensure the
  efficient consolidation of planning and budgeting processes, alongside the diligent implementation and reporting of
  project activities. A National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established within the State Department of
  Forestry of the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Forestry. The NPCU will oversee all fiduciary aspects of
  project implementation, including financial management, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E) reporting. Reporting at the national, county, and community levels will be designed
  to facilitate accurate and comprehensive tracking of project progress.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                          Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                   No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

9. Under component 1, risks and impacts relate to adverse cumulative and downstream impacts of TA and
particularly the development of policies and regulations as well as training and capacity building. These include type 2
and 3 TAs that aim to support the formulation of policies and strengthen borrower capacity, as per the relevant
requirements of the Operations Environmental and Social Review Committee (OESRC) Advisory Note on Technical
Assistance and the Environmental and Social Framework (May 21, 2019), TA Guidance Note. Key prevention and mitigation
measures include: (i) Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS) mainstreaming in Terms of References and bidding
documents by the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) Environment and Social (E&S) officers; (ii) capacity building
for TA service providers on ESHS, including obligations to prevent and address cases of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse -
Sexual Harassment (SEA-SH); (iii) adherence to relevant national laws and security protocols as per the Environmental and
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP); (iv) inclusive and culturally appropriate approaches to stakeholder targeting and inclusion
for indigenous peoples (IPs) and vulnerable and marginalized groups (VMGs); (v) establishment of a functional workers’

                                                                                                                      Page 4
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)


GRM, sensitive to SEA-SH issues, with multiple uptake channels and referral pathways, and; (vi) the application of strategic
E&S assessment (SESA) to understand the downstream cumulative E&S risks and impacts.

10. Under component 2, potential risks are related to restrictions on land use or access to land and natural resources,
challenges in establishing equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms for investments on community land, and the
displacement of communities, which could affect their economic status and social cohesion. Additional risks include
exclusion of IPs and VMGs, ineffective grievance management, and inadequate monitoring of the effectiveness of
livelihood restoration or improvement measures. To address these, the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, and
Forestry (MoECCF) has prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for inclusive, culturally appropriate engagement,
and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) detailing key risk mitigation actions. An Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has also been developed, providing guidelines for assessing site-specific risks and
including Labor Management Procedures and a Security Management Plan. An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA)
is underway and will inform instruments such as: (i) a Social and conflict analysis to assesses the degree to which the
project interventions may exacerbate existing tensions and inequality within communities; (ii) an evaluation of the
institutional frameworks for the KFS and KWS for recommendations on strengthening their codes of conduct as aligned
with Good Practice Notes (GPN) on the use of armed security and other internationally accepted practices; (iii) an E&S
technical capacities and systems assessment of implementing entities to enhance management and sustainability
measures; (iv) a review of the existing Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) of implementing entities including integration
of existing country and county GRM systems and (vi) Process Framework to assess restrictions in access to natural
resources in gazetted forests. The Process Framework will include principles and guidelines for the development of: (i)
Resettlement Plans; (ii) Livelihood Restoration Plans; (iii) Indigenous Peoples Plans; and (iv) benefit sharing
plans/agreements as required. In addition, a comprehensive Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be
conducted to examine E&S risks and impacts associated with policies and regulatory frameworks under Component 1.

  E. Implementation
  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
11. The KEWASIP will adopt a three-tiered implementation arrangement involving national, county, and community
levels. Due to the multisectoral nature of the project, at the national level, a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC)
will provide overall project oversight and policy guidance, while a National Technical Advisory Committee (NTAC) will offer
technical support to ensure environmental, social, and economic objectives are met. The project will have a National
Project Coordinating Unit (NPCU) established under the State Department for Forestry staffed by government officers.
The main role of NPCU is the day-to-day coordination and management of project activities, and implementation of
activities at National Level as well as monitoring, reporting and verification of project outputs and outcomes. At the county
level, a County Project Steering Committee (CPSC) and a County Project Advisory Committee (CPAC) will be established
with roles like those of the NPSC and the NTAC. The NTAC will be composed of technical officers from relevant national
agencies and county officers. A County Project Coordinating Unit (CPCU) will be established in relevant counties.

12. At the community level, the organization will revolve around local-level Common Interest Groups (CIGs) that
represent beneficiary communities and ensure participatory identification, preparation, and implementation of sub-
projects. These CIGs will prioritize the inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized groups (VMGs) to enhance social and
economic participation in targeted rural areas. The project activities will be informed by the project integrated Sustainable
Landscape Management Plans, the hydroshed plans and the micro-catchment action plans which harmonizes County
Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs), County Spatial Plans, Participatory Climate Risk Assessments (PCRA), and other
plans such as Participatory Forest Management Plans (PFMPs), Sub-Catchment Management Plans (SCMPs), and Climate
Risk Management Action Plans, ensuring that local climate considerations are incorporated into planning and
implementation.

                                                                                                                         Page 5
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman Mohammed
 Senior Environmental Engineer

 Victor Vazquez Alvarez
 Senior Water Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Kenya

Implementing Agencies
 State Department of Forestry
 Gitonga Mugambi
 PS
 ps@forestry.go.ke

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                  Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman Mohammed, Victor Vazquez Alvarez

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:             Paul Jonathan Martin              25-Feb-2025

Country Director:                     Anne Margreth Bakilana            08-Apr-2025




                                                                                                     Page 6
The World Bank
Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)




                                                         Page 7
