Public Disclosure Authorized   Republic of Benin / National Agency for Food and
                                              Nutrition (ANAN)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program
                                                  (P509225)


                                ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT
                                               PLAN




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                   (ESCP)


                                                 Negotiated


                                                May 15th, 2026



Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                 1


                                                                               Official Use Only
                         ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN

1. The Republic of Benin (the Recipient) will implement the ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Project
   (the “Project”), with the involvement of Presidency of Benin, the Ministry of Economy and Finance
   (MEF) and National Agency for Food and Nutrition (ANAN), as set out in the Financing Agreement and
   Project Agreement (the Agreements). The International Development Association (the Association)
   has agreed to provide the financing for the Project, as indicated in the Agreements.

2. The Recipient shall ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the Environmental and
   Social Standards (ESS) and this Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), in a manner
   acceptable to the Association. The ESCP is a part of the Agreements. Unless otherwise defined in this
   ESCP, capitalized terms used in this ESCP have the meanings ascribed to them in the Agreements.

3. Without limitation the foregoing, this ESCP sets out the material measures and actions that the
   Recipient shall implement or cause to be carried out, including, as applicable, their respective
   timeframes; institutional, staffing, training, monitoring and reporting arrangements; and grievance
   management. The ESCP also sets out the environmental and social (E&S) documents that shall be
   prepared or updated, consulted, disclosed and implemented under the Project, consistent with the
   ESSs, in form and substance acceptable to the Association. Such E&S documents may be revised from
   time to time with the prior written consent of the Association. As provided for under the referred
   Agreements, the Recipient shall ensure that there are sufficient funds available to cover the costs of
   implementing the ESCP.

4. As agreed between the Association and the Recipient, this ESCP will be revised from time to time, as
   necessary, to reflect adaptive management of Project changes or unforeseen circumstances or in
   response to Project performance. In such circumstances, the Association and the Recipient agree to
   update the ESCP to reflect such changes through an exchange of letters signed between the
   Association and the Representative of the Recipient specified in the Financing Agreement or the
   director general of National Agency for Food and Nutrition in coordination with the Representative of
   the Recipient. The Recipient shall promptly disclose the ESCP.

5. The subsection on “Indicators for Implementation Readiness” below identifies the actions and
   measures to be monitored to assess Project readiness to begin implementation in accordance with
   this ESCP. Nevertheless, all actions and measures in this ESCP shall be implemented as set out in the
   “Timeframe” column below irrespective of whether they are listed in the referred subsection.




                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
CONCRETE MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                             TIMEFRAME                           RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS AND CAPACITY SUPPORT
A                                                                                                                                             ANAN PCU
     ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE                                                           Establish the PCU and recruit the environmental
                                                                                        and social specialists before the Project
     Establish and maintain the Project Implementing Unit within ANAN, that is
                                                                                        Effective Date and maintain the PCU and these
     responsible for the Project, with qualified staff through the recruitment of (i)
                                                                                        positions throughout Project implementation.
     an environmental specialist and (ii) a social specialist with expertise in
     managing GBV risks and impacts to implement the project's environmental
     and social risk management measures.
MONITORING AND REPORTING
C    REGULAR REPORTS                                                                    Starting from the Effective Date, quarterly           ANAN PCU
                                                                                        reports will be produced throughout the
     Prepare and regularly submit to the Association reports monitoring the             implementation of the Project and submitted
     environmental, social, health, and safety (ESHS) performance of the Project.       to the Association no later than 15 days after
     The reports shall include, inter alia:                                             the quarter has expired.

     •   The degree of preparation and implementation of the environmental              .
         and social instruments required under the ESCP.
     •   A summary of stakeholder engagement activities.
     •   Complaints submitted to the Project grievance mechanism, the
         complaint register, and progress made in resolving them.
     •   The number and status of resolution of incidents and accidents reported
         under Actions D and E below.
D                                                                                       Monthly reports for contract work are provided        ANAN PCU
     CONTRACTORS’ MONTHLY REPORTS
                                                                                        throughout the term of the contract or
     Require contractors and supervising firms to provide monthly monitoring            subcontract.
     reports on the environmental and social performance of the works in                Submit the monthly reports to the Association
     accordance with the metrics specified in the respective bidding documents          as annexes to the quarterly reports to be
     and contracts to the PIU. These reports will be forwarded to the Association       submitted under action C above.
     by the PIU upon its request.

E    INCIDENTS AND ACCIDENTS                                                            Notify the Association no later than 48 hours         ANAN PCU
                                                                                        after learning of the incident or accident, ideally
     Notify the Association of any incident or accident related to the Project that
                                                                                        24 hours for SEA/SH but any other event, not
     has or is likely to have a significant adverse effect on the environment,
                                                                                        later than 48 hours.
     affected communities, the public or workers, including those resulting in
                                                                                        Provide available details upon request.
                                                                                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
CONCRETE MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                          TIMEFRAME                         RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
     death or serious injury to workers or the public; acts of violence,
     discrimination or protest; environmental pollution; forced or child labor;
     displacement without due process (forced eviction); allegations of sexual        Provide report and Corrective Action Plan to the
     exploitation or abuse (SEA) or sexual harassment (SH); or epidemics. Provide     Association no later than 10 days following the
     available details of the incident or accident to the Association upon request.   submission of the initial notice, unless a
                                                                                      different timeframe is agreed to in writing by
       Arrange for an appropriate review of the incident or accident to establish its
                                                                                      the Association.
       immediate, underlying and root causes. Prepare, agree with the Association,
       and then implement a Corrective Action Plan that sets out the measures and
       actions to be taken to address the incident or accident and prevent its
       recurrence.
ESS 1: ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS
1.2    MANAGEMENT OF CONTRACTORS                                                      As part of the preparation of procurement          ANAN PCU
       Incorporate the relevant aspects of the ESCP, including, the Labor documents and before the signing of respective
       Management Procedures, and code of conduct, into the E&S specifications contracts and effective start of the relevant
       of the procurement documents and contracts with contractors and services or works.
       supervising firms.

       Thereafter ensure that the contractors comply with the E&S specifications of
       their respective contracts.                                                    Throughout Project implementation.



       Provide copies of the relevant contracts with contractors to the Association
                                                                                      Throughout Project implementation and upon
       upon request.
                                                                                      request.


1.3    TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                                                                                                              ANAN PCU
       Carry out the consultancies, studies (including feasibility studies, if        Throughout Project implementation.
       applicable), capacity building, training, and any other technical assistance
       activities under the Project, including, inter alia, potential environmental
       and social assessment instruments to be supported under the TA in
       accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the Association, that are
       consistent with the ESSs. Thereafter prepare and finalize the outputs of
       such activities in compliance with the terms of reference.
ESS 2: LABOR AND WORKING CONDITIONS
                                                                                                                                                               4


                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
CONCRETE MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                          TIMEFRAME           RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
2.1  LABOR MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
     The recipient should implement labor management procedures including,             Throughout Project implementation   ANAN PCU
     inter alia, the prohibition of SEA / SH, child labor, and forced labor in
     accordance with the ESS 2 and in a manner acceptable to the Association.

      The Recipient shall adopt and implement in the area of Project workers
      procedures that consist of the following requirements:
      •       Ensure that Project workers, as defined under ESS2, i.e. directly
      engaged by the Recipient or through third-parties to work specifically in
      relation to the Project a (direct and contracted workers) will be hired,
      promoted and their employment, where needed, terminated based on
      principles of non-discrimination and equal opportunity, no-harassment, and
      freedom of association;
      •       Ensure that all Project workers are provided with information and
      documentation that is clear and understandable regarding their terms and
      conditions of employment, their rights under national labor and employment
      laws (including payment of wages and deductions, periods of rest and
      leaving, written notice of termination and severance payments, among
      others) at the beginning of the working relationship or whenever a material
      change to the terms or conditions of employment occurs.
      •       Ensure the adoption of appropriate occupational health and safety
      measures, in line with ESS2, at the workplace, which shall consider inter alia
      an assessment of the potential OHS risks associated with the tasks to be
      carried out and include mitigation measures, such as protocols for protection
      against communicable diseases as issued by Ministry of Health and the World
      Bank;
      •       Ensure the adoption of a code of conduct that sets out measures
      against practices related with sexual harassment, abuse, and exploitation in
      the workplaces, including the dissemination of the referral services available
      in the country to respond to such behaviors. The Code of conduct will be
      included in the project operations manual.
      •       Prohibit and ban child labor as well as forced labor, per ESS2
      requirements and applicable national laws. The minimum age for this project
      is 18.


                                                                                                                                                 5


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
CONCRETE MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                        TIMEFRAME                       RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
     Consult population and specific groups to consider their needs and concerns
     when recruiting workers. During the recruitment processes of consultants
     and staff, stakeholder consultation is necessary to avoid certain minority
     groups being marginalized or even excluded due to lack of information, or a
     selection/recruitment process which would not consider certain specific
     groups, in particular people with disabilities.

      These procedures shall be maintained in place and use for the
      implementation of the Phase I of the MPA.

      Incorporate the relevant provisions set out above into the ESS2
      specifications of procurement files and contracts with third parties that
      assign workers to the implementation of the Project activities.
2.3   GRIEVANCE MECHANISM FOR PROJECT WORKERS                                       The grievance mechanism shall be established     ANAN PCU
      Establish and operate a grievance mechanism for Project workers in            and operationalized prior to engaging Project
      consistence with ESS2.                                                        workers and implemented throughout Project
                                                                                    implementation.
ESS 3: RESOURCE EFFICIENCY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT
3.1    ELECTRONIC WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN                                             Prepare the EWMP no later than 3 months after    ANAN PCU
       Prepare and implement the Electronic Waste Management Plan (EWMP) in         the project effective date and thereafter
       consistence with ESS3.                                                       implement      it    throughout      Project
                                                                                    implementation.

3.2   RESOURCE EFFICIENCY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT                                                                    ANAN PCU
      After an E&S screening of the activity/sub-project, if necessary, integrate
                                                                                    Prior to initiating Project activities and
      resource efficiency, pollution prevention and management measures into
                                                                                    implementation throughout Project duration.
      the terms of reference acceptable to the Association to be prepared under
      action 1.1 above and in accordance with ESS3
ESS 4: COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY
 4.2 COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY
                                                                                    As part of the preparation of procurement        ANAN PCU
                                                                                    documents and before the signing of respective
                                                                                    contracts and effective start of the relevant
                                                                                    services or works.

                                                                                                                                                           6


                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
CONCRETE MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                           TIMEFRAME                       RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
     The Recipient shall develop, adopt, and implement precautionary measures
     for the prevention and management of risks related to the spread of
     disease, to manage this risk during stakeholder consultations and Program
     implementation Assess and manage specific risks and impacts to the
     community arising from Project activities

4.3   SEA AND SH RISKS
      Include the requirements of SEA/SH management in the project manual of           Prepare the project procedures manual with
      procedure to assess and manage the risks of SEA and SH.                          SEA/SH management requirements no later          ANAN PCU
                                                                                       than 3 months after the project effective date
                                                                                       and thereafter implement it throughout Project
                                                                                       implementation.

4.4   SECURITY MANAGEMENT
                                                                                                                                        ANAN PCU
      Assess and implement measures to manage the security risks of the Project,       Adopt the SMP prior to engaging security
      including the risks of engaging security personnel to safeguard Project          personnel and thereafter implement
      workers, sites, assets, and activities, as set out in the Security Management    throughout Project implementation.
      Plan (SMP), consistent with the requirements of ESS4 and guided by the
      principles of proportionality and Good International Industry Practice (GIIP),
      and by applicable law, in relation to hiring, rules of conduct, training,
      equipping, and monitoring of such personnel.

ESS 10: STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
10.1 STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN                                                       Implement the stakeholder engagement             ANAN PCU
                                                                                       activities throughout Project implementation.
      The Recipient should develop and implement Stakeholder Engagement
      activities during the implementation of the program in accordance with ESS
      10 and in a manner acceptable to the Association.


      The Recipient shall identify the different stakeholders, both those affected
      by the project and other parties concerned and identify project-affected
      parties (individuals or groups) who, due to their situation, may be
      disadvantaged or vulnerable.


                                                                                                                                                              7


                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
CONCRETE MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                                             TIMEFRAME                        RESPONSIBLE ENTITY


       The Recipient shall inform stakeholders of the start of the Project: official
       launch of the Project (Information on the Project, technical assistance, its
       activities) and the operational and technical launch of the Project.


       The Recipient shall engage with stakeholders in consistent with ESS10, which
       shall include measures to:
       •       provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and
       accessible information
       •         Provide stakeholders with information about the environmental and
       social risks and impacts of the Project in a timely, understandable, accessible
       and appropriate manner and format, including but not limited to any
       environmental and social instruments prepared as part of the Project;
       •       Consult stakeholders in a culturally appropriate manner, which is
       free of manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination and
       intimidation, including with regards to any environmental and social
       instruments prepared as part of the Project;
       •      Document the stakeholder engagement activities, including: (i)
       stakeholder mapping; (ii) description of consultations and participation
       mechanisms utilized, and records of meetings held; (ii) feedback received
       and responses to said feedback; and (iv) measures to engage stakeholders
       who, because of their circumstances, may be disadvantaged or vulnerable.


10.2   PROJECT GRIEVANCE MECHANISM                                                                                                         ANAN PCU
       Establish, publicize, maintain, and operate an accessible grievance
                                                                                         Establish, operationalize, and disclose the
       mechanism, to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and grievances
                                                                                         grievance mechanism, acceptable to the
       in relation to the Project, promptly and effectively, in a transparent manner
                                                                                         Association, within three months of the
       that is culturally appropriate and readily accessible to all Project-affected
                                                                                         Effective Date of the Project. Maintain, update
       parties, at no cost and without retribution, including concerns and
                                                                                         as necessary, and operate the GRM throughout
       grievances filed anonymously, in a manner consistent with ESS10.
                                                                                         Project implementation

                                                                                                                                                                 8


                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
CONCRETE MEASURES AND ACTIONS                                                        TIMEFRAME   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY
     The grievance mechanism shall also be equipped (centrally and locally) to
     receive, register, and facilitate the resolution of complaints related to the
     Project as defined in the Agreements, and SEA/SH complaints, including
     through the referral of survivors to relevant gender-based violence service
     providers, all in a safe, confidential, and survivor-centered manner.
INDICATORS FOR IMPLEMENTATION READINESS
The following actions are indicators of readiness for implementation:
A.
1.1
2.1
2.2
3.1
3.2
4.2
4.3
4.4
10.1
10.2




                                                                                                                      9


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
