Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01361




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
Turkiye                        P509293                        Green and Future Cities Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
EUROPE AND CENTRAL             19-Dec-2025                    19-Mar-2026                     Urban, Resilience and Land
ASIA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Investment Project             ILLER BANKASI ANONIM           Antalya Metropolitan
Financing (IPF)                SIRKETI (ILBANK)               Municipality , Konya
                                                              Metropolitan Municipality

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Improve access to sustainable and resilient municipal infrastructure and services in participating cities.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           350.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                350.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   250.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                  250.00
   IFC Own Resources/Mobilization                                                                                100.00



                                                                                                                      Page 1



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                              Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                               The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 B. Introduction and Context

 Project Strategic and Country Context
    1. Türkiye’s development achievements over the past two decades have been remarkable, but macroeconomic
       stabilization efforts continue. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth in Türkiye averaged 5.4 percent between
       2002 and 2022 and was accompanied by a rapid decline in poverty, with the poverty rate (US$6.85 2017 Purchasing
       Power Parity (PPP) poverty line) halving from above 20 percent in 2007 to less than 10 percent in 2021. While the
       COVID-19 pandemic dampened growth in 2020, Türkiye achieved double-digit DGP growth in 2021 (11.8 percent)
       and growth maintained significant momentum in 2022 (5.4 percent) and 2023 (5.0 percent), before moderating in
       2024 (3.3 percent). Yet, the policy framework that helped the country navigate the COVID-19 shock also heightened
       macroeconomic risks created by high inflation (inflation reached 85.5 percent in October 2022) and reduction in
       reserves. The policy normalization started in the second half of 2023 has delivered significant results as credit rating
       upgraded, external balance strengthened, reserves recovered, and growth composition improved. However, the
       financial markets came under pressure due to the heightened volatility in mid-March 2025 and increased global
       economic uncertainties. The measures taken, including the increase in the policy rate to 46 percent in April 2025,
       have largely stabilized markets. Therefore, the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye has reinitiated the policy
       rate cut cycle lowering the policy rate to 40.5 percent in September 2025. Despite the downward trend, inflation
       remains high (33 percent in September 2025) and CDS premium hovers around 250 bps (October 2025).
    2. Türkiye’s development path is also vulnerable to significant seismic and climate-related hazards. With about 70
       percent of the country’s population living in high-risk seismic zones, earthquakes pose a significant risk to lives,
       livelihoods, and infrastructure, and have a disruptive impact on the economy. Türkiye has experienced 45
       earthquakes with a magnitude of 5 and above between 1914 and 2024 resulting in approximately 131,000 fatalities,
       a total affected population of 20.5 million, and direct damages exceeding US$79 billion.1 In addition, climate-
       related disasters have been striking with greater frequency and intensity in Türkiye over the past two decades2,
       and this intensification is expected to continue with more frequent extreme weather and flooding, more protracted
       droughts and wildfires, sea level rise, and extreme heat. Türkiye’s geographic and socioeconomic conditions make
       it particularly vulnerable to changes in climate – assessed as highly vulnerable in 9 out of 10 climate dimensions,
       compared with the Organization for Economic Development (OECD) median of 2 out of 10, in the Türkiye Country
       Climate and Development Report3 (CCDR) issued by the World Bank (WB) in June 2022.4
    3. As elsewhere in the world, cities in Türkiye have been central to the country’s economic development and job
       creation. By bringing people, firms, and services into proximity, cities generate agglomeration economies boosting

1 EM-DAT, CRED / UC Louvain, Brussels, Belgium (https://www.emdat.be/)
2 1,030 extreme weather and flood events were recorded in 2022 – the highest number since at least 1944. Turkish State Meteorological service (2023). State of the

Climate in Türkiye in 2022 (https://mgm.gov.tr/FILES/iklim/yillikiklim/2022-iklim-raporu.pdf)
3 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/turkey/brief/key-highlights-country-climate-and-development-report-for-turkiye
4 Dimensions with high risks include extreme heat, agricultural (maize) yield losses, risks to assets, risks to well-being, forced displacement, exposure of the poor to

climate risks, and transport network exposure – with considerable implications for productivity, macroeconomic stability, and poverty reduction.


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


            productivity and economic growth. About 76 percent of Türkiye’s population, a large share of its assets and GDP
            are concentrated in urban areas, with the urban population expected to reach 86 percent by 2050.5 In 2023, the
            30 metropolitan cities in Türkiye generated 4.5 percent of the total 5.1 percent national GDP growth. Notably,
            secondary metropolitan cities6, which are the epicenter of the Türkiye’s recent urban development, accounted for
            about 2 percent of this growth emanating from cities, nearly half of the country's overall growth. In addition, the
            average labor force participation rate in Türkiye is higher in metropolitan cities at 53.3 percent compared to 50.8
            percent in other cities7. Globally, cities offer an average wage premium of 6.5 percent over non-urban areas. Over
            the next decade, 1.2 billion young people will reach working age in developing countries, yet only 420 million jobs
            are expected to be created under the current trajectory8.
      4. While cities in Türkiye have been central to the country’s economic transformation, their ability to access long-
         term finance for the municipal infrastructure and services required to support people and economic activity has
         not kept pace. The WB estimates that municipal investment needs are around 2 to 4 percent of GDP in low and
         middle-income countries annually.9 Yet, subnational government capital expenditure in Türkiye, which includes
         municipal infrastructure investments, accounted for only 0.6 percent of GDP in 2020.10 In addition, municipalities
         in Türkiye mobilize limited repayable finance to address their infrastructure investment needs, as demonstrated
         by the municipal borrowing stock merely reaching 1 percent of GDP.11 The commercial market for municipal debt
         remains underdeveloped, with most municipal borrowing locked into short-term maturities that are ill-suited for
         large-scale infrastructure projects. Even creditworthy municipalities face challenges in accessing long-term debt
         financing for infrastructure investments needed to deliver quality municipal services and lay the foundations for
         employment and development. Consequently, Turkish municipalities have limited access to long-term commercial
         and capital market borrowing options and primarily depend on infrastructure funding from investment
         development banks such as ILBANK—a publicly owned institution dedicated to supporting sub-national
         authorities—despite these banks representing only a small segment of the overall banking sector12. Moreover, the
         capacity to prepare and structure viable infrastructure projects is limited in many municipalities, further impacting
         their ability to mobilize infrastructure financing. Building on previous experience of the WB and the International
         Finance Cooperation (IFC) in the municipal sector in Türkiye and leveraging each institution’s respective
         comparative advantages and mandates, the proposed Series of Projects seeks to establish a one World Bank Group
         (WBG) model to support ILBANK and secondary metropolitan municipalities in addressing these municipal
         investment gaps using a variety of financing mechanisms and instruments.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context
      5. Türkiye has experienced rapid urbanization over the past decades, driven by population growth, rural-to-urban
         migration, and economic development, with infrastructure demands prompting large-scale public and private
         investments. The urbanization rate in Türkiye roughly doubled, rising by about 39.7 percentage points from
         approximately 38.2 percent in 1970 to 77.9 percent in 2024.13 As more people moved to urban areas in search of

5 World development indicators. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
6 These include all metropolitan cities in Türkiye except Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir. Antalya and Konya are among this group of 27 metropolitan municipalities.

7
    Turkish Statistical Institute (TURKSTAT) Labor Force Participation Data, 2024
8
    Jobs and Growth, WB, https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/jobsandgrowth/overview
9 WBG, 2025. Unlocking Subnational Finance: Overcoming Barriers to Finance for Municipalities in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.

https://hdl.handle.net/10986/43104
10 OECD & UCLG, 2022. Republic of Türkiye – Country Profile. OECD/UCLG World Observatory on Subnational Government Finance and Investment (SNG-WOFI).
11 IMF Government Finance Statistics; World Bank Local Government Borrowing Database; US Census Bureau (2021)
12 World Bank.2023. Türkiye - Water Circularity and Efficiency Improvement Project. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.

https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/34056674
13 WB, World Development Indicators, “Urban population (% of total population) – Türkiye,” accessed October 6, 2025,

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.URB.TOTL.IN.ZS?locations=TR[20].


                                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


            better job opportunities and living standards, Turkish cities expanded quickly and increasing the demand for
            municipal services—often outpacing the development of essential infrastructure and putting pressure on the
            capacity of municipalities to plan, develop, and finance adequate infrastructure and services. Many cities in Türkiye
            have aging and inefficient infrastructure that requires significant upgrades and maintenance. As a result, non-
            revenue water (NRW) losses average over 40 percent in metropolitan municipalities across Türkiye, and energy
            expenditures make up 20 percent of the total budgets for municipal water utilities with only 4 percent share of
            renewable energy sources in energy consumption.14 Furthermore, secondary metropolitan municipalities with
            growing populations and important economic sectors need to further improve and expand municipal infrastructure
            and services to remain attractive for people and firms seeking predictable environments for operations and talent
            retention. In addition, improvement and expansion of municipal transportation, water, sanitation, and waste
            management systems is also critical for tourist cities like Antalya, which hosted 17.3 million tourists in 202415, to
            accommodate massive influxes of visitors, thereby supporting economic growth and maintaining quality of life for
            residents and tourists alike. Municipalities have also been relied on to host and address the basic needs of various
            vulnerable groups especially following recent devastating earthquakes and need to be better prepared to service
            and accommodate a dynamic population.
      6. Given the high concentration of people and assets in cities, Türkiye’s cities also play a key role in ensuring the
         resilience of people and productive activity under mounting natural hazards and regional instability, and in
         achieving a low-carbon and resource-efficient future. Rapid urban growth in Türkiye paired with insufficient
         consideration of hazard risks in spatial planning, investment prioritization, and construction have resulted in high
         exposure of urban populations and assets to seismic and climate hazards, including notably earthquakes and floods.
         The Government of Türkiye (GoT) assessed the damage from the February 2023 earthquakes to municipal
         infrastructure (including water and sewage networks, water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants,
         municipal buildings, and municipal roads) at US$1.02 billion.16 Riverine and urban floods already affect 600,000
         people annually on average, with approximately US$5 billion of annual GDP exposed and US$843 million of annual
         damages forecast. Floods in 2021 caused 2,500 evacuees, 454 significantly damaged buildings, and at least 81
         deaths, while flooding caused around US$600 million in damages in 2009, US$400 million in 2004, and over US$1
         billion in damages in 199817. As Turkish cities become increasingly exposed to climate- and nature-related hazards,
         they will need to play a pivotal role in national efforts to build resilience of both Türkiye’s people and the economy.
         At the same time, well planned and resource-efficient urban infrastructure development has the potential to
         reduce water and air pollution, cut emissions (65 percent of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
         come from cities18), and improve quality of life for urban residents.
      7. Investing in municipal infrastructure that improves efficiency, sustainability, and resilience can help Türkiye’s
         cities to reach their full potential as engines of economic growth. Investments in public transport, energy
         efficiency, urban water and ecosystem restoration can generate employment opportunities, making cities more
         competitive, livable, and attractive to investment. Well-targeted low-carbon urban investments can outperform
         traditional infrastructure in generating jobs: for every US$1 million invested, public transport and electric vehicles
         create 15 to 28 jobs (compared to 8 jobs in conventional road construction), energy efficiency yields 8 to 21 jobs,
         and nature-based solutions such as ecosystem restoration can generate up to 40 jobs, twice the rate of gray
         infrastructure.19

14
     https://www.suen.gov.tr/uploads/suki-mukayeseli-performans-degerlendirmesi_ana-rapor.pdf
15 https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/ekonomi/antalya-2024te-yaklasik-17-3-milyon-ziyaretciyle-tarihi-rekor-kirdi/3440837
16 https://www.sbb.gov.tr/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/2023-Kahramanmaras-ve-Hatay-Depremleri-Raporu.pdf
17 https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/Turkey.pdf
18 World Bank Group.2022. Türkiye - Country Climate and Development Report : Background Note 2 - Cities, Transport, and Buildings. Washington, D.C. : World Bank

Group. https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/33838520
19 Banking on Cities, Washington, DC. World Bank




                                                                                                                                                            Page 4



                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


      8. The WB and the IFC have built a strong partnership in the municipal sector in Türkiye over the past decade that
         has the potential to create platforms for coordinated investment financing and private participation.
         Traditionally, the WB worked with ILBANK20 to provide financing to municipalities and utilities without access to
         commercial finance or for investments that would not attract commercial or IFC financing, while IFC worked with
         large metropolitan municipalities or their associated utilities with the capacity to borrow without a sovereign
         guarantee and for more commercially attractive investments. The WB currently has an active portfolio of seven
         operations totaling EUR2.1 billion with ILBANK that has diversified sectoral and geographic coverage over time.21
         IFC has about US$600 million in direct lending to large metropolitan municipalities in Türkiye for major municipal
         infrastructure investments.22 However, accessing finance for multi-sectoral municipal infrastructure investments
         remains a challenge, even for creditworthy secondary metropolitan municipalities with investment planning
         instruments. Leveraging the WB’s and IFC’s municipal engagement in Türkiye, there is an opportunity to establish
         a one World Bank Group (WBG) model to support ILBANK and secondary metropolitan municipalities. The
         collaboration will leverage both institutions’ expertise in project preparation, planning, and structuring, while
         building ILBANK’s and municipal capacity for future market-based financing. IBRD will focus on public-good and
         non-commercial investments, whereas IFC will focus on commercially viable, credit-enhancing projects that
         strengthen municipal creditworthiness and crowd in private participation. This model would also help develop and
         finance critical multi-sectoral municipal investments aligned with local development and climate plans, mobilizing
         both public and private resources, while putting forward the most appropriate financing package for priority
         investments within municipal borrowing limits.

     Relationship to CPF
      9. The proposed Project is consistent with the WBG Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Türkiye for FY24–
         FY2823 (Report No. CPF0000004, discussed by the WBG Board of Executive Directors on April 9, 2024) and the
         Türkiye Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) issued in 202224. The Project supports the CPF’s
         objective of promoting inclusive services and job creation by strengthening resilient municipal infrastructure and
         services. Specifically, it aligns with CPF priorities to expand access to climate- and disaster-resilient urban services,
         including safely managed water supply and wastewater systems and high-quality public transport. Building
         resilience in urban areas contributes to the WBG mission of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity
         on a livable planet by reducing the vulnerability to disasters of the population, especially the poor. Disasters are
         estimated to cause US$520 billion in losses and to push 26 million people into poverty annually. The Project also
         aligns with Türkiye’s CCDR’s recommendations for integrating measures that reduce risks and improve resilience
         in municipal infrastructure investments through improved urban planning, increased energy efficiency, and
         sustainable approaches to managing water, waste, and transport systems.

      10. The proposed Project will also contribute to goals set out in Türkiye’s 12th National Development Plan (NDP) for
          2024-2028, Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), and Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation Strategy
          and Action Plans for 2024-2030 (CCMASAP). The main priority for the NDP under the Disaster Resilient Living Areas
          and Sustainable Environment section is to improve the quality of life in cities, ensuring sustainable development,
          enhancing resilience, and providing urban services that meet societal needs. Specifically, under the Urban

20 ILBANK, a development and investment bank that on lends international financial institution (IFI) loans for municipal investments
21
   These operations include Sustainable Cities Project 2 (P161915), Türkiye Earthquakes, Floods, Wildfires Emergency Reconstruction (TEFWER) Project (P176608),
Climate and Disaster Resilience Cities (CDRC) Project (P173025), Türkiye Water Circularity and Efficiency Improvement Project (P174915), Public and Municipal
Renewable Energy Project (P179867), Municipal Services Improvement Project (P169996), Türkiye Earthquake Recovery and Reconstruction Project (P180849).
22 These include support to Istanbul MM’s metro line project (#37093), Antalya MM’s tramline project (#38506), and Izmir MM’s water and wastewater investments

(#44190, #36080). This is the total cumulative commitment – the current outstanding exposure is US$160 million.
23 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/turkey/brief/world-bank-group-country-partnership-framework-for-turkiye-fy24-28
24 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/80bdfcf8-73b1-42b3-b107-1629f64a1f0c/content




                                                                                                                                                         Page 5



                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


      Infrastructure section, the main objectives include ensuring access to healthy and reliable drinking water,
      minimizing the impacts of wastewater on human and environmental health, and establishing sustainable urban
      transportation systems that are cost-effective, clean, energy-efficient, easily accessible to all individuals, and
      feature strong intermodal connectivity. The CCMASAP outlines several measures to mitigate GHG emissions, such
      as encouraging a shift from private vehicle use to public transport and reducing emissions from traffic congestion.
      It also aims to improve wastewater management and treatment infrastructure. This Project will also help Türkiye
      achieve its NDC goal of net-zero emissions by 2053.



C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve access to sustainable and resilient municipal infrastructure and services in participating cities.


Key Results (From PCN)
 11. The proposed Project will measure progress toward the PDO via the following proposed indicators:
 a. People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (number, of which women and youth) – a sub-indicator to
    CRI ‘People with enhanced resilience to climate risk’
 b. People provided with water, sanitation and hygiene of which (%) is safely managed (number, of which women and
    youth) - CRI
 c. People provided with access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (number, of which female) - CRI
 d. Energy saved by municipal utilities (MWh)

D. Concept Description

 12. The proposed Project responds to a request from the GoT to support efforts to improve infrastructure services
     and resilience in growing municipalities and is expected to be the first in a series of projects (SOP). The proposed
     SOP approach will allow for the provision of IBRD financing to a single borrower (ILBANK) for scalable subnational
     lending to sequential cohorts of metropolitan municipalities and their affiliated utilities at a pace consistent with
     their readiness. Another benefit of the SOP is that a joint WB-IFC implementation model with ILBANK can be
     established during the first phase and related capacity within ILBANK strengthened to facilitate access to a broader
     package of diversified financing for sustainable and resilient municipal infrastructure investments to municipalities
     in subsequent phases. As the first operation in the series, the proposed Project will provide an initial two
     municipalities (Antalya and Konya Metropolitan Municipalities) with access to both WB and IFC lending for multi-
     sectoral municipal investments enhancing sustainability and resilience, while providing technical support to other
     municipalities on creditworthiness and pipeline sub-project preparation to reach readiness for participation in
     subsequent projects under the SOP.
 13. The proposed Project components are described below.
   Component 1. Integrated, multi-sectoral investments in participating municipalities
 14. This component will support demand-driven municipal investments contributing to more livable, productive, and
     resilient urban development in the participating municipalities. It will finance civil works, goods, consulting and
     non-consulting services for, inter alia, review and quality assurance of technical designs prepared by municipalities
     and construction supervision as needed by each municipality. Eligible investments are expected to include, but are
     not limited to, the following:


                                                                                                                        Page 6



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


      1.   Urban Transport: construction or rehabilitation of resilient mass transit systems (such as tramlines and
           associated facilities); purchase of public transport vehicles (such as trams and electric buses); construction of
           non-motorized transport infrastructure; establishment of digital systems; road safety improvements;
           establishment of evacuation routes and emergency corridors; improvements for universal accessibility; and
           integrated greening along transport corridors. Investments will focus on supporting a modal shift towards
           sustainable mobility modes and improving access to main urban centers and, thus, their markets and
           employment opportunities.
      2.   Water and Sanitation: construction and rehabilitation of resilient drinking water, sewage, and stormwater
           networks, transmission lines, water tanks, pumping stations, and water and wastewater treatment plants;
           and purchase of goods for related municipal services.
      3.   Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency: construction of distributed renewable energy plants from sources
           such as solar and geothermal; energy efficiency improvements in municipal infrastructure services and on-
           site energy generation for utilities.
    Component 2. Strengthening capacity of ILBANK and municipalities in municipal finance and urban management
    for future investment projects
  15. The component will support ILBANK and municipalities to build institutional and technical capacity in municipal
      finance and urban management to prepare integrated municipal infrastructure and financing plans. The
      component will support a next cohort of municipalities to develop investment plans and sub-project pipelines for
      future financing, advance creditworthiness, and prepare technical (Project Information Documents (PIDs),
      technical designs, design reviews), environmental, and social studies for potential sub-projects for the next project
      under the SOP. The component will also explore innovative ways of using available WBG financing instruments
      with ILBANK, including guarantees and blended financing, and of facilitating access to private capital to support
      municipalities with a broader package of financing for future municipal infrastructure investments. The component
      will target municipalities participating under this Project and potentially benefiting under subsequent projects.
    Component 3. Project management
  16. This component will finance provision of goods, consulting and non-consulting services, operating costs, and
      training to ILBANK for Project management and implementation support activities, including, inter alia,
      procurement, financial management, environmental and social compliance, monitoring and evaluation, reporting,
      grievance redress, stakeholder engagement, communications and outreach.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                     Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




                                                                                                                        Page 7



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


 17. The Project aims at promoting sustainable and resilient urban development in Türkiye. Eligible sectors include
     public transport, water and sanitation, renewable energy, and energy efficiency. The project seeks to enhance
     urban livability, efficiency, productivity, and resilience to climate-related risks. ILBANK, a state-owned bank, will
     act as the Financial Intermediary for the IBRD financing, providing loans and implementation support to
     municipalities. It has a strong track record in managing environmental and social (E&S) risks through its
     Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), which has been functional since August 2024. The ESMS
     will guide the project's implementation, ensuring compliance with World Bank standards.
 18. Environmental risks are rated as substantial due to potential impacts on air, water, and soil quality, as well as
     biodiversity. Mitigation measures will address risks like pollution, habitat disturbance, and occupational health and
     safety. Social risks are also rated as substantial and include risks and impacts related to land acquisition, labor
     conditions, and community health and safety. Stakeholder engagement is crucial, involving municipalities,
     government agencies, civil society, and vulnerable groups. ILBANK will prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan
     (SEP) and a Grievance Mechanism (GM) to address complaints, including those related to sexual exploitation and
     abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH). Labor risks will be managed through Labor Management Plan (LMP) and ESMPs
     prepared by each municipal sub-borrower as per ILBANK’s ESMS and ESS2. Sub-projects will be located in urban
     and semi-urban areas, potentially affecting cultural heritage and sensitive natural areas. ILBANK will ensure
     compliance with ESS5 and ESS8, preparing Resettlement Plans and chance finds procedures as needed by sub-
     borrowers in line with its ESMS and World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework. High E&S risk investments
     will be ineligible for financing, which will be specified in Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP),
     positive/negative lists and ESCP. Capacity of participating municipalities will be assessed during the Project
     preparation and any gaps, if identified, covered in ESCP and respective action plan(s).


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Ahmet Kindap
 Senior Urban Specialist

 Bontje Marie Zaengerling
 Senior Urban Development Specialist

 Xueman Wang
 Senior Urban Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 ILLER BANKASI ANONIM SIRKETI (ILBANK)

Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                      Page 8



                                                                                                              Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Green and Future Cities Project(P509293)


 Antalya Metropolitan Municipality

 Konya Metropolitan Municipality

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Ahmet Kindap, Bontje Marie Zaengerling, Xueman Wang

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Joanna Mclean Masic                 08-Sep-2025

Country Director:                       Agata E. Pawlowska                  29-Oct-2025




                                                                                                      Page 9



                                                                                              Official Use Only
