Public Disclosure Authorized



                                                                REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               MINISTRY OF PUBLIC WORKS, HOUSING AND WATER RESOURCES




                                                URBAN WATER SECURITY PROJECT (P509890)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                     STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)

                               SEP PREPARED FOR:                                             SEP PREPARED BY:


                               Fundo de Investimento e Património do Abastecimento de Água   Kampala, Uganda




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               (FIPAG)
                                                                                             info@jbn.co.ug/www.jbn.co.ug
                               Gabinete do Director Geral
                                                                                             in Joint Venture with
                               Attention: Mr. Mr. Sérgio Cavadias - Director General
                                                                                             Maputo, Mozambique
                               Av. Filipe Samuel Magaia, Nº 1291, PO.Box. 917
                               Maputo - Mozambique
                               Telephone: +258 21 308 840 / 21 315 529 / 21 318 815
                                                                                             info@ea.intelligentperspectives.com
                               Email: nticongolo@fipag.co.mz




                                                                            APRIL 2025
                                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan



PROJECT SUMMARY
Name of Unit         Environmental Services
Document Title       Consultancy Services for Preparation of Environmental and Social
                     Instruments for the Urban Water Security Project.
Project Name         Urban Water Security Project (P509890)
Contract Ref. Nº     XXX
Client Address       Fundo de Investimento e Património do Abastecimento de Água (FIPAG)
                     Gabinete do Director Geral
                     Attention: Mr. Mr. Sérgio Cavadias - Director General
                     Av. Filipe Samuel Magaia, Nº 1291, PO.Box. 917
                     Maputo-Mozambique
                     Telephone: +258 21 308 840 / 21 315 529 / 21 318 815
                     Email: csitole@fipag.co.mz


 Quality Assurance      Reviewer/Approver                           Title/Role           Version
Consultant (JBN Team)
                     JBN     Consults   and
                     Planners Ltd (Uganda) in
Author               Joint-Venture with EA Consultants                               v.001
                     Consultoria e Serviços
                     (Mozambique)
Reviewer(s)          Alfredo Ricardo Zunguze Project Manager                         v.001
Approver             Nelson Omagor                     Team Leader                   v.001


External Parties - Client Reviewers




Current Version                                        Draft Report                 Final Version   
                                                                   Stakeholder Engagement Plan




TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS ......................................................................................................................................... 1
LIST OF TABLES .................................................................................................................................................. 2i
LIST OF ACRONYMS .......................................................................................................................................... 3v
GLOSSARY OF TERMS ........................................................................................................................................ 6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY…………………………………………………………………………………………………..viii
1           INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................................... 14
1.1             Background ......................................................................................................................................... 15
1.2             Project Description and Objectives ...................................................................................................... 16
1.3             Project Components ............................................................................................................................ 16
1.4             Project Location ................................................................................................................................... 18
2           DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVE OF SEP ............................................................................................ 19
3           STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS PER PROJECT COMPONENT .......................... 20
3.1             Methodology ........................................................................................................................................ 20
3.2             Affected Parties ................................................................................................................................... 20
3.3             Other Interested Parties ...................................................................................................................... 20
3.4             Disadvantages/ Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ............................................................................... 20
4           STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM ....................................................................................... 34
4.1             Summary of Stakeholder Engegement Undertaken during Project Preparation .................................. 34
4.2             Engagement strategy and dissemination of project information .......................................................... 34
4.3     Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for Stakeholder
Engegement.......................................................................................................................................................... 34
4.4             Proposed Strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups..................................................... 496
5           RESOURCES AND RESPONSABILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGEMENT 50
5.1             Implementation Arrangements and Resources ................................................................................. 507
6           GRIEVANCE MECHANISM................................................................................................................. 5542
6.1             Discription of Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) ..................................................................... 5542
A              Grievance Redress Principles…………………………………………………………………………………44
B               Labor-related Grievances……………………………………………………………………………………...48
C              GBV/SEA/SH-related Grievances……………………………………………………………………………..48
7           MONOTORING AND REPORTING ..................................................................................................... 5063
7.1             Summary of how SEP will be monitored and reported upon (including indicators).......................... 6350
7.2             Reporting back to stakeholder groups ............................................................................................. 6451
8          REFERENCES..……………………………………………………………………………………………………53
Appendix       I:  Public Consultation   Report:     Preparation                                                                                 of          E&S
Instruments…….……………………………………..54Appendix         II:      Grievance                                                                                       Register
Form…………………………………………………………………………………….55
Appendix III: Grievance Resolution Report……………………………………………………………………………….56
                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Appendix IV: Form to Record and Monitor Grievance……………………………………………………………………57
Annex I: Public Consultation Minute for Preparation and Disclosure of ESSA………………………………………..58
Annex II: Template to capture minutes/records of consultation meetings…………………………………………….62
Annex III: Sample Table: Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP………………………………………………………63




LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Project Interested and Affected Parties per Component and Subcomponent .......................................... 8
Table 2: Summary of Stakeholder Engagement done during Project preparation................................................ 22
Table 3: Project Stakeholders’ needs and Engagement Strategy ........................................................................ 28
Table 4: Proposal of the Plan for Consultation of IAPs in the Project ................................................................... 33
Table 5: Proposed Budget for Project Implementation ......................................................................................... 40
Table 6: Illustrative Table on Grievance Redress Mechanism steps to be adjusted to each subproject .............. 45
Table 7: Monitoring Indicatores ............................................................................................................................ 50




                                                                                                                                                             2
                                         Stakeholder Engagement Plan




LIST OF ACRONYMS
AdRMM      Maputo Metropolitan Area Water Company (Águas da Região Metropolitana de Maputo)
AFORAMO    Association of Water Providers of Mozambique (Associação Moçambicana de Fornecedores de
           Água)
AdRS       South Region Water Company (Águas da Região Sul)
AIAS, IP   Administration of Water and Sanitation Infrastructures, Public Institute (Administração de Infra-
           Estruturas de Água e Saneamento, Instituto Público)
ANE, IP    National Road Administration, Public Institute (Administração Nacional de Estradas, Instituto
           Público)
ARA-SUL    Water Southern Regional Administration (Administração Regional de Águas – Região Sul)
AURA       Water Regulatory Authority (Autoridade Reguladora de Águas)
CAP        Compliance Action Plan
CoC        Code of Conduct
CTASR      Technical Committee for Supervision and Monitoring of Resettlement (Comissão Técnica de
           Acompanhamento e Supervisão do Reassentamento)
CSOs       Civil Society Organizations
CTA        Confederation of Economic Association of Mozambique (Confederação das Associações
           Económicas de Moçambique)
DMF        Delegated Maagement Framework
DNAAS      Administration of Water and Sanitation Infrastructures, Public Institute) AIAS, IP / National
           Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation (Direcção Nacional de Abastecimento de Água e
           Saneamento)
DUAT       Right to Use and Benefit from Land (Direito de Uso e Aproveitamento da Terra)
EDM        Electricity Utility Management Company of Mozambique (EDM - Electricidade de Moçambique)
E&S        Environmental and Social
EIAs       Environmental Impact Assessments
ESC        Environmetal and Social Consultant
ESF        Environmental and Social Framework
ESIA       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESIP       Environmental and Social Implementation Program
ESM        Environmental and Social Monitoring
ESMF       Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMPs      Environmental and Social Management Plans
ESS        Environmental and Social Standards
ESSA       Evironmetal and Social System Assessment
ESSM       Environmental and Social Safeguards Management
ESSS       Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist
FGDs       Focused Group Discussions
FM         Financial Management

                                                                                                               3
                                        Stakeholder Engagement Plan



FSTP     Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant
GBV      Gender-Based Violence
GoM      Government of Mozambique
GRC      Grievance Redress Committee
GRM      Grievance Redress Mechanism
HIV      Human Immuno Virus
HR       Human Resource
IAPs     Interested and Affected Parties
IDA      International Development Association
IEC      Information, Education, and Communication
ILO      International Labour Organization
INAM     National Institute of Meteorology
INE      National Institute for Statistics
INGD     National Institute for Disaster Risk Management and Reduction
IRM      Immediate Response Mechanism
ISO      International Standards Organization
IWRM     Integrated Water Resources Management
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MTA      Ministry of Land and Environment (Ministério da Terra e Ambiente)
NDC      Nationally Determined Contribution
NGOs     Non Governmental Organizations
NRW      Non‐Revenue Water
PAD      Project Appraisal Document
PAPs     Project Affected Persons
PDO      Project Development Objective
PF       Process Framework
PIA      Project Influence Area
PIAP     Performance Improvement Action Plan
PIU      Project Implementation Unit
PLAMA    Mozabique Platform for Water
PMC      Project Maagemet Committee
PMU      Project Management Unit
PSP      Private Sector Participation
PROSIR   Resettlement Service Provider (Provedor de Serviços de Reassentamento)
PWPs     Private Water Providers
RA       Risk Assessment
RAP      Resettlement Action Plan

                                                                                  4
                                        Stakeholder Engagement Plan



RE          Resident Engineer
RAR         Risk Assessment and Reporting
RPF         Resettlement Policy Framework
SDGs        Sustainable Development Goals
SEA/ SH     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual Harassment
SEMUSATE Serviços Municipais de Saneamento de Tete
SEP         Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SGs         Safeguards
SMS         Safety Management System
SORT        Systematic Operation Risk-Rating Tool
TMU         Technical Municipality Unity (Unidade Técnica Municipal)
ToRs        Terms of Reference
TPM         Third-Party Monitoring
UoF         Utilities of the Future
USP         Urban Sanitation Project (Projecto de Saneamento Urbano)
VAC         Violence Against Children
WB          World Bank
WHO         World Health Organization
WQA         Water Quality Assessment
WQMP        Water Quality Monitoring Program
WQMT        Water Quality Management Tool
WRM         Water Resources Management
WTP         Water Treatment Plant




                                                                       5
                                          Stakeholder Engagement Plan




GLOSSARY OF TERMS
          TERM                                                    DEFINITION
Baseline Data                Initial data collected at the start of the project to serve as a reference point for
                             evaluating progress and impacts during monitoring.
Environmental and Social A detailed plan for mitigating and managing environmental and social impacts
Management Plan (ESMP)   during a project, often site-specific and developed after the ESIA.
Environmental and Social The World Bank's framework for managing environmental and social risks in
Framework (ESF)          Investment Project Financing (IPF), which includes Environmental and Social
                         Standards (ESSs).
Gender-Based      Violence Any harmful act directed at an individual based on their gender, often involving
(GBV)                      physical, sexual, or psychological harm. Includes prevention and mitigation
                           measures in projects.
GBV/SEA/SH Prevention A plan specifically aimed at preventing and addressing gender-based violence
and Response Action Plan (GBV), sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), and sexual harassment (SH) in the
                         context of a project.
Grievance       Redress A system set up to allow affected individuals or communities to lodge complaints
Mechanism (GRM)         about the project, including confidential channels for reporting GBV/SEA/SH
                        incidents.
Project Affected Persons Individuals or communities who are affected by the project’s activities, often
(PAPs)                   through physical or economic displacement.
Resettlement Action Plan A plan that outlines how affected communities or individuals will be compensated
(RAP)                    and resettled, ensuring that their livelihoods are restored.
Sexual Exploitation    and The abuse of a position of vulnerability, power, or trust for sexual purposes,
Abuse (SEA)                which can occur in the context of development projects, necessitating strong
                           prevention and response measures.
Sexual Harassment (SH)       Unwanted sexual advances or behaviour that can occur within a project setting,
                             requiring strict monitoring and prevention efforts.
Third-Party      Monitoring Monitoring conducted by an independent party to assess project compliance with
(TPM)                       environmental and social safeguards, focusing on aspects of environmental,
                            social, health and safety impacts.




                                                                                                                    6
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Republic of Mozambique (the Recipient) through the Ministry of Economy and Finance and Ministry of Public
Works, Housing, and Water Resources (MOPHRH) will implement the Mozambique Urban Water Security Project
(UWSP) (the Project), with the involvement of the Water Supply Asset Holdings and Investment Fund (FIPAG),
Directorate of Water Supply and Sanitation (DNAAS), Water Regulatory Authority (AURA), and South Regional
Water Administration Structure (ARA-Sul) as the Implementing Agencies, consistent with their respective
mandates, as set out in the Financing Agreement (the Agreement). Specifically, FIPAG will lead the implementation
of water supply infrastructure and performance improvement activities, while DNAAS will oversee activities related
to Private Water Providers (PWPs), regulatory strengthening activities benefiting AURAS, the project’s water
resources management (WRM) and watershed components benefiting ARA-Sul. The International Development
Association (the Bank), has agreed to provide financing for the Project, as set out in the Agreement.
Mozambique has achieved significant economic growth since the end of the civil war in 1992, but important
challenges still affecting the country’s prospects. Many people in Mozambique still lack access to clean and piped
water. While access to clean water is a sector goal expected to lead to significant economic and human
development gains, the water sector lacks sufficient funding and capacity to meet this goal by 2030.
At a sectorial level, a substantial proportion of the Mozambican urban population continues to lack consistent
access to safely managed drinking water services. While 90% of urban households have access to clean water,
supply is often intermittent and many people do not have piped water to their premises, relying on a public
standpipe or on neighbours’ supply. At present, none of the 21 main cities have a continuous water supply service,
with only seven systems reaching the target service level of 16 hours of supply per day, defined by the Water
Regulatory Authority (AURA) as the threshold for good performance.
The Government of Mozambique (GoM) is committed to increasing investments to secure water to meet increasing
urban demand, expand treatment and distribution capacity, promote efficiency in service delivery and foster
sustainability, with the aim of delivering safely managed water to all, as defined in the 2016 Water Policy, the
National Water Resources Management Plan and the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs 2015‐2030).
In the avenue to reach SDGs the GoM, through its implementing agencies, is transitioning the Mozambique Urban
Water Security Project from a Program-for-Results (PforR) under P178653 to an Investment Project Financing
(IPF) under P509890. The project is an IPF with Performance Based Grants (PBG) and aims to enhance access
to improved water supply services and improve service delivery capacity in selected cities. This transition requires
full compliance with the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), necessitating the preparation
of key Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments.
Relatedly, the Fundo de Investimento e Património do Abastecimento de Água (FIPAG) has engaged Consultancy
Services of JBN Consults & Planners in JV with EA Consultoria e Serviços to develop the project’s
Environmental and Social (E&S) management instruments according to the requirements of the World Bank
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), which includes this SEP.
The Urban Water Security Project is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework
(ESF), as well as Mozambican Environmental and Social regulations. Under the ESF, all World Bank Borrowers
have agreed to comply with the ten Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) applied to investment project
lending financed by the Bank. This Project recognizes the significance of adopting the ESSs, for identifying and
assessing as well as managing the environmental and social risks and impacts associated with this Investment
Project. According to Project Appraisal Document (PAD) the Systematic Operation Risk-Rating Tool (SORT)
undertaken by the World Bank has classified the environmental and social risks as Moderate and specifically for
stakeholders as Low.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to improved water supply services and improve
service delivery capacity in selected cities. The project investments will target the Southern Region of Mozambique,
covering three of the country's provinces most affected by water scarcity and droughts, namely Maputo, Gaza and
Inhambane, and the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Region (GMMR).



                                                                                                                  7
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan



The Urban Water Security Project comprises the following 4 components.
    1. Component 1 (C1): Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
       (US$70 million), Which will support a combination of interventions from source to tap to strengthen the
       climate resilience and sustainability of urban water supply and sanitation services that are regularly
       affected by climate-change-exacerbated droughts and floods events, contributing to the implementation
       of priority climate adaptation investments enacted in the country’s NDC, specifically under the water
       resources and resilient water supply and sanitation systems strategic area.
    2. Component 2 (C2): Improvement of performance and efficiency of services (US$60 million), which
       will support the improvement of performance and efficiency of water supply services in the Greater
       Maputo Metropolitan Area (GMMA) and Southern Region provided by AdRMM and AdRS respectively,
       allocating one-third of the project investments to finance activities, through a grant mechanism for water
       utilities, that will contribute to lower energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
       specifically NRW reduction and energy efficiency.
    3. Component 3 (C3). Water sector development support to improving the enabling environment for
       PSP (US$10 million), which will support several critical actions underpinning the operationalization of a
       sector reform effort led by the Government of Mozambique (GoM) to improve the enabling environment
       for PSP and to achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water.
    4. Component 4 (C4). Project Management Support (US$6 million), which will support technical
       assistances and incremental project operation costs for the two Project Implementation Units (PIU) based
       on FIPAG and DNAAS, and the Project Technical Units (PTU) based on ARA-Sul and AURAS. It will also
       provide additional support for the environmental and social compliance.
In accordance with the Environmental and Social Standard 10 (ESS10) on Stakeholder Engagement and
Information Disclosure, as a recognition of the importance of open and transparent engagement between the
Borrower and project stakeholders, FIPAG will provide stakeholders with correct and clear information about the
project as this can improve the environmental and social sustainability of the project, enhance project acceptance,
and make a significant contribution to its successful design and implementation. Once implemented, the SEP will
support the development of strong, constructive, and responsive relationships with project stakeholders which is
important for successful management of project environmental and social risks. In this case, it is highlighted that,
stakeholder engagement is most effective when initiated at an early stage of the project development process and
is an integral part of early project decisions and the assessment, management, and monitoring of the project’s
environmental and social risks and impacts.
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public information
disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. This SEP outlines the ways in which the
implementing agencies, namely DNAAS, FIPAG (including AdRMM and AdRS), ARA-Sul and AURA will
communicate with stakeholders and include a mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback
or make complaints about the project and any activities related to the project. The SEP specifically emphasizes
methods to engage groups considered most vulnerable and that are at risk of being left out of project benefits.
Therefore, the stakeholder’s identification is a critical component of the SEP before the specific engagement begins
and it is an on-going process requiring regular review and updating. Through that, the project implementing
agencies above mentioned will find it easy to understand how each stakeholder may be affected or how they could
be interested in the project so that the engagement can be tailored to inform them and understand their views and
concerns in an appropriate manner. A preliminary stakeholder identification and analysis was undertaken
considering each project component and subcomponent and were identified 9 affected sets of stakeholders, 29
interested sets of stakeholders and 7 sets of vulnerable groups. It is important to underline that within each set
there can have several sub groups.
The stakeholder engagement started with scoping meetings with various stakeholders institutionally at central
(Maputo) and provincial levels. Focus group discussions, in-depth interviews and informal discussions with
residents of the project area should be used for stakeholder consultation meetings. Consultations should form an
integral part of the environmental and social project instruments. To effectively conduct consultations with the
identified stakeholders, including local communities, government entities, international organizations, civil society
organizations, and affected individuals, various consultation methods are to be employed looking at time and
resource constraints.

                                                                                                                   8
                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Thus, the Stakeholder Engagement Program was developed considering the initial Project preparation stage and
the Implementation stage through a wide range of stakeholder engagement meetings. The preparation and
assessment stage essentially covers the disclosure of the project, as well as the conception and dissemination of
the E&S management instruments (ESCP, SEP, ESMF, LMP, RPF, including GRM and GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan)
in line with the requirements of the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). Government
institutions interested in the project, implementing agencies, water private providers and their associations, WB,
project implementation partners, local authorities and related associations, donors and general public, including
vulnerable groups, among others represent the range of stakeholders involved and/or targeted to be engaged
throughout this stage. Engagement meetings (coordination and advocacy meetings, focus group discussions, and
business meetings, technical and public consultations) have been and will continue to be conducted throughout
this stage. Amongst the engagement meetings held, stand out the public consultation meeting conducted during
the ESSA preparation and disclosure, as well as the public consultation meeting undertaken during the preparation
of the E&S management instruments under WB ESF, which includes this SEP.
The first public consultation were carried out on February 7th, 2023 in Maputo and a total of 36 stakeholders (24 in
the room and 12 virtually), including government institutions, the implementing agencies, NGOs, development
funding institutions, water sector entities attended the meeting. This consultation aimed to disclose the UWSP and
also collecting essential stakeholder contributions to consolidate the ESSA preparation and the project conception.
The minute of this consultation is included in Annex I.
The second public consultation was undertaken on March 22nd, 2025 in Moamba district (representing Maputo
province), Xai-Xai city (representing Gaza province) and Inhambane city (representing Inhambane province). A
total of 166 stakeholders, among them 102 men (61%) and 64 women (39%), attended the consultation meetings.
Apart from continuing disclosing the project, these consultations sought to collect relevant contribution to feed the
preparation process of the E&S management instruments under WB’s ESF, namely ESMF (including GBV/SEA/SH
Risk Assessment, Prevention and Response Action Plan), SEP (including GRM), ESCP, RPF and LMP. Attendees
included residents, government officials, civil society representatives, and members of the private sector, technitias
from implementing agencies, amongst others. The details of the consultation meetings can be seen in the
respective reports, in Appendix I.
The overall responsibility for the implementation of the SEP lies with the Project Implementation Unit under the
Project Coordinator with the direct support from the Environmental and Social specialist and other related staff that
may be brought on board in the PIU hosted by FIPAG, as the implementing agency which is set to lead the project’s
water supply components. DNAAS will host a second PIU. The SEP activities will also be implemented along with
the site-specific instruments (ESIA/ESMP) both through ESIA consultants and the Contractors who will be involved
in the project construction works. Thus, at this level AURA and ARA-Sul will be involved through their E&S
safeguards specialiats from the Project Technical Units (PTUs) they will host.
This SEP has developed a GRM guidance which should be a guide for the management of the grievances and
complaints (including suggestions) during the project lifecycle. The GRM should encompass complaint resolution
forums at three levels, namely: (i) Technical Unit level which is responsible for the implementation of specific
activities in the project/ subcomponents of the projects; (ii) Project Implementation Central Unit level; (iii) Project
Community Management level. The main activities of the mentioned forum include: (i) deliberate on complex issues
and stakeholder complaints that are presented over the project cycle; (ii) collectively find appropriate solutions,
seek constructive results and, whenever is required, formulate responses on behalf of the project to be
communicated to the appropriate stakeholders. Within the existent cultural and legal frameworks, the GRM will
encompass three boards of grievances and complaints resolutions, namely (i) community or public board; (ii)
project management/ implementation board (includes Technical Unit level and Central Unit level); and (iii)
Mozambican judicial system.
The mechanism provides a wide range of channels through which the complaints, grievances or suggestions
should be submitted such as toll-free telephone hotlines, SMS/WhatsApp, E-mail, latter, complaint book or
suggestion/complaint boxes, in-person at physical facilities or during meetings, online form on the PIU/
implementation agencies website, Corporate WB Grievance Redress Service and WB’s Inspection Panel. The
process should respect a set of steps within 6 or 7 stages, depending on the progress of each grievance, namely
(1) Sorting and processing (preliminary assessment of the claim); (2) Acknowledgement and follow-up (initial
response to complainant); (3) Verification, investigation and action; (4) Appeals process; (5) Provision of feedback;

                                                                                                                     9
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan



and (6) Monitoring and evaluation. Some relevant tools/ instruments should be handled to support the
implementations and management, including recording procedures of the mechanism, which stand out the
Grievance Register Form, the Complaint Box Opening Plan, Complaint Box Opening Control Form, Form to Record
and Monitor Grievance (See proposed templates of some instruments in Appendix II, III and IV).
The SEP will support the implementation of the Project's Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), the design of site-specific instruments (ESIA/ESMP) and guide the stakeholder engagement process.
The budget estimated for preparing and implementing SEP is US$ 430 525 and should be funded through
Component 4 (C4) – Project Management Support. This budget can be updated throughout the project lifecycle
depending on the development of project activities which emphasis on social or community demanding activities.
E&S PIU experts will be responsible for coordinating and internal monitoring the implementation of the SEP with
the stakeholders and will be held quarterly. The PIU hosted by FIPAG will be the head of this activity and should
get support from DNAAS’ PIU and AURA, as well as ARA-SUL’s PTUs. External monitoring (TPM) of the SEP may
be contracted and carried out in simultaneous with project overall external monitoring, considering an annual basis.




                                                                                                                 10
                                            Stakeholder Engagement Plan




SUMÁRIO EXECUTIVO
A República de Moçambique (a Beneficiária), através do Ministério da Economia e Finanças e do Ministério das
Obras Públicas, Habitação e Recursos Hídricos (MOPHRH), implementará o Projecto de Segurança Hídrica
Urbana de Moçambique (UWSP) (o Projeto), com o envolvimento do Fundo de Investimento e Participação em
Ativos de Abastecimento de Água (FIPAG), da Direção de Abastecimento de Água e Saneamento (DNAAS), da
Autoridade Reguladora de Águas (AURA) e da Estrutura Administrativa Regional de Águas do Sul (ARA-Sul) como
Agências Implementadoras, em conformidade com seus respectivos mandatos, conforme estabelecido no Acordo
de Financiamento (o Acordo). Especificamente, o FIPAG liderará a implementação da infraestrutura de
abastecimento de água e as atividades de melhoria de desempenho, enquanto a DNAAS supervisionará as
atividades relacionadas aos Fornecedores Privados de Água (PWPs), as atividades de fortalecimento regulatório
estarão a cargo da AURAS, enquanto a gestão de recursos hídricos (WRM) do projeto e os componentes da bácia
hidrográfica estarão na alçada da ARA-Sul. A Associação Internacional de Desenvolvimento (o Banco) concordou
em fornecer financiamento para o Projecto, conforme estabelecido no Acordo.
Moçambique alcançou um crescimento econômico significativo desde o fim da guerra civil em 1992, mas desafios
importantes ainda afectam as perspectivas do país. Muitas pessoas em Moçambique ainda não têm acesso a
água limpa e canalizada. Embora o acesso à água limpa seja uma meta sectorial que se espera que leve a ganhos
significativos em termos de desenvolvimento económico e humano, o sector de águas carece de financiamento e
capacidade suficientes para atingir essa meta até 2030.
A nível sectorial, uma proporção substancial da população urbana moçambicana continua sem acesso consistente
a serviços de água potável geridos com segurança. Embora 90% dos domicílios urbanos tenham acesso a água
limpa, o abastecimento é frequentemente intermitente e muitas pessoas não têm água canalizada em suas casas,
dependendo de furos (poços) públicos ou do abastecimento de vizinhos. Actualmente, nenhuma das 21 principais
cidades possui um serviço contínuo de abastecimento de água, com apenas sete sistemas atingindo a meta de
16 horas de abastecimento por dia, definida pela Autoridade Reguladora de Águas (AURA) como o limite para um
bom desempenho.
O Governo de Moçambique (GdM) está empenhado em aumentar os investimentos para garantir água potável, a
fim de atender à crescente demanda urbana, expandir a capacidade de tratamento e distribuição, promover a
eficiência na prestação de serviços e fomentar a sustentabilidade, com o objectivo de fornecer água gerida com
segurança a todos, conforme definido na Política de Águas de 2016, no Plano Nacional de Gestão de Recursos
Hídricos e no Plano de Acção para a Implementação dos Objectivos de Desenvolvimento Sustentável (ODS 2015-
2030).
Visando atingir os ODS, o GdM, por meio de suas agências implementadoras, está transitando o Projecto de
Segurança Hídrica Urbana de Moçambique, de um Programa para Resultados (PforR), sob o P178653, para um
Financiamento de Projectos de Investimento (FPI), sob o P509890. O projecto é um FPI com Subvenções
Baseadas no Desempenho (PBG) e visa ampliar o acesso a serviços de abastecimento de água de qualidade e
aprimorar a capacidade de prestação de serviços em cidades selecionadas. Essa transição exige total
conformidade com o Quadro Ambiental e Social (QAS) do Banco Mundial, exigindo a preparação de instrumentos
ambientais e sociais (A&S) essenciais.
Neste contexto, o Fundo de Investimento e Património do Abastecimento de Água (FIPAG) contratou os serviços
de consultoria da JBN Consults & Planners em parceria com a EA Consultoria e Serviços para desenvolver os
instrumentos de gestão ambiental e social (A&S) do projecto, de acordo com os requisitos do Quadro Ambiental
e Social (QAS) do Banco Mundial, que inclui este PEPI.
O Projecto de Segurança Hídrica Urbana está sendo elaborado no âmbito do Quadro Ambiental e Social (QAS)
do Banco Mundial, bem como da regulamentação ambiental e social moçambicana. No âmbito do QAS, todos os
mutuários do Banco Mundial concordaram em cumprir as dez Normas Ambientais e Sociais (NAS) aplicadas aos
empréstimos para projectos de investimento financiados pelo Banco. Este Projecto reconhece a importância da
adopção das NAS para identificar, avaliar e gerir os riscos e impactos ambientais e sociais a ele associados. De
acordo com o Documento de Avaliação do Projecto (PAD), a Ferramenta Sistemática de Classificação de Risco
Operacional (SORT) utilizada pelo Banco Mundial classificou os riscos ambientais e sociais do projecto como
Moderados e, especificamente para as partes interessadas, como Baixos.

                                                                                                             11
                                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan



O Objectivo de Desenvolvimento do Projecto (ODP) é aumentar o acesso a serviços de abastecimento de água
de qualidade e melhorar a capacidade de prestação de serviços em cidades selecionadas. Os investimentos do
projecto serão direcionados à Região Sul de Moçambique, abrangendo três das províncias do país mais afetadas
pela escassez de água e secas, nomeadamente Maputo, Gaza e Inhambane, e a Região Metropolitana da Grande
Maputo (RMGM).
O Projecto de Segurança Hídrica Urbana compreende os 4 componentes seguintes:
    1. Componente 1 (C1): Acesso a serviços de água e saneamento sustentáveis e resilientes ao clima
       (US$ 70 milhões), que apoiará uma combinação de intervenções da fonte à torneira para fortalecer a
       resiliência climática e a sustentabilidade dos serviços urbanos de abastecimento de água e saneamento
       que são regularmente afectados por secas e inundações agravadas pelas mudanças climáticas,
       contribuindo para a implementação de investimentos prioritários em adaptação climática promulgados
       na NDC do país, especificamente na área estratégica de recursos hídricos e sistemas resilientes de
       abastecimento de água e saneamento.
    2. Componente 2 (C2): Melhoria do desempenho e da eficiência dos serviços (US$ 60 milhões), que
       apoiará a melhoria do desempenho e da eficiência dos serviços de abastecimento de água na Grande
       Área Metropolitana de Maputo (GMMA) e na Região Sul, fornecidos pela AdRMM e AdRS,
       respectivamente, alocando um terço dos investimentos do projecto para financiar actividades, por meio
       de um mecanismo de subsídio para serviços públicos de água, que contribuirão para a redução do
       consumo de energia e das emissões de gases de efeito estufa (GEE), especificamente a redução de
       ARN e a eficiência energética.
    3. Componente 3 (C3). Apoio ao desenvolvimento do setor hídrico para melhorar o ambiente
       favorável à PSP (US$ 10 milhões), que apoiará diversas acções cruciais que sustentam a
       operacionalização de um esforço de reforma sectorial liderado pelo Governo de Moçambique (GdM) para
       melhorar o ambiente favorável à PSP e alcançar o acesso universal e equitativo à água potável segura
       e acessível.
    4. Componente 4 (C4). Apoio à Gestão de Projetos (US$ 6 milhões), que apoiará a assistência técnica
       e os custos operacionais incrementais do projecto para as duas Unidades de Implementação do Projeto
       (UIP), baseadas no FIPAG e no DNAAS, e as Unidades Técnicas do Projecto (UTP), baseadas na ARA-
       Sul e na AURAS. Também fornecerá apoio adicional para a conformidade ambiental e social.
De acordo com a Norma Ambiental e Social 10 (ESS10) sobre Engajamento das Partes Interessadas e Divulgação
de Informações, como reconhecimento da importância do engajamento aberto e transparente entre o Mutuário e
as partes interessadas do projecto, o FIPAG fornecerá às partes interessadas informações correctas e claras
sobre o projecto, pois isso pode melhorar a sustentabilidade ambiental e social do projecto, aumentar a sua
aceitação e contribuir significativamente para o sucesso de sua concepção e implementação. Uma vez
implementado, o PEPI apoiará o desenvolvimento de relacionamentos fortes, construtivos e receptivos com as
partes interessadas do projecto, o que é importante para o gerenciamento bem-sucedido dos riscos ambientais e
sociais. Nesse caso, destaca-se que o engajamento das partes interessadas é mais eficaz quando iniciado em
um estágio inicial do processo de desenvolvimento do projecto e é parte integrante das decisões iniciais do mesmo
e da avaliação, gestão e monitoramento dos riscos e impactos ambientais e sociais do projecto.
O objectivo geral deste PEPI é definir um programa de engajamento das partes interessadas, incluindo a
divulgação de informações públicas e consultas ao longo de todo o ciclo do projecto. Este PEPI descreve as
formas pelas quais as agências implementadoras, nomeadamente DNAAS, FIPAG (incluindo AdRMM e AdRS),
ARA-Sul e AURA, comunicarão com as partes interessadas e incluIe um mecanismo pelo qual as pessoas podem
levantar preocupações, fornecer feedback ou apresentar reclamações sobre o projecto e quaisquer actividades
relacionadas com o mesmo. O PEPI enfatiza especificamente métodos para envolver grupos considerados mais
vulneráveis e que correm o risco de serem excluídos dos benefícios do projecto.
Portanto, a identificação das partes interessadas é um componente crítico do PEPI antes do início do engajamento
específico e é um processo contínuo que requer revisão e actualização regular. Por meio disso, as agências
implementadoras do projecto mencionadas acima terão facilidade em entender como cada parte interessada pode
ser afectada ou como pode estar interessada no projecto, para que o engajamento possa ser adaptado para
informá-las e compreender suas opiniões e preocupações de maneira adequada. Uma identificação e análise
preliminar das partes interessadas foi conduzida considerando cada componente e subcomponente do projecto,

                                                                                                              12
                                            Stakeholder Engagement Plan



e foram identificados 9 conjuntos de partes afectadas, 29 conjuntos de partes interessadas e 7 conjuntos de
grupos vulneráveis. É importante ressaltar que, dentro de cada conjunto, pode haver vários subgrupos.
O engajamento das partes interessadas teve início com reuniões de escopo com diversas partes interessadas,
institucionalmente, a nível central (Maputo) e provincial. Discussões em grupos focais, entrevistas em
profundidade e discussões informais com moradores da área do projecto devem ser utilizadas nas reuniões de
consulta às partes interessadas, como estratégia de engajamento. As consultas devem ser parte integrante dos
instrumentos ambientais e sociais do projecto. Para conduzir consultas eficazes com as partes interessadas
identificadas, incluindo comunidades locais, entidades governamentais, organizações internacionais,
organizações da sociedade civil e indivíduos afectados, diversos métodos de consulta devem ser empregados,
considerando as restrições de tempo e recursos.
Assim, o Programa de Engajamento de Partes Interessadas foi desenvolvido considerando a fase inicial de
preparação do Projecto e a fase de Implementação por meio de uma ampla gama de reuniões de engajamento
de partes interessadas. A fase de preparação e avaliação abrange essencialmente a divulgação do projecto, bem
como a concepção e disseminação dos instrumentos de gestão ambiental e social (PCAS, PEPI, QGAS, PGT,
QPR, incluindo MGQR e Plano de Ação de Violência Baseada no Género – VBG,/Abuso e Exploração Sexual –
AES/ Assédio Sexual – AS) em conformidade com os requisitos do Quadro Ambiental e Social (QAS) do Banco
Mundial. Instituições governamentais interessadas no projecto, agências implementadoras, provedores privados
de água e suas associações, Banco Mundial, parceiros de implementação do projecto, autoridades locais e
associações relacionadas, doadores e público em geral, incluindo grupos vulneráveis, entre outros, representam
a gama de partes interessadas envolvidas e/ou alvos a serem engajadas ao longo desta fase. Reuniões de
engajamento (reuniões de coordenação e advogacia, discussões de grupos focais e reuniões de negócios,
consultas técnicas e públicas) foram e continuarão a ser realizadas ao longo desta fase. Dentre as reuniões de
engajamento realizadas, destacam-se a reunião de consulta pública realizada durante a preparação e divulgação
da Avaliação dos Sistemas Ambientais e Sociais (ESSA), bem como a reunião de consulta pública realizada
durante a preparação dos instrumentos de gestão ambiental e social no âmbito do QAS do Banco Mundial, que
inclui este PEPI.
A primeira consulta pública foi realizada a 7 de Fevereiro de 2023 em Maputo e contou com a presença de um
total de 36 partes interessadas (24 presenciais e 12 virtuais), incluindo instituições governamentais, agências
implementadoras, ONGs, instituições de financiamento ao desenvolvimento e entidades do sector de águas. Esta
consulta teve como objectivo divulgar o projecto e também colectar contribuições essenciais das partes
interessadas para consolidar a preparação do Relatório da Avaliação dos Sistemas Ambientais e Sociais (ESSA)
e a concepção do projecto. A acta desta consulta encontra-se no Anexo I.
A segunda consulta pública foi realizada a 22 de Março de 2025 no distrito de Moamba (representando a província
de Maputo), na cidade de Xai-Xai (representando a província de Gaza) e na cidade de Inhambane (representando
a província de Inhambane). Um total de 166 partes interessadas, entre elas 102 homens (61%) e 64 mulheres
(39%), participaram destas reuniões de consulta. Além de continuar a divulgar o projecto, essas consultas
buscaram colectar contribuições relevantes para alimentar o processo de preparação dos instrumentos de gestão
ambiental e social no âmbito do QGA do BM, nomeadamente QGAS (incluindo o Plano de Ação de Avaliação,
Prevenção e Resposta a Riscos de VBG/AES/AS), PEPI (incluindo MGQR), PCAS, QPR e PGT. Os participantes
incluíram moradores, funcionários do governo, representantes da sociedade civil e membros do sector privado,
funcionários das agências implementadoras, entre outros. Os detalhes das reuniões de consulta podem ser vistos
nos respectivos relatórios, no Apêndice I.
A responsabilidade geral pela implementação do PEPI cabe à Unidade de Implementação do Projecto, sob a
coordenação do Coordenador do Projecto, com o apoio directo do especialista em Meio Ambiente e Social e de
outros funcionários relacionados que possam ser incorporados à UIP sediada pelo FIPAG, como agência
implementadora responsável pela liderança das componentes de abastecimento de água do projecto. A DNAAS
sediará uma segunda UIP. As actividades do PEPI também serão implementadas, juntamente com os
instrumentos específicos do local (AIAS/PGAS), tanto por meio de consultores de AIAS quanto pelos empreteiiros
que participarão das obras de construção do projecto. Assim, a AURA e a ARA-Sul participarão, nesse nível, por
meio de seus especialistas em salvaguardas ambientais e sociais das Unidades Técnicas do Projeto (UTPs) por
si sedeadas.


                                                                                                            13
                                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Este PEPI desenvolveu um guia para o MGQR, que deve servir de guia para a gestão de queixas e reclamações
(incluindo sugestões) durante o ciclo de vida do projecto. O referido MGQR deve abranger fóruns de resolução
de queixas em três níveis, a saber: (i) nível da Unidade Técnica, responsável pela implementação de actividades
específicas no projecto/subcomponentes do projeto; (ii) nível da Unidade Central de Implementação do Projecto;
(iii) nível da Gestão Comunitária do Projecto. As principais atividades do fórum mencionado incluem: (i) deliberar
sobre questões complexas e reclamações das partes interessadas apresentadas ao longo do ciclo do projecto;
(ii) encontrar colectivamente soluções adequadas, buscar resultados construtivos e, sempre que necessário,
formular respostas em nome do projecto, a serem comunicadas às partes interessadas apropriadas. Dentro dos
quadros cultural e legal existentes, o MGQR abrangerá três conselhos de resolução de queixas e reclamações, a
saber: (i) conselho comunitário ou público; (ii) conselho de gestão/implementação do projecto (inclui os níveis da
Unidade Técnica e da Unidade Central); e (iii) sistema judicial moçambicano.
O mecanismo oferece uma ampla gama de canais pelos quais as reclamações, queixas ou sugestões devem ser
enviadas, como linhas telefônicas gratuitas, SMS/WhatsApp, e-mail, livro de reclamações ou caixas de
sugestões/reclamações, pessoalmente em instalações físicas ou durante reuniões, formulário online no wabsite
da UIP/agências de implementação, Serviço Corporativo de Reparação de Reclamações do Banco Mundial e
Painel de Inspeção do Banco Mundial. O processo deve respeitar um conjunto de etapas dentro de 6 ou 7 estágios,
dependendo do progresso de cada reclamação, a saber: (1) Classificação e processamento (avaliação preliminar
da reclamação); (2) Reconhecimento e acompanhamento (resposta inicial ao reclamante); (3) Verificação,
investigação e acção; (4) Processo de apelação; (5) Fornecimento de feedback; e (6) Monitoramento e avaliação.
Algumas ferramentas/ instrumentos relevantes devem ser manuseados para apoiar a implementação e gestão,
incluindo procedimentos de registro do mecanismo, dos quais se destacam o Formulário de Registro de
Reclamações, o Plano de Abertura da Caixa de Reclamações, o Formulário de Controle de Abertura da Caixa de
Reclamações, o Formulário para Registro e Monitoramento de Reclamações (Ver modelos propostos de alguns
instrumentos nos Apêndice II, III e IV).
O PEPI apoiará a implementação do Quadro de Gestão Ambiental e Social (ESMF) do Projecto, a concepção de
instrumentos específicos para cada local (EIAS/PGAS) e orientará o processo de engajamento das partes
interessadas.
O orçamento estimado para a preparação e implementação do PEPI é de US$ 430.525 e deverá ser financiado
pelo Componente 4 (C4) – Apoio à Gestão do Projecto. Este orçamento pode ser atualizado ao longo do ciclo de
vida do projecto, dependendo do desenvolvimento das atividades do projecto com maior ênfase em atividades
sociais ou comunitárias.
Os especialistas Ambientais e Sociais da Unidade de Implementação do Projecto (UIP) serão responsáveis pela
coordenação e monitoramento interno da implementação do PEPI junto das partes interessadas, e as monitorias
serão realizados trimestralmente. A UIP, sediada pelo FIPAG, será a responsável por essa atividade e deverá
receber apoio da UPI sediada pela DNAAS, bem como pelas Unidades Técnicas do Projecto (UTP) sediadas pela
AURA e pela ARA-SUL. O monitoramento externo (TPM) do PEPI poderá ser contratado e realizado
simultaneamente ao monitoramento externo geral do projecto, considerando uma periodicidade anual.




1. INTRODUCTION

                                                                                                               14
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




1.1 Background
The Republic of Mozambique (the Recipient) through the Ministry of Economy and Finance and Ministry of Public
Works, Housing, and Water Resources (MOPHRH) will implement the Mozambique Urban Water Security Project
(UWSP) (the Project), with the involvement of the Water Supply Asset Holdings and Investment Fund (FIPAG),
Directorate of Water Supply and Sanitation (DNAAS), Water Regulatory Authority (AURA), and South Regional
Water Administration Structure (ARA-Sul) as the Implementing Agencies, consistent with their respective
mandates, as set out in the Financing Agreement (the Agreement). Specifically, FIPAG will lead the implementation
of water supply infrastructure and performance improvement activities, while DNAAS will oversee activities related
to Private Water Providers (PWPs), regulatory strengthening activities benefiting AURAS, the project’s water
resources management (WRM) and watershed components benefiting ARA-Sul. The International Development
Association (the Bank), has agreed to provide financing for the Project, as set out in the Agreement.
Mozambique has achieved significant economic growth since the end of the civil war in 1992, but important
challenges still affecting the country’s prospects. Many people in Mozambique still lack access to clean and piped
water. While access to clean water is a sector goal expected to lead to significant economic and human
development gains, the water sector lacks sufficient funding and capacity to meet this goal by 2030.
At a sectorial level, a substantial proportion of the Mozambican urban population continues to lack consistent
access to safely managed drinking water services. While 90% of urban households have access to clean water,
supply is often intermittent and many people do not have piped water to their premises, relying on a public
standpipe or on neighbours’ supply. At present, none of the 21 main cities have a continuous water supply service,
with only seven systems reaching the target service level of 16 hours of supply per day, defined by the Water
Regulatory Authority (AURA) as the threshold for good performance.
The Government of Mozambique (GoM) is committed to increasing investments to secure water to meet increasing
urban demand, expand treatment and distribution capacity, promote efficiency in service delivery and foster
sustainability, with the aim of delivering safely managed water to all, as defined in the 2016 Water Policy, the
National Water Resources Management Plan and the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs 2015‐2030).
After several projects have been implemented in urban water sector in Mozambique, with World Bank (WB)
funding, there is now a strong strategic rationale for WB to continue its intervention with a focus on performance
improvement.
In the avenue to reach SDGs the GoM, through its implementing agencies, is transitioning the Mozambique Urban
Water Security Project from a Program-for-Results (PforR) under P178653 to an Investment Project Financing
(IPF) under P509890. The project is an IPF with Performance Based Grants (PBG) and aims to enhance access
to improved water supply services and improve service delivery capacity in selected cities. This transition requires
full compliance with the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), necessitating the preparation
of key Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments.
Relatedly, the Fundo de Investimento e Património do Abastecimento de Água (FIPAG) has engaged Consultancy
Services of JBN Consults & Planners in JV with EA Consultoria e Serviços to develop the project’s
Environmental and Social (E&S) management instruments according to the requirements of the World Bank
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and these include the following instruments:
   • Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP);
   • Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM);
   • Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan;
   • Labor Management Procedures (LMP); and
   • Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
This Consultancy is promoted by the Government of Mozambique, through the Ministry of Public Works, Housing
and Water Reasources and its implementing agencies amongst what FIPAG is the main one.

                                                                                                                 15
                                                                   Stakeholder Engagement Plan




 1.2 Project Description and Objectives
Poverty and inequality, which are concentrated in the overpopulated neighbourhoods of the southern region, further
exacerbate climate change vulnerabilities in the main cities in Mozambique. It is estimated that over 70% of the
inhabitants of Greater Maputo live in slums. Likewise, Maputo and other capital cities in the south face many
challenges, such as poor transport and drainage infrastructure, poor garbage collection, high numbers of informal
settlements amongst others, which have profound implications on people’s livelihoods, particularly in informal
settlements. There’s also increasing pressure on public water services and job creation. As a result, there’s high
risk of gender-based violence (GBV) in the region, particularly to women and girls with no access to water in the
premises, with reports of experiences or fear of GBV when collecting water from public water points.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to improved water supply services and improve
service delivery capacity in selected cities. The project investments will target the Southern Region of Mozambique,
covering three of the country's provinces most affected by water scarcity and droughts, namely Maputo, Gaza and
Inhambane, and the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Region (GMMR).
 1.3 Project Components
The project is structured in four areas/components, namely (1) Accessing to sustainable and climate resilient water
and sanitation services; (2) Improvement of performance and efficiency of services; (3) Water sector development
support to improving the enabling environment for PSP; and (4) Project Management Support. . In addition, the
Project includes a cross‐cutting area aimed at human capital strengthening.
      1. Component 1 (C1): Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
         (US$70 million).

             C1 will support a combination of interventions from source to tap to strengthen the climate resilience and
             sustainability of urban water supply and sanitation services that are regularly affected by climate-change-
             exacerbated droughts and floods events, contributing to the implementation of priority climate adaptation
             investments enacted in the country’s NDC, specifically under the water resources and resilient water
             supply and sanitation systems strategic area. C1 is structured in five sub-components, specifically:

                    a) Reducing climate hazards impacting water supply infrastructure and services through
                       Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) and watershed management, including
                       providing strategic support to ARA-Sul to fulfill its mandate, covering investments that will
                       contribute to strengthening of climate-informed water planning and allocation, the enhancement
                       of water quality through improved watershed management that reduces climate-change-
                       exacerbated water source contamination, assurance of water availability to meet urban demand
                       via source diversification and demand conservation;
                    b) Expansion of access to climate-resilient water supply services, including investments for
                       the expansion of water treatment and transport capacity, as well as downstream investments to
                       expand the distribution network following the key principles for climate-resilient water
                       infrastructure design, with key Water Treatment Plant (WTP), pumping stations, and bridge
                       crossings for main pipes designed to withstand and be installed above historic flood levels,
                       following the protocol for climate-proofing of water supply infrastructure and service;1
                    c) Output-based payments for low-income household connections, building on the successful
                       experience of output-based payments implemented in WASIS II (P149377) and aims at
                       increasing access to piped water connections for low-income households in the main urban
                       centers. Under this component, output-based grant payments are to be provided to regional
                       utilities to cover the costs of connecting low-income households;
                    d) Improvement of the quality of services provided by PWPs through grants for upgrading PWP
                       water supply infrastructure to comply with technical standards, with best practices for climate-



1 WBG. 2020. Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief. Link: http://hdl.handle.net/10986/34448


                                                                                                                     16
                                         Stakeholder Engagement Plan



           proofing of operations and service, and to enable them to distribute bulk water supply purchased
           from the regional utilities;
        e) Access to safely managed sanitation financing the completion of the ongoing Fecal Sludge
           Treatment Plant (FSTP) in Tete currently supported by the MUSP (P161777) that is closing in
           September 2025.

2. Component 2 (C2): Improvement of performance and efficiency of services (US$60 million).
   C2 will support the improvement of performance and efficiency of water supply services in the Greater
   Maputo Metropolitan Area (GMMA) and Southern Region provided by AdRMM and AdRS respectively,
   allocating one-third of the project investments to finance activities, through a grant mechanism for water
   utilities, that will contribute to lower energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
   specifically NRW reduction and energy efficiency. C2 is structured in fours sub-components, specifically:
         a) Performance improvement for the service area of the GMMA. Carrying out a performance-
            based program of activities defined under a Performance Improvement Action Plan (PIAP) for
            the GMMA, which include investments for: (i) NRW reduction led by the utility not covered by
            the NRW Performance-Based Contract (PBc) (2.c); (ii) improving energy efficiency; (iii)
            improving the collection ratio and the operational cost coverage ratio; (iv) digitalization of
            operations; (v) training and capacity building in key areas for the utilities; 6) women
            empowerment within; (vi) improving utility’s governance and accountability; (vii) establishment
            of communications platforms for information sharing on water quality and services and timely
            resolution of complaints; and (vii) implementation of the turn-around plans derived from the
            Utilities of the Future (UoF) assessment;
         b) Performance improvement for the Southern Region service area. Carrying out a
            performance-based program of activities defined under a PIAP for the Southern Region, which
            include investments for: (i) co-management contract for NRW reduction; (ii) improving energy
            efficiency; (iii) improving the collection ratio and the operational cost coverage ratio; (iv)
            digitalization of operations; (v) training and capacity building; (vi) women empowerment; (vii)
            improving utility’s governance and accountability; (viii) establishing of communications
            platforms for information sharing on water quality and services and timely resolution of
            complaints; and (ix) implementation of the turn-around plans derived from the UoF assessment;
         c) NRW PBc for GMMA. PBc for NRW reduction to be signed between FIPAG and a contractor
            to be selected on a competitive basis to implement investments to reduce NRW, including
            investments to reduce both physical and commercial losses, management technologies, and
            capacity-building programs, in the service areas of GMMA and the Southern Region;
         d) Revolving fund for a prepaid meter program. Supporting the acquisition of pre-paid meters
            to be installed for consumers segments with high water bill and low billing collection ratios to
            support the desired increasing in operational costs coverage based on receivables

3. Component 3 (C3). Water sector development support to improving the enabling environment for
   PSP (US$10 million).
   C3 will support several critical actions underpinning the operationalization of a sector reform effort led by
   the Government of Mozambique (GoM) to improve the enabling environment for PSP and to achieve
   universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water. This component will be divided into
   three sub-components, specifically:
         (a) Improvement of the enabling environment for Private Sector Participation, which will
             support the development of the legal framework for the integration of PWP services into the
             regulated service provision (the development of technical standards, including best practices
             for climate-proofing of operations and service, and bulk water supply models), including the
             licensing and monitoring of their water quality and services, and the dissemination and training
             of licensing authorities;
         (b) Strengthening the regulatory role of AURA to promote efficiency and inclusiveness in the
             provision of services by extending them to the poorest segments of the population and reducing
             the risk of investment in the sector through economic regulation that guarantees tariffs that fully
                                                                                                             17
                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                  cover operating costs, debt service, a return on private investment and ensure service to poor
                  segments of the population;
              (c) Strengthen ARA-Sul capacity to manage water resources including licensing of water
                  users, strengthening of management and ARA-Sul’s financial sustainability, capacity building,
                  including in climate-risk prevention, management and response, institutional development
                  support, and the implementation of a women empowerment program;
              (d) Institutional development support for FIPAG. This sub-component will support FIPAG in
                  managing the process of restructuring the urban water supply sector, including strengthening
                  it to be an institution focused on mobilizing funds for investment in the sector, migrating from
                  its previous focus on operations, and to strengthen private sector participation and private
                  capital mobilization for urban water supply;
              (e) Preparatory studies for the next generation of WSS investments will allocate resources to
                  support the preparation of the future generation of priority investments in WSS.

    4. Component 4 (C4). Project Management Support (US$6 million).
        Will support technical assistances and incremental project operation costs for the two Project
        Implementation Units (PIU) based on FIPAG and DNAAS, and the Project Technical Units (PTU) based
        on ARA-Sul and AURAS. It will also provide additional support for the environmental and social
        compliance.
        Project management support comprises technical assistance and incremental operating costs to ensure
        fiduciary compliance including Financial Management (FM), procurement and environment and social
        safeguards, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for. This component will support necessary equipment (e.g.
        computers, software and other goods), capacity building (training), and incremental staff to allow the
        project implementing unit to carry out their responsibilities.
              (a) Technical Assistance and Project Management Support for FIPAG to ensure technical and
                  fiduciary compliance, including financial management (FM) and procurement, monitoring and
                  evaluation (M&E). This component will support necessary equipment (e.g. computers, software
                  and other goods), capacity building (training), travel, logistics and incremental staff to allow the
                  PIU to carry out their responsibilities related to the project.
              (b) Technical Assistances and Project management support for DNAAS to ensure technical
                  and fiduciary compliance, including financial management (FM) and procurement, monitoring
                  and evaluation (M&E). This component will support necessary equipment (e.g. computers,
                  software and other goods), capacity building (training), travel, logistics and incremental staff to
                  allow the PIU to carry out their responsibilities related to the project. It will also support technical
                  assistances and incremental operating costs for the implementation two PTUs based on ARA-
                  Sul and AURAS.
              c) Support for the Environmental and Social Compliance to ensure compliance with the
                  Environmental and Social Commitment Plan, the satisfactory implementation of the
                  Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP), and the Environmental and Social Management
                  Framework, the Resettlement Policy Framework, including the compensation of people
                  affected by the project (PAP) interventions.
The UWSP is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF).
1.4 Project Location
As shown in figure 1 bellow, the project targeted area is essentially the province of Maputo, Gaza and Inhambane
but focused mainly the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Region (GMMR), Xai-Xai and Chibuto, as well as Inhambane
city and Maxixe.
Figure 1: Project targeted area




                                                                                                                       18
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




2. DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVE OF SEP
The WB’s Environmental and Social Standard on Stakeholder Engagement and Disclosure Information (ESS10)
requires borrowers to engage interested and particularly affected parties (IAPs) throughout the project life cycle.
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public information
disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. This SEP outlines the ways in which the
implementing agencies, namely DNAAS, DNGRH, ARA-SUL, FIPAG, (including AdRMM, AdRS) and AURA will
communicate with stakeholders and include a mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback
or make complaints about the project and any activities related to the project. The SEP specifically emphasizes
methods to engage groups considered most vulnerable and that are at risk of being left out of project benefits.
The objectives of this SEP are:
    ●    Stabilish a systematic approach for AIPs’ engagement in order to assist the borrowers in identifying
         project AIPs, building and maintaining constructive relationship amongst all AIPs throughout the project
         cycle;
    ●    Assess the level of interest and support of the project AIPs and allow their views to be taken into account
         in the conception, preparation/ design and implementation of the project, including in matters relating to
         environmental and social performance;
    ●    Promote and provide means for effective and inclusive engagement with AIPs throughout the project
         lifecycle on issues that may potential affect them;
    ●    Ensure that project-affected communities have accessible and inclusive means to raise issues and
         grievances and enable borrowers to respond to and manage such issues and grievances;
    ●    Ensure that appropriate information on the project´s socio environmental risks and impacts is disclosed
         to stakeholders in a timely, accessible, understandable and appropriate manner.
                                                                                                              19
                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan




3. STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS PER PROJECT COMPONENT

3.1 Methodology
For the UWSP, the following stakeholders have been identified and analyzed per project component. These
stakeholders include affected parties (as defined in section 3.2), other interested parties (as defined in section 3.3)
and disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups (as defined in section 3.4).
3.2 Affected Parties
People, groups and other entities within the Project Influence Area (PIA) who are directly influenced (currently or
potentially) by the project and/ or have been identified as most susceptible to the changes associated with the
project and who need to be closely involved in identifying risks and their impacts, as well as in making decisions
about mitigation and management measures. Affected people are those who quality of life will suffer a direct
change as a result of direct impacts of the implementation of the UWSP. It includes local communities, community
members and other parties that may be subject to direct impacts from the Project. Specifically, the following
individuals and groups fall within this category, as shown in table 1.
3.3 Other Interested Parties
The projects’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities, including Individuals/
groups/ entities that may not be directly impacted by the project but who consider that their intersts may be affected
by the project and/ or may influence the design and the implementation of the project. Specifically, the following
individuals and groups fall within this category, as shown in table 1.
3.4 Disadvantages/ Vulnerable Individuals or Groups
These are people or groups who may be disproportionately impacted or even more harmed by the project,
compared to any other group due to their vulnerable status and therefore may require special efforts to ensure
their representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated with the project. These
disadvantage or vulnerable individuals or groups often do not have voice to express their concerns or understand
the impact of the project. Within the Project, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include but are not limited
to the following, as shown in table 1.
Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the project will be further confirmed and consulted through
dedicated means, as appropriate. Description of the methods of engagement that will be undertaken by the project
is provided in the following sections




                                                                                                                    20
                                                                          Stakeholder Engagement Plan




Table 1: Project Interested and Affected Parties per Component and Subcomponent
 Project    Components                and Project Affected Parties                       Project Interested Parties                     Disadvantages/ Vulnerable Individuals
 Subcomponents                                                                                                                          or Groups
 Component (C1): Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
 Subcomponent 1.1: Reducing climate             −   Technicians from implementing             −     Ministry of Public works,               −   Women and Girls who head
 hazards impacting water supply                     agencies;                                       Housing and Water Resources                 households;
 infrastructure and services through            −   Technicians from government                     (MOPHRH);                               −   Children and Children heading
 Integrated      Water      Resources               and/ or public institutions               −     Water Southern Regional                     households;
 Management (IWRM) and watershed                    associated with the Water                       Administration (ARA-SUL);               −   Elderly persons;
 management                                         Sector;                                   −     Ministery of Land and                   −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                                −   Workers from civil constructions                Environment;                                physical and mental) which
                                                    companies engaged in the                  −     National Institute of Meteorology           could be (but not only)
                                                    project;                                        (INAM);                                     represented         by   their
                                                −   Project workers;                          −     National Institute for Disaster             associations;
                                                −   Southern      Region      water                 Risk      Management          and       −   People living under chronic
                                                    consumers;                                      Reduction (INGD);                           diseases;
                                                −   Water urban consumers                     −     Professional Training Center for        −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                                    Water and Sanitation;                   −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                              −     National Evironmetal Quality
                                                                                                    Control Agency (AQUA);
                                                                                              −     Ministry of Health;
                                                                                              −     Mozambican Platform for Water
                                                                                                    (PLAMA);
                                                                                              −     Companies and associations
                                                                                                    specialized in water training;
                                                                                              −     Municipality authority
 Subcomponent 1.2: Expansion of access          −   Technicians from implementing             −     Fund for Investments and                −   Women and Girls who head
 to climate-resilient water supply services         agencies;                                       Assets of Water Supply                      households;
                                                −   Technicians from government                     (FIPAG);                                −   Children and Children heading
                                                    and/ or public institutions                                                                 households;
                                                                                                                                            −   Elderly persons;

                                                                                                                                                                            21
                                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                         associated with the Water                 −     Administration of Water and           −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                         Sector;                                         Sanitation         Infrastructures,       physical and mental) which
                                     −   Local Government Authorities;                   Public Institute (AIAS, IP);              could be (but not only)
                                     −   Southern       Region      water          −     Office of Studies and Projects of         represented         by their
                                         consumers;                                      the Ministry of Public works,             associations;
                                     −   Workers from civil constructions                Housing and Water Resources           −   People living under chronic
                                         companies engaged in the                        (MOPHRH-GEP);                             diseases;
                                         project;                                  −     Companies and associations            −   Illiterate persons;
                                     −   Project workers;                                specialized in water training e.g.    −   Extremely poor persons
                                     −   Owners of the areas that will be                Professional Training Center for
                                         affected by the project, namely                 Water and Sanitation;
                                         (1) people temporarily or                 −     Ministry of Health;
                                         permanently affected (physical            −     Ministery of Land and
                                         and economic displacement) by                   Environment;
                                         the civil construction works of           −     National Institute of Meteorology
                                         the project and land acquisition;               (INAM);
                                         (2) people who derive their               −     National Institute for Disaster
                                         livelihood     from     common                  Risk       Management          and
                                         resources and have their access                 Reduction (INGD);
                                         to them restricted due to project         −     National Evironmetal Quality
                                         activities;                                     Control Agency (AQUA);
                                     −   Local community leaving around            −     Electricity Utility Management
                                         the project civil constructions                 Company of Mozambique
                                         work areas;                                     (EDM);
                                                                                   −     National Road Administration,
                                                                                         Public Institute (ANE, IP)
Subcomponent   1.3:   Output-based   −   Southern      Region    water             −     Fund for Investments and              −   Women and Girls who head
payments for low-income household        consumers;                                      Assets of Water Supply                    households;
connections                          −   Low-income water consumers;                     (FIPAG);                              −   Children and Children heading
                                     −   Technicians from implementing             −     Administration of Water and               households;
                                         agencies;                                       Sanitation         Infrastructures,   −   Elderly persons;
                                     −   Technicians from government                     Public Institute (AIAS, IP);          −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                         and/ or public institutions               −     Office of Studies and Projects of         physical and mental) which
                                                                                         the Ministry of Public works,             could be (but not only)
                                                                                                                                                              22
                                                                 Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                           associated with the Water                       Housing and Water Resources            represented         by their
                                           Sector;                                         (MOPHRH-GEP);                          associations;
                                       −   Workers from Civil constructions          −     Water Southern Regional            −   People living under chronic
                                           companies engaged in the                        Administration (ARA-SUL)               diseases;
                                           project;                                                                           −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                                                              −   Extremely poor persons

Subcomponent 1.4: Improvement of the   −   Technicians from implementing             −     Ministry of Public works,          −   Women and Girls who head
quality of services provided by PWPs       agencies;                                       Housing and Water Resources            households;
                                       −   Technicians from government                     (MOPHRH);                          −   Children and Children heading
                                           and/ or public institutions               −     National Directorate for Water         households;
                                           associated with the Water                       Resources           Management     −   Elderly persons;
                                           Sector;                                         (DNGRH);                           −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                       −   Private     Water      Providers          −     National Directorate for Water         physical and mental) which
                                           Associations;                                   Supply       and      Sanitation       could be (but not only)
                                       −   Private Water Providers;                        (DNAAS);                               represented         by   their
                                       −   Local Government Authorities;             −     National Evironmetal Quality           associations;
                                       −   Southern       Region     water                 Control Agency (AQUA);             −   People living under chronic
                                           consumers;                                −     Ministry of Health;                    diseases;
                                       −   Workers from Civil constructions          −     Local Water and Sanitation         −   Illiterate persons;
                                           companies engaged in the                        Committes;                         −   Extremely poor persons
                                           project;                                  −     Water aid;                         −
                                       −   Project workers;
                                       −   Local community leaving around
                                           the civil constructions work of
                                           the project areas;
Subcomponent 1.5: Access to safely     −   Local community leaving around            −     Ministry of Public works,          −   Women and Girls who head
managed sanitation                         the civil constructions work of                 Housing and Water Resources            households;
                                           the project areas;                              (MOPHRH);                          −   Children and Children heading
                                       −   Local Government Authorities;             −     National Directorate for Water         households;
                                       −   Workers from Civil constructions                Supply      and      Sanitation    −   Elderly persons;
                                           companies engaged in the                        (DNAAS);                           −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                           project;                                  −     National Evironmetal Quality           physical and mental) which
                                                                                           Control Agency (AQUA);                 could be (but not only)
                                                                                                                                                              23
                                                                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                             − Technicians from implementing              −     Ministry of Health;                       represented         by their
                                               agencies (DNAAS and AIAS,                  −     Local Water and Sanitation                associations;
                                               IP);                                             Committes;                            −   People living under chronic
                                          − Technicians from government                   −     Administration of Water and               diseases;
                                               and/ or public institutions                      Sanitation         Infrastructures,   −   Illiterate persons;
                                               associated with the Water                        Public Institute (AIAS, IP);          −   Extremely poor persons
                                               Sector;                                    −     Municipality authorities, e.g.
                                          − Owners of the areas that will be                    SEMUSATE;
                                               affected by the project, namely
                                               (1) people temporarily or
                                               permanently affected (physical
                                               and economic displacement) by
                                               the civil construction works of
                                               the project and land acquisition;
                                               (2) people who derive their
                                               livelihood     from     common
                                               resources and have their access
                                               to them restricted due to project
                                               activities;
Component (C2): Improvement of performance and efficiency of services
Subcomponet       2.1:    Performance        −   Technicians from implementing            −     Office of Studies and Projects of     −   Women and Girls who head
improvement for the service area of the          agencies;                                      the Ministry of Public works,             households;
GMMA                                         −   Technicians from government                    Housing and Water Resources           −   Children and Children heading
                                                 and/ or public institutions                    (MOPHRH-GEP);                             households;
                                                 associated with the Water                −     Maputo Metropolitan Area              −   Elderly persons;
                                                 Sector;                                        Water Company (AdRMM);                −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                             −   Greater Maputo Metropolitan              −     Fund for Investments and                  physical and mental) which
                                                 Area Water consumers;                          Assets of Water Supply                    could be (but not only)
                                                                                                (FIPAG);                                  represented         by   their
                                                                                          −     Ministry of Health;                       associations;
                                                                                          −     Electricity Utility Management        −   People living under chronic
                                                                                                Company of Mozambique                     diseases;
                                                                                                (EDM);                                −   Illiterate persons;

                                                                                                                                                                      24
                                                                  Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                      −     Local Water and Sanitation          −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                            Committes;
                                                                                      −     Water aid;
                                                                                      −     National Evironmetal Quality
                                                                                            Control Agency (AQUA)
                                                                                      −     Professional Training Center for
                                                                                            Water and Sanitation;
                                                                                      −     Mozambique Water Suppliers
                                                                                            Association (AFROMO);
                                                                                      −     Mozambican Platform for Water
                                                                                            (PLAMA);
                                                                                      −     Companies and associations
                                                                                            specialized in water training;
                                                                                      −     Women              Empowerment
                                                                                            Associations;
Subcomponent      2.2:    Performance     −   Technicians from implementing           −     Office of Studies and Projects of   −   Women and Girls who head
improvement for the service area of the       agencies;                                     the Ministry of Public works,           households;
Southern Region                           −   Technicians from government                   Housing and Water Resources         −   Children and Children heading
                                              and/ or public institutions                   (MOPHRH-GEP)                            households;
                                              associated with the Water               −     South Region Water Company          −   Elderly persons;
                                              Sector;                                       (AdRS);                             −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                          −   Southern      region    water           −     Fund for Investments and                physical and mental) which
                                              consumers;                                    Assets of Water Supply                  could be (but not only)
                                                                                            (FIPAG);                                represented         by   their
                                                                                      −     Electricity Utility Management          associations;
                                                                                            Company of Mozambique               −   People living under chronic
                                                                                            (EDM);                                  diseases;
                                                                                      −     Ministry of Health;                 −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                      −     Local Water and Sanitation          −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                            Committes;
                                                                                      −     Water aid;
                                                                                      −     National Evironmetal Quality
                                                                                            Control Agency (AQUA)


                                                                                                                                                                25
                                                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                 −     Office of Studies and Projects of
                                                                                       the Ministry of Public works,
                                                                                       Housing and Water Resources
                                                                                       (MOPHRH-GEP)
                                                                                 −     Professional Training Center for
                                                                                       Water and Sanitation;
                                                                                 −     Mozambique Water Suppliers
                                                                                       Association (AFROMO);
                                                                                 −     Mozambican Platform for Water
                                                                                       (PLAMA);
                                                                                 −     Companies and associations
                                                                                       specialized in water training;
                                                                                 −     Women             Empowerment
                                                                                       Associations;
Subcomponent 2.3: NRW PBc for GMMA   −   Technicians from implementing           −     Office of Studies and Projects of   −   Women and Girls who head
                                         agencies;                                     the Ministry of Public works,           households;
                                     −   Technicians from government                   Housing and Water Resources         −   Children and Children heading
                                         and/ or public institutions                   (MOPHRH-GEP)                            households;
                                         associated with the Water               −     Fund for Investments and            −   Elderly persons;
                                         Sector;                                       Assets of Water Supply              −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                     −   Southern      region     water                (FIPAG);                                physical and mental) which
                                         consumers;                              −     Maputo Metropolitan Area                could be (but not only)
                                     −   Informal Water Sector Provider                Water Company (AdRMM);                  represented         by   their
                                     −   Private Water Provider                  −     South Region Water Company              associations;
                                                                                       (AdRS);                             −   People living under chronic
                                                                                 −     Mozambique Water Suppliers              diseases;
                                                                                       Association (AFROMO);               −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                 −     Mozambican Platform for Water       −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                       (PLAMA);
                                                                                 −     Professional Training Center for
                                                                                       Water and Sanitation;
                                                                                 −     Companies and associations
                                                                                       specialized in water training;


                                                                                                                                                           26
                                                                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                          −     Water Southern Regional
                                                                                                Administration (ARA-SUL);
                                                                                          −     Private     Water    Providers
                                                                                                Associations (e.g AFORAMO)
Subcomponet 2.4: Revolving fund for a       −    Technicians from implementing            −     Fund for Investments and            −   Women and Girls who head
prepaid meter program                            agencies;                                      Assets of Water Supply                  households;
                                            −    Southern      region    water                  (FIPAG);                            −   Children and Children heading
                                                 consumers;                               −     Water Southern Regional                 households;
                                                                                                Administration (ARA-SUL);           −   Elderly persons;
                                                                                                                                    −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                                                                                                                        physical and mental) which
                                                                                                                                        could be (but not only)
                                                                                                                                        represented         by   their
                                                                                                                                        associations;
                                                                                                                                    −   People living under chronic
                                                                                                                                        diseases;
                                                                                                                                    −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                                                                    −   Extremely poor persons


Component (C3): Water sector development support to improving the enabling environment for PSP
Subcomponent 3.1: Improvement of the        −    Technicians from implementing            −     Office of Studies and Projects of   −   Women and Girls who head
enabling environment for Private Sector          agencies;                                      the Ministry of Public works,           households;
Participation                               −    Private    Water      Providers                Housing and Water Resources         −   Children and Children heading
                                                 Associations (e.g AFORAMO)                     (MOPHRH-GEP)                            households;
                                            −    Private Water Providers;                 −     Water Regulathory Authority         −   Elderly persons;
                                                                                                (AURA);                             −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                                                                          −     National Directorate for Water          physical and mental) which
                                                                                                Supply       and      Sanitation        could be (but not only)
                                                                                                (DNAAS);                                represented         by   their
                                                                                          −     Professional Training Center for        associations;
                                                                                                Water and Sanitation;               −   People living under chronic
                                                                                          −     Water Southern Regional                 diseases;
                                                                                                Administration (ARA-SUL);           −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                                                                                                    27
                                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                   −     Water Regulathory Authority         −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                         (AURA);
                                                                                   −     Confederation of Economic
                                                                                         Association of Mozambique
                                                                                         (CTA);
                                                                                   −     Companies and associations
                                                                                         specialized in water training;
                                                                                   −     National Evironmetal Quality
                                                                                         Control Agency (AQUA)
                                                                                   −     Ministry of Health;
                                                                                   −     Mozambican Platform for Water
                                                                                         (PLAMA);
                                                                                   −     Ministery of Land and
                                                                                         Environment;
                                                                                   −     National Institute of Meteorology
                                                                                         (INAM);
                                                                                   −     National Institute for Disaster
                                                                                         Risk       Management         and
                                                                                         Reduction (INGD);
Subcomponent 3.2: Strengthening the   −   Technicians from implementing            −     Office of Studies and Projects of   −   Women and Girls who head
regulatory role of AURA                   agencies (e.g AURA);                           the Ministry of Public works,           households;
                                                                                         Housing and Water Resources         −   Children and Children heading
                                      −   Private    Water      Providers                (MOPHRH-GEP)                            households;
                                          Associations (e.g AFORAMO);              −     Water Regulathory Authority         −   Elderly persons;
                                      −   Private Water Providers;                       (AURA);                             −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                      −   Southern      Region     water           −     National Directorate for Water          physical and mental) which
                                          consumers;                                     Resources            Management         could be (but not only)
                                                                                         (DNGRH);                                represented         by   their
                                                                                   −     National Directorate for Water          associations;
                                                                                         Supply       and       Sanitation   −   People living under chronic
                                                                                         (DNAAS);                                diseases;
                                                                                   −     National Water Council (CAN);       −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                   −     Ministery of Land and               −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                         Environment;
                                                                                                                                                             28
                                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                  −     National Institute of Meteorology
                                                                                        (INAM);
                                                                                  −     National Institute for Disaster
                                                                                        Risk       Management         and
                                                                                        Reduction (INGD);
                                                                                  −     Water and Sanitation for the
                                                                                        Urban Poor;
                                                                                  −     Mozambican Plataform for
                                                                                        Water (PLAMA);
Subcomponent 3.3: Strengthen ARA-Sul   −   Southern      region   water           −     Office of Studies and Projects of   −   Women and Girls who head
capacity to manage water resources         consumers;                                   the Ministry of Public works,           households;
                                       −   Technicians from ARA-SUAL;                   Housing and Water Resources         −   Children and Children heading
                                       −   Womens           Empowerment                 (MOPHRH-GEP)                            households;
                                           Associations;                          −     Water Regulathory Authority         −   Elderly persons;
                                                                                        (AURA);                             −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                                                                  −     National Directorate for Water          physical and mental) which
                                                                                        Resources            Management         could be (but not only)
                                                                                        (DNGRH);                                represented         by   their
                                                                                  −     National Directorate for Water          associations;
                                                                                        Supply       and       Sanitation   −   People living under chronic
                                                                                        (DNAAS);                                diseases;
                                                                                  −     National Water Council (CAN);       −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                  −     Ministery of Land and               −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                        Environment;
                                                                                  −     National Institute of Meteorology
                                                                                        (INAM);
                                                                                  −     National Institute for Disaster
                                                                                        Risk       Management         and
                                                                                        Reduction (INGD);
                                                                                  −     Water and Sanitation for the
                                                                                        Urban Poor;
                                                                                  −     Mozambican Plataform for
                                                                                        Water (PLAMA);


                                                                                                                                                            29
                                                                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                         −     Water Southern Regional
                                                                                               Administration (ARA-SUL);
                                                                                         −     Fund for Investments and
                                                                                               Assets of Water Supply
                                                                                               (FIPAG);
                                                                                         −     Local Water and Sanitation
                                                                                               Committes;
                                                                                         −     Professional Training Center for
                                                                                               Water and Sanitation;
                                                                                         −     Women             Empowerment
                                                                                               Associations;
Subcomponent      3.4:      Institutional   −   Private    Water      Providers          −     Office of Studies and Projects of   −   Women and Girls who head
development support for FIPAG                   Associations;                                  the Ministry of Public works,           households;
                                            −   Private Water Providers;                       Housing and Water Resources         −   Children and Children heading
                                            −   Southern      Region     water                 (MOPHRH-GEP)                            households;
                                                consumers;                               −     Water Regulathory Authority         −   Elderly persons;
                                            −   Workers for PWP;                               (AURA);                             −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                            −   Technicians from FIPAG and               −     National Directorate for Water          physical and mental) which
                                                DNAAS;                                         Resources           Management          could be (but not only)
                                                                                               (DNGRH);                                represented         by   their
                                                                                         −     National Directorate for Water          associations;
                                                                                               Supply       and      Sanitation    −   People living under chronic
                                                                                               (DNAAS);                                diseases;
                                                                                         −     National Water Council (CAN);       −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                         −     Fund for Investments and            −   Extremely poor persons
                                                                                               Assets of Water Supply
                                                                                               (FIPAG);
                                                                                         −     Ministry of Health;
                                                                                         −     National Evironmetal Quality
                                                                                               Control Agency (AQUA)
                                                                                         −     Maputo Metropolitan Area
                                                                                               Water Company (AdRMM);
                                                                                         −     South Region Water Company
                                                                                               (AdRS);
                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                                   Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                       −     Mozambique Water Suppliers
                                                                                             Association (AFROMO);
                                                                                       −     Mozambican Platform for Water
                                                                                             (PLAMA);


Subcomponet 3.5: Preparatory studies    −    Technicians from implementing             −     Office of Studies and Projects of   −   Women and Girls who head
for the next generation of WSS               agencies;                                       the Ministry of Public works,           households;
investments                             −    Technicians from government                     Housing and Water Resources         −   Children and Children heading
                                             and/ or public institutions                     (MOPHRH-GEP)                            households;
                                             associated with the Water                 −     Maputo Metropolitan Area            −   Elderly persons;
                                             Sector;                                         Water Company (AdRMM);              −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                        −    Local Government Authorities;             −     South Region Water Company              physical and mental) which
                                        −    Operators, companies and                        (AdRS);                                 could be (but not only)
                                             formal businesses in the water            −     National Directorate for Water          represented         by   their
                                             sector;                                         Supply       and      Sanitation        associations;
                                        −    Private    Water      Providers                 (DNAAS);                            −   People living under chronic
                                             Associations;                             −     Water Regulathory Authority             diseases;
                                        −    Private Water Providers;                        (AURA);                             −   Illiterate persons;
                                        −    Southern      Region      water           −     Fund for Investments and            −   Extremely poor persons
                                             consumers;                                      Assets of Water Supply
                                        −    Workers from Civil constructions                (FIPAG);
                                             companies engaged in the                  −     Local Water and Sanitation
                                             project;                                        Committes;
                                        −    Project workers;                          −     Water aid;,
                                                                                       −     Ministry of Health;
                                                                                       −     National Evironmetal Quality
                                                                                             Control Agency (AQUA)
                                                                                       −     Professional Training Center for
                                                                                             Water and Sanitation;


Component (C4): Project Management Support


                                                                                                                                                                 31
                                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Subcomponent      4.1:   Technical    −   Technicians from FIPAG                  −     Fund for Investments and           −   Women and Girls who head
Assistance and Project Management     −   Technicians from government                   Assets of Water Supply                 households;
Support for FIPAG                         and/ or public institutions                   (FIPAG);                           −   Children and Children heading
                                          associated with the Water               −     Professional Training Center for       households;
                                          Sector;                                       Water and Sanitation;              −   Elderly persons;
                                      −   Labor Market (Skiled and semi-          −     Confederation of Economic          −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                          skilled labors)                               Association of Mozambique              physical and mental) which
                                                                                        (CTA)                                  could be (but not only)
                                                                                  −     Companies and associations             represented         by   their
                                                                                        specialized in water training;         associations;
                                                                                                                           −   People living under chronic
                                                                                                                               diseases;
                                                                                                                           −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                                                           −   Extremely poor persons
Subcomponent      4.2:    Technical   −   Technicians from DNAAS,                 −     Professional Training Center for   −   Women and Girls who head
Assistances and Project management        AURA and ARA-SUL;                             Water and Sanitation;                  households;
support for DNAAS                     −   Technicians from government             −     Confederation of Economic          −   Children and Children heading
                                          and/ or public institutions                   Association of Mozambique              households;
                                          associated with the Water                     (CTA)                              −   Elderly persons;
                                          Sector;                                 −     Companies and associations         −   Disabled persons (visual,
                                      −   Labor Market (Skiled and semi-                specialized in water training;         physical and mental) which
                                          skilled labors)                                                                      could be (but not only)
                                                                                                                               represented         by   their
                                                                                                                               associations;
                                                                                                                           −   People living under chronic
                                                                                                                               diseases;
                                                                                                                           −   Illiterate persons;
                                                                                                                           −   Extremely poor persons
Subcomponet 4.3: Support for the      −   Government of Mozambique                −     World BANK (WB)                    −   Women and Girls who head
Environmental and Social Compliance       (GdM)                                   −     Fund for Investments and               households;
                                      −   Technicians from implementing                 Assets of Water Supply             −   Children and Children heading
                                          agencies;                                     (FIPAG);                               households;
                                                                                                                           −   Elderly persons;
                                                                                                                                                           32
                          Stakeholder Engagement Plan



−   Technicians from government               −     National Directorate for Water      −   Disabled persons (visual,
    and/ or public institutions                     Supply       and       Sanitation       physical and mental) which
    associated with the Water                       (DNAAS);                                could be (but not only)
    Sector;                                   −     Water Regulathory Authority             represented         by their
−   Local Government Authorities;                   (AURA);                                 associations;
−   Local Government Authorities;             −     Water Southern Regional             −   People living under chronic
−   Operators, companies and                        Administration (ARA-SUL);               diseases;
    formal businesses in the water            −     Ministry of Public works,           −   Illiterate persons;
    sector;                                         Housing and Water Resources         −   Extremely poor persons
−   Private     Water      Providers                (MOPHRH);
    Associations;                             −     Ministry of Health;
−   Private Water Providers;                  −     National Evironmetal Quality
−   Southern       Region      water                Control Agency (AQUA);
    consumers;                                −     Ministery of Land and
−   Workers from Civil constructions                Environment;
    companies engaged in the                  −     National Institute of Meteorology
    project;                                        (INAM);
−   Owners of the areas that will be          −     National Institute for Disaster
    affected by the project, namely                 Risk      Management          and
    (1) people temporarily or                       Reduction (INGD);
    permanently affected (physical            −     Women              Empowerment
    and economic displacement) by                   Associations
    the civil construction works of
    the project and land acquisition;
    (2) people who derive their
    livelihood     from     common
    resources and have their access
    to them restricted due to project
    activities;




                                                                                                                       33
                                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan




4. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM

4.1 Summary of Stakeholder Engegement Undertaken during Project Preparation
During project preparation, the following public consultation / stakeholders engagement meetings were conducted
as shown in the table 2 below. The meetings related to ESSA preparation and disclosure, including the public
consultation undertaken on February 7th, 2025, were all conducted under WB leadership/ coordination. The three
public consutation for preparation of WB ESF instruments were under leadership of the Enviormental and Social
Consultant (ESC) team.
4.2 Engagement strategy and dissemination of project information
The table 3 summarize the engagement strategy for the different types of IAPs, taking into account their specific
features and needs. The SEP is dynamic and allows for adaptation to the needs over different contexts by
facilitating the incorporation of new categories of IAPs, as the implementation of the project requires.
4.3 Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs and Methods, Tools and Techniques for
    Stakeholder Engegement
The SEP below outlines the engagement process, methods, including sequencing, topics of consultations and
target stakeholders. The World Bank and the Borrower do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against project
stakeholders who share their views about Bank-financed projects




                                                                                                              34
                                                                       Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Table 2: Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation
 Subject         Date                Number of Venue                 Key Issues discussed
                                     participants
 ESSA         9th, September 08                     FIPAG                •     FIPAG has already an Environmental Policy (already shared dated of August 2022);
 Meeting with 2022                                                       •     FIPAG has a generic ESMP covering both construction and operation phases, that is
 FIPAG                                                                         attached to contracts with contractors;
                                                                         •     FIPAG has been undertaking public participation during the EIA process following the
                                                                               national guideline on PPP in EIA;
                                                                         •     FIPAG has been developing a GRM with WB assistance under the WASIS Project. A GRM
                                                                               Manual was prepared (already shared) and its implementation started in 2021;
                                                                         •     FIPAG has prepared ToR for consulting services for mapping of GBV service providers.
                                                                               The mapping shall cover all FIPAG’s intervention area;
                                                                         •     In Maputo and Xai‐Xai there are small water providers in conflict with FIPAG/AdRMM.
                                                                               AURA is mediating the conflict;
                                                                         •     The current ES Consultant will start in September six packs of trainings for key ES staff,
                                                                               tobe replicated by the key ES staff for other FIPAGs employees. (training plan/manual to
                                                                               beshared)
 ESSA         12th, September 05                    AdRMM                •     AdRMM is responsible for the ES management of all the assets operation. It was prepared
 Meeting with 2022                                                             and approved an Environmental Policy (already shared).
 AdRMM                                                                   •     Environmental procedures have been progressively being prepared and implemented,
                                                                         •     prioritizing the safety aspects (use of PPE, record of incidents, emergence fire response,
                                                                               risk management, solid wastes management ‐ already shared).
                                                                         •     AdRMM has a GRM mechanism with a green line. The number is identified on customer
                                                                               invoices.
                                                                         •     AdRMM has an insurance for compensation of no planned damages due to maintenance
                                                                               activities or even operation (such as rupture of a pipeline)
                                                                         •     No Resettlement Management Plan have been prepared.
                                                                         •     The company has a Code of Conduct for workers although it does not cover GBV/SEA/SH.
                                                                         •     AdRMM is trying to convince the water private providers (WPP) to by AdRMM bulk water
                                                                               at a lower cost. This water has better quality and the WPP could save energy costs.



                                                                                                                                                                       35
                                            Stakeholder Engagement Plan



ESSA         13th, September 04   ARA-Sul     •     There is no ESMS, ES Policy, procedures, or ES specifications for contractors.
Meeting with 2022                             •     ARA‐Sul has experience in working with WB and AfDB ES requirements
ARA-Sul                                       •     There was an experience of GRM implementation in Corumana Project, which is being
                                                    managed by Corumana staff.
ESSA         14th, September 05   AURA        •     The current evaluation indicators do not allow to identify the coverage of poorest
Meeting with 2022                                   households. A proposal to improve the current coverage indicator to assess gender issues
AURA                                                and vulnerable groups would be welcome;
                                              •     A mechanism to receive complaints via hotline and email is being prepared and will be
                                                    tested in the first half of 2023 (AURAnet);
                                              •     AURA monitors the water quality of the distribution network by checking the results of water
                                                    analyses carried out by the operator/provider and if necessary, using analysis kits and
                                                    complementary laboratory analyses.
                                              •     AURA was part of the commission created to mediate the conflict between FIPAG
                                              •     and private providers, which also included representatives of MOPHRH and AFORAMO,
                                                    which resulted in a MoU;
                                              •     AURA is preparing ToR for a diagnostic study on private water providers. It was considered
                                                    that will be important to include a stakeholder engagement specialist as a strong
                                                    stakeholder engagement process will be crucial to achieve conflict resolution.
ESSA         15th, September 04   AURA        •     There is an improvement in the relationship with the government since the signature of the
Meeting with 2022                                   MoU in December 2021, although there is a delay in the implementation of the agreed
AFORAMO                                             measures and little dissemination of the MoU beyond the Maputo metropolitan area, which
                                                    is causing some discredit in the process.
                                              •     There is lack of capacity and/or willing of local authorities in the licensing process of water
                                                    supply services which results in delay in licensing and lack of mapping of intervention areas,
                                                    which contributes to more conflict
                                              •     Water supply private providers (WSPP) should be trained and organised to improve the
                                                    quality of service to distribute bulk water
                                              •     The use of bulk water will reduce the risk of groundwater overexploitation.
                                              •     FIPAG should prioritise networks in areas with brackish water
                                              •     The current system of social tax attribution is only based on consumption, which does not
                                                    always reflect situations of vulnerability.
                                              •     WSPP are closer to the community and more able to identify vulnerable households. The
                                                    public sector should subsidise the private sector in the application of social tariff.
                                                                                                                                                 36
                                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan



ESSA         16th, September 06                DNGRH            •     DNGRH intends to stablish an ESMS as an umbrella for all ARAs which are already
Meeting with 2022                                                     prepared (shared). There will be need for less than 1 million USD for equipment and support
DNGRH                                                                 with technical assistance and training.
                                                                •     There were some previous experiences in implementing projects ES requirements under
                                                                      WB and AfDB ES requirements, although not transmitted to the new staff
ESSA         16th, September 06                FIPAG            •     All operational areas have labs for water quality monitoring, following the standards defined
Meeting with 2022                                                     in the Cession Agreement;
FIPAG                                                           •     FIPAG’s Planning Directorate have been engaged with AFORAMO and PLAMA
                                                                      (Mozambican Platform for Water)
Public         7th, February 2023 36           FIPAG            •     As the works will be mainly in urban and periurban areas it is not clear how there will be
Consultation                                                          risks on biodiversity.
Meeting for                                                     •     There is a need to engage municipalities and local leaders and clarify their roles, namely in
ESSA                                                                  the licensing of PWP.
preparation                                                     •     There is a risk of brackish water emerging due to over‐exploitation by private suppliers, who
and disclosure                                                        have their boreholes licensed by ARA‐Sul.
                                                                •     FIPAG must improve its ability to communicate before intervening on the field
                                                                •     The capacity to attend and respond to consumers must be strengthened.
                                                                •     ESSA recommends that the ESMS be in place before the start of the PforR implementation,
                                                                      but since it was felt that FIPAG has the capacity for environmental and social management
                                                                      it should be in year 1, to allow time to refine the procedures.
Public         22nd, March 2025   82 (Total)   Zunguza          •     Water access and infrastructure planning: Concerns were raised regarding the exclusion of
Consultation                                   Complex   in           certain neighborhoods from the planned water supply network, despite pipelines running
Meeting for                       39 Men       Moamba Sede            through these areas;
Preparations                                                    •     Local employment and labor practices: Stakeholders demanded a transparent and fair
of        E&S                     43 Women                            hiring process, with many recommending a lottery-based recruitment system to prevent
Instruments                                                           favoritism; participants also demanded young and local labor priorization in the process of
(see Appendix                                                         hiring workers for the project.
I          for                                                  •     Affordability and private sector regulation: There was widespread concern that water
Consultation                                                          supplied through private operators would be too expensive for vulnerable communities,
Report)                                                               especially the elderly and low-income households. Participants expressed concern that
                                                                      even if private operators are involved in the project, the poorest members of the community
Public         22nd, March 2025   43 (Total)   Salgadinhos
                                                                      may be excluded due to the higher prices these providers typically charge. While
Consultation                                   da      Mamã

                                                                                                                                                                 37
                                                                 Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Meeting for                       32 Men       Argentina, Xai-           FIPAGwater is generally more affordable, the fear is that partnerships with private vendors
Preparations                                   Xai city                  could compromise accessibility for low-income groups. There were also questions about
of        E&S                     11 Women                               whether private vendors would be permitted to draw water directly from FIPAG’s
Instruments                                                              infrastructure, and how quality control would be maintained in such cases;
(see Appendix                                                      •     Environmental safeguards and risk mitigation: Participants requested detailed
I          for                                                           environmental assessments to identify and mitigate risks, ensuring that local ecosystems
Consultation                                                             and water resources are protected; Risks of floodings and infiltration leading to poor quality
Report)                                                                  of water provision were especially raised in Xai-Xai. The risk of water contamination due to
                                                                         the proximity between the water pipes and the sewerage also come up in the discussion;
Public         22nd, March 2025   41 (Total)   Hotel Escola,
                                                                   •     Community engagement and project governance: There were strong calls for greater
Consultation                                   Cidade    de
                                                                         transparency, improved communication, and stronger grievance mechanisms to address
Meeting for                       38 Men       Inhambane
                                                                         resettlement concerns and service delivery complaints. Employment and labor practices
Preparations
                                                                         featured prominently in the discussion. Several community members noted that even when
of        E&S                     08 Women                               contractors are provided with lists of local artisans or are given specific guidelines for hiring
Instruments
                                                                         local labor, these are often not respected; Residents called for strong and continuous
(see Appendix
                                                                         engagement with local communities throughout the project lifecycle. It was noted that in
I          for
                                                                         some resettlement processes carried out in the past, affected persons were listed but never
Consultation
                                                                         contacted again. This created resentment and a sense of abandonment. Several
Report)
                                                                         participants stressed that consultants must work directly with the local population to build
                                                                         trust and support; Regarding the resettlement issue, it was suggested that before the
                                                                         physical displacement, basic live conditions should be provided in the areas designated to
                                                                         build the new settlements; Weak communication and lack of complaints feedback by FIPAG
                                                                         were also expressed as concerns. Communities raised dissatisfaction with the
                                                                         communication flow since pipes have been interrupted for more than three months and no
                                                                         reason is given, no information is disclosed, pipes are exposed, damaged and boreholes
                                                                         are closed with no information.
                                                                   •     Emphasis on the need for inter-institutional coordination during the planning and
                                                                         implementation phases: The interaction between the planned water infrastructure and
                                                                         existing energy system was one of the concerns raised over these subject. The location of
                                                                         energy infrastructure along the proposed pipeline route posed a risk to continuous service
                                                                         delivery if not properly managed; Weak coordination and conflict of interests between the
                                                                         National Institute for Disaster Risk Management and Reduction (INGD) and FIPAG since
                                                                         the first has maped all the risk areas and is advising households not to occupy these areas,
                                                                         yet contrary to their efforts, FIPAG has been expanding the supply of water throughout
                                                                         these risked areas. INGD highlighted the need of a strong coordination. They have offered
                                                                                                                                                                        38
Stakeholder Engagement Plan



        their availability to work together with the implementing agencies in order to avoid conflit of
        interests; Weak coordination between FIPAG and municipality council since many roads
        have been abandoned without restoration after excavation and water pipe laying;
  •     Mapping process of potential beneficiaries:Concerns raised over the methodology to map
        which area should be prioritized due to divergences among the differents points of views of
        the water consumers. Some consumers stated that there are some districts/ areas that were
        prioritized over others although having lesser water demand.
  •     Environmental considerations were also highlighted. A representative from the Provincial
        Environment Directorate requested specific information about the geographic areas to be
        impacted by the project. The objective was to ensure that all potential environmental risks
        could be appropriately assessed and mitigated in advance;
  •     Private Provider Partnership with public services: FIPAG-supplied water is too expensive
        for small-scale vendors and in the past, vulnerable individuals such as the elderly were
        given priority. However, the privatization process has led to the exclusion of many who
        cannot afford to pay, and this shift could generate new conflicts; FIPA has been imposing
        barriers for PWP to operate in some areas while FIPAG does not have enough capaticity to
        supply the demand of this areas;
  •     Implications of discontinuous water supply from FIPAG/AdRs and multiple concerns related
        to billing process and water leakages: This was a recurring theme since several
        stakeholders have raised concerns about the visible growth of private boreholes to satisfy
        the demand for water at the household level, resulting from multiple interruptions in the
        water supply, high rates of water leaks, which charges on consumers’ bills.
  •     Warnings were also issued about the risk that the growth of the private water well drilling
        segment posed to the health of households, since this water does not undergo appropriate
        quality tests to determine whether it is suitable for consumption. The colaborations of
        neighbourhoods representatives was to help discourage this practice and it was stressed
        that it is illegal;
  •     The space for the construction of resilient infraestructures must be carefully monitored.
        Coordination with other responsible stakeholders is a kay aspect. Cases of excavations of
        roads for the installation of water pipes and further abandonment without restoration would
        be avoided.
  •     Regarding GRM it is important to widely spread all the means so that it coud be effectively
        accessible. It is also important to provide the feedback of the grievances raised over the
        project implementation.

                                                                                                     39
Stakeholder Engagement Plan



  •     In terms of services the project should consider the possibility of including the
        implementation of pre-paid services via pre-paid meters.
  •     Resettlement issues: concerns were raised regarding unresolved past resettlement cases.
        Some households were included in resettlement lists but never contacted or compensated.
        Situations of water pipes running into private proprieties should be avoided. There are cases
        of projects that the resettled persons are displaced to regions where there is no basic
        services such as water and power supplies, although having these services in the previous
        lands (compensated). This resettlement framework should guide the process not displace
        persons before the provision of basics services like water and electricity.
  •     GBV/SEA/SH issues: concerns regarding the risk of early and unwanted pregnancy, which
        consequently leads to low levels of education, unemployment and increased poverty were
        expressed, also problems with GBV due to high labor influx and civil construction works
        within the community environment.




                                                                                                   40
                                                                       Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Table 3: Project stakeholders’ needs and engagement strategy
  Set of Interested       Key features     Language needs      Preferred means         Specific needs         Position        Level of influence     Appropriate
 and Afected Parties                                             of notification           (access         regarding the       (low, medium,         engagement
                                                                   (telephone,        assistance, daily   project (support,         high)             approach
                                                               television, radio,      care, childcare)     opposition,
                                                                  letter, direct                              neutral)
                                                               communication,
                                                                       etc.)
 Technicians      from Affected part      Portuguese     and Letter,      e-mail, N/A                     Support             High                 Coordinations
 implementing                             English            shocases in the                                                                       meetings/
 institutinos                                                offices, WhatsApp,                                                                    technical meetings
                                                             meetings, phone
                                                             calls,         direct
                                                             communication
                                                             (face-to-face)
 Project implementing Interested Part     Portuguese     and Letter,      e-mail, N/A                     Support             High                 Coordinations
 entities                                 English            shocases in the                                                                       meetings
                                                             offices, WhatsApp,
                                                             meetings, phone
                                                             calls,         direct
                                                             communication
                                                             (face-to-face)
 Private        Water Affected and Portuguese            and Letter,      e-mail, N/A                     Support             High                 Coordinations
 Providers            Interested Part English                shocases in the                                                                       meetings
                                                             offices, WhatsApp,
                                                             meetings, phone
                                                             calls,        direct
                                                             communication
                                                             (face-to-face),
                                                             newspaper
                                                             announcements,
                                                             TV

                                                                                                                                                                    41
                                                                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Companies       and Interested Part       Portuguese    and Letter,     e-mail, N/A                   Support   High     Coordinations
associations                              English           shocases in the                                              meetings
specialized in water                                        offices, newspaper
training                                                    announcements,
                                                            TV
Technicians       from Affected Part      Portuguese          Letter,     e-mail, N/A                 Support   High     Coordinations;
government and/ or                                            shocases in the                                            meetings, focus
public     institutions                                       offices, meetings                                          group discussions.
associated with the
water sector
Water          company Affected Part      Portuguese    and Letter, e-mail, IEC N/A                   Support   Low      Coordinating and
workers                                   English           materials,                                                   advocacy
                                                            newspaper                                                    meetings; focus
                                                            announcements,                                               group discussions;
                                                            TV
Water informal sector Affected Part       Portuguese and IEC materials, TV, N/A                       Support   Low      Coordinating and
operators                                 other dialects radio, newspaper,                                               advocacy
                                                         local leadership                                                meetings; focus
                                                                                                                         group discussions;
                                                                                                                         individual meetings
Construction            Interested Part   Portuguese          IEC materials, TV, N/A                  Support   Medium   Coordinating and
companies                                                     radio, newspaper,                                          advocacy
                                                              local leadership                                           meetings; focus
                                                                                                                         group discussions;
                                                                                                                         individual meetings
Inhabitants of project Affected Part      Portuguese and IEC materials, TV,          Transport to the Support   Low      Public
influence areas                           other local dialects radio, newspaper,     consultation                        consultations;
                                                               local leadership,     location, need for a                focus        group
                                                               community-based       translator in the                   discussions;
                                                               organizations         local     language,                 individual meetings
                                                                                     Snacks at the                       (wherever
                                                                                     meeting, subject to                 applicable);

                                                                                                                                          42
                                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                              the      estimated                   advocacy
                                                                              duration of meeting                  meetings.
Groups of women and Vulnerable   Portuguese and Letters,              IEC     Daytime meetings,                    Advocacy
girls               Group        other local dialects materials,      TV,     arrangement       of                 meetings; focus
                                                      radio, community        transportation to                    group discussions;
                                                      leaders,                meeting location in                  targeted surveys;
                                                      notification to the     case of long                         identify and consult
                                                      local associations      distances;                           with     community
                                                      that work with          scheduling        of                 members         who
                                                      these groups            meetings          at                 represent women
                                                                              suitable times that                  from        minority
                                                                              facilitate     their                 groups.
                                                                              attendance;
                                                                              provison          of
                                                                              assistance        to
                                                                              minors under the
                                                                              care       of  their
                                                                              mothers       while
                                                                              attending
                                                                              meetings; when
                                                                              necessary,
                                                                              provison          of
                                                                              assistance      with
                                                                              translation     into
                                                                              local languages
Disabled persons    Vulnerable   Portuguese and                               Ensure that there is Support   Low   Public
                    Group        other local dialects                         special access for                   consultations,
                                                                              disabled persons,                    focus        group
                                                                              provison          of                 discussions;
                                                                              assistance     with                  individual
                                                                              translation     into                 meetings;
                                                                              local languages,                     meetings       with
                                                                              companion for the                    representatives of
                                                                              visually impaired,
                                                                                                                                     43
                                                                    Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                                                   availability   of                      the assossiations
                                                                                   transport                              of these groups.
People living under Vulnerable          Portuguese and Community              Ensure that there is Support       Low      Public
chronic diseases    Group               other local dialects meetings, radio, special       access;                       consultations;
                                                             social media     focus           group                       focus        group
                                                                              discussions and                             discussions;
                                                                              community                                   individual meetings
                                                                              meetings;
                                                                              transport
                                                                              availability;
                                                                              translation       into
                                                                              local language
Illiterate persons         Vulnerable   Local dialects     Community               transport           Support   Low      Community
                           Group                           leadership;             availability;                          consultations;
                                                           community radio;        translation    into                    focus        group
                                                           door to door            local language                         discussions;
                                                           communication
Extremely            poor Vulnerable    Portuguese and Community                   transport           Support   Low      Community
persons                   Group         other local dialects leadership;           availability;                          consultations;
                                                             community radio;      translation    into                    focus        group
                                                             door to door          local language                         discussions;
                                                             communication
Owners of the areas Affected Part       Portuguese and IEC materials, TV, Translation         into Oposition     Medium   Public
that will be affected by                other local dialects radio; leadership local language                             consultations;
the project, namely (1)                                      and local authority;                                         focus        group
people temporarily or                                        local newspaper;                                             discussions,
permanently affected                                         targeted                                                     individual meetings
(physical           and                                      notifications.
economic
displacement) by the
civil      construction
works of the project
and land acquisition;
                                                                                                                                           44
                                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan



(2) people who derive
their livelihood from
common resources
and have their access
to them restricted due
to project activities
National        and Other          Portuguese,          Letters, e-mails, N/A               Support   Medium   Public
Iternational ONGs, Interested      English,       other IEC       materials,                                   consultations;
community-based      Parties       other local dialects phone calls, direct                                    advocacy
organizations, local                                    communication                                          meetings;
assossiations                                           (face-to-face)                                         meetings       with
                                                                                                               ONGs
                                                                                                               representatives
Local Water       and Interested   Portuguese and IEC materials, TV, N/A                    Support   High     Public
Sanitation            Parties      other local dialects radio;        local                                    consultations;
Committees                                              leadership     and                                     focus        group
                                                        local     authority;                                   discussions
                                                        local newspaper;
Private        Water Affected and Portuguese and Letters, e-mails, N/A                      Support   Medium   Coordination
Provider Associations Interested  other local dialects IEC       materials,                                    meetings; Public
                      Parties                          phone calls, direct                                     consultations;
                                                       communication                                           advocacy
                                                       (face-to-face)                                          meetings; group
                                                                                                               discussions




                                                                                                                                45
                                                                            Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Table 4: Proposal of the Plan for Consultation of IAPs in the Project
       Project Stage               Target Stakeholder         Topic of Consultation/              Method used                Responsability        Frequency/ Timeline
                                                                    message
 Preparation            and Government         institution −     Disclosure of the Coordination            and MOPHRH, FIPAG                     March – April 2025
 Assessment Stage           engaged in the project               Urban Water Security advocacy meetings;
                            (e.g.             MOPHRH,            Project;             Focus group discussions;
                            implementing agencies,
                            Ministry of Finace, Ministry                                   Individual meetings;
                            of               Agriculture,                                  Technical Visits;
                            Environment,              and
                            Fisheries.       Municipality                                  One-on-one interviews
                            councils,
                            local/district/provincial
                            government          amongst
                            other            government
                            interested parties;
                               Water Private Providers
                               Associations;
                               World Bank;
                               Project Implementation
                               Partners
                                                            −    Environmental and Coordination                    and MOPHRH and FIPAG          March – April 2025
                               •    Key        government
                                                                 Social Commitment business meetings
                                    institution for the          Plan.
                                    project;
                               •    WB.


                               Government     institution −      Stakeholder               Technical consultations;      MOPHRH, FIPAG           March – April 2025
                               engaged in the project at         Engagement      Plan, Personal and               Public Safeguard team from
                                                                                       consultations;                    implementing agencies

                                                                                                                                                                         46
                                                                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                       national, provincial and           including Grievance Disclosure of information
                       district scale;                    Redress Mechanism. on the webside of WB,
                                                                              MOPHRH, FIPAG.
                       NGOs,                related
                       associations,        private
                       providers, implementing
                       partners, donors and
                       general     public, with
                       special attention to women
                       and vulnerable groups,
                       PAPs and other IAPs
                       Government         institution −   ESMF and RPF               Technical consultations;    MOPHRH, FIPAG            March – April 2025
                       engaged in the project,            disclosure, including      Personal and        Public Safeguard team from
                       local authorities;                 description of LMP,        consultations;             implementing agencies
                       NGOs,                related       GRM              and
                                                          GBV/SEA/SH        risk     Disclosure of information
                       associations,        private
                                                          assessment       and       on the webside of WB,
                       providers, implementing
                                                          action plan                MOPHRH, FIPAG.
                       partners, donors and
                       general     public, with
                       special attention to women
                       and vulnerable groups,
                       and other PAIs
Implementation stage   Project Affected Persons, −        Conception,            Public and community            PIU – MOPHRH, FIPAG    To be defined by the PIU
                       Public     and     private         Selection, Design and consultations;                                          during the conception,
                                                                                                                 Safeguard team for the
                       interested        parties,         Screening           of Focus group discussions;                               selection and design
                                                                                                                 implementing agencies,
                       vulnerables       groups,          Subprojects                                                                   phase of the subprojects,
                                                                                                                 including PTUs
                       ONGs, community-based                                     Media, websites and water                              before their approval
                       organizations,     district                               platforms
                       government and WB
                       Project Affected Persons, −        ESIA      for       the Public and community PIU – MOPHRH, FIPAG                To be defined by the PIU
                       Public     and     private         subprojects             consultations;                                          prior to commencement of
                                                                                                           Safeguard team for the
                       interested parties                                                                                                 activities in subprojects
                                                                                  Focus group discussions; implementing agencies,
                                                                                                                                          requiring this instruments
                                                                                                           including PTUs
                                                                                                                                                                  47
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                                                             Media, websites and water
                                                             platforms
Project Affected Persons, −       ESMP       for      the Public and community PIU – MOPHRH, FIPAG               To be defined by the PIU
Public     and      private       subprojects             consultations;                                         prior to commencement of
                                                                                    Safeguard team for the
interested parties, ONGs,                                                                                        activities in subprojects
                                                          Focus group discussions; implementing agencies,
community-based                                                                                                  requiring this instruments;
                                                                                    including PTUs
organizations,      district                              Media, websites and water
government and WB.                                        platforms
Project Affected Persons;     −   RAP       for       the Public and community PIU – MOPHRH, FIPAG               To be defined by the PIU
                                  subprojects             consultations;                                         prior to commencement of
Public     and      private                                                         Safeguard team for the
                                                                                                                 activities in subprojects
interested         parties,                               Focus group discussions; implementing agencies,
                                                                                                                 requiring this instruments;
community-based                                                                     including PTUs
                                                          Media, websites and water
organizations, Technical                                                                                         Consultations will be
                                                          platforms.
Committee for Supervision                                                                                        carried out continuously
and      Monitoring      of                                                                                      through      out      the
Resettlement (CTASR),                                                                                            implementation stage.
Resettlement       Service
Provider (PROSIR)
Affected and interested       −   Project      Progress      Community meetings;         PIU – MOPHRH, FIPAG     To be defined by the PIU
communities,       project        Reports;                   Notice boards;             Safeguard team for the
stakeholders, ONGs; WB;       −   Audit Reports;                                        implementing agencies,
Implementing Agencies;        −   GRM Reports;               Media, project green line,
                                                                                        including PTUs
Government authorities        −   Stakeholder                SMS,             Website,
(at local, provincial and         Feedback Reports.          Community notice board,
central level); Resident                                     Community radio.
Supervising from the
subprojects
Women       and     other
vulnerable groups will be
consulted separatly



                                                                                                                                            48
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




4.4 Proposed Strategy to incorporate the views of vulnerable groups
The project will seek the views of women and girls heading households, children and children heading households,
elderly and disabled persons, people living under chronic diseases, illiterate persons, extremely poor persons and
other vulnerable groups. Thus, apart from community overall consultation, specific meetings with vulnerable groups
through focus groups meetins/ discussios will be undertaken.
The SEP will be flexible and dynamic so that updated issues can be accommodated throughout the project life
cycle. A social assessment will identify further and detailed issues for vulnerable groups throughout the EIAs and
ESMPs preparation theraby the SEP will absorve the appropriate changes.
Therefore, the following measures shoud be taken in order to remove obstacles to full and enabling participation /
access to information:
Involvement of women in specific engagement groups on an ongoing basis throughout the project life cycle.
Women should be encouraged to contribute to the decision-making process on diverse issues such as livelihoods,
inclusion of community infrastructure, equal opportunities, representation over different discussion forums, whether
community, local, institutional or governmental;
    •    Regarding women heading households, additional measures should be taken in consideration in order to
         strengthen their participation, such as: arrangement of transportation to meeting location in case of long
         distances; scheduling of meetings at suitable times that facilitate their attendance; provison of assistance
         to minors under the care of their mothers while attending meetings; when necessary, provison of
         assistance with translation into local languages ensuring their representation at meetings;
    •    In case of vulnerable groups represented by associations, it should be suitable if the dissemination of the
         information and their engagement would be carried out through their respective associations, ensuring its
         organizational principles and values are accommodated into the implementation of the project, otherwise
         the engagement should be undertaken through ONGs, associations or community-based assotiations.




                                                                                                                  49
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




5. RESOURCES AND RESPONSABILITIES FOR IMPLEMENTING STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGEMENT
Adequate human, financial and technical resources will be provided for the implementation of the SEP over the
project life cycle.
5.1 Implementation Arrangements and Resources
The overall responsibility for the implementation of the SEP lies with the Project Implementation Unit under the
Project Coordinator with the direct support from the Environmental and Social specialist and other related staff that
may be brought on board (such as GBV for instance) in the PIU hosted by FIPAG. DNAAS will host a second PIU.
The Environmental and Social safeguards Team must maintain an IAPs database (including terms of commitment,
if necessary) throughout the project life cycle. The SEP activities will also be implemented along with the site-
specific instruments (ESIA/ESMP) both through ESIA consultants and the Contractors who will be involved in the
project construction works. Thus, at this level AURA and ARA-Sul will be involved through their E&S safeguards
specialiats from the Project Technical Units (PTUs) they will host..
Procurement Arrangements are fundamental on the process of stakeholder engagement and liaising so that
activities can flow through the appropriate channels without constraints. The two PIUs hosted by FIPAG and
DNAAS respectively and the PTU hosted by AURA-Sul will manage procurement related to its activities. ARA-Sul
will need capacity building on procurement and FM support.
Effective coordination and collaboration mechanisms are crucial for the successful implementation of the SEP.
These mechanisms will include:
   • Inter-ministerial Project Steering Committee: Established by the Government to provide strategic
        oversight and decision-making. The committee comprises representatives from MPWHWR, FIPAG,
        DNASS, ARA-Sul, AURA, AIAS, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Agriculture, Environment,
        and Fisheries (MAAP), and other relevant stakeholders. Meetings will be held twice a year or quarterly as
        needed;
   • Regular Coordination Meetings: Held among FIPAG, DNASS, ARA-Sul, AIAS, IP, AURA, and other
        stakeholders to enhance communication and collaboration;
   • Project Implementation Unit (PIU): Set up within FIPAG to oversee compliance with E&S requirements,
        staffed by:
              o       One Environmental Specialist;
              o       One Social Development Specialist;
              o       One Gender-Based Violence (GBV) and Gender Specialist;
              o       One Environmental Advisor.
    •     Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs): Implemented to address complaints effectively and ensure
          prompt resolution. The implementation of GRM will flow from the bottom (contractors and TUs) to the Top
          (PIUs).
    •     Collaboration with International Partners: Ensuring alignment with best practices and standards.
    •     Capacity Building Initiatives: Workshops, guidelines, preparation of E&S instruments, and technical
          support to improve institutional capacity.
The PIU hosted by FIPAG will be responsible for coordinating the implementation, monitoring, and reporting of
E&S compliance for all project activities. Clear roles, responsibilities, and collaboration mechanisms are essential
to ensuring that the project adheres to the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) of the World Bank and
achieves its intended objectives.




                                                                                                                  50
                                                       Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Figure 2: Flowchar of SEP Implementation Arrangement




                                                                                     51
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




During the activities execution phase, the PIU must ensure that monitoring and verification of compliance with the
SEP is carried out, as well as that the TUs and contractors prepare Progress Reports to be submitted to the central
PIUs and the WB.
Safeguards technicians from the implementing TUs may be supported by Community Liaison Officers/ E&S SGs
specialists from the contractor, responsible for implementing the subprojects, also in charge of monitoring all
resettlement activities (PROSIR), where applicable, compensations and community engagement meetings in the
interventions areas. The TUs should have primary responsibility for implementing the GRM.
The budget estimated for preparing and implementing SEP is US$ 430 525 as shown below in the table 5 and will
be funded through Component 4 (C4) – Project Management Support.




                                                                                                                52
                                                                         Stakeholder Engagement Plan




Table 5: Proposed Budget for Project Implementation
                           Activity                                                                    Quantity   Unit                   Unit        Cost Estimated Cost
                                                                                                                                         (USD)            (USD)
 General costs             Consultation/ Participatory planning, decision-making meetings              56         Meetings                        2 500,00     140 000,00
                           Operations of a free hotline for disseminating information and 60                      Months                           200,00       12 000,00
                           receiving complaints
                           Maitenance of information on websites of the MOPHRH and the 60                         Months                           300,00       18 000,00
                           project implementing agencies
                           Newspaper advertisements/ announcements                                     40         Announcements                    500,00       20 000,00
                           Local radio announcements/ programs                                         50         Announcements                    100,00        5 000,00
                           Project information leaflets (IEC material)                                 10         Packages/ Units                 1 500,00      15 000,00
                           Internal and external verification of implementation of SEP and GRM         5          Verification/ audits           10 000,00      50 000,00
                           Worshops/ training to promote E&S instruments                               30         Units                           1 500,00      15 000,00
                           Rental of rooms and venues for training/ meetings                           30         Units                           1 000,00      30 000,00
                           Annual meeting with IAPs                                                    5          Meetings                        2 500,00      12 500,00
 SUBTOTAL                                                                                                                                                      317 500,00
 CENTRAL                   Operating Costs - SEP
                           Acquisition of equipaments (cameras, telephones, computers)                 02         Budget                         10 000,00      20 000,00
                           Travel (Hotel, accommodation)                                               50         Nights                           200,00       10 000,00
                           Vehicle/ transport/ fuel                                                    48         Months                          1 000,00      48 000,00
                           Flight Tickets                                                              30         Round trip                        50,00       15 000,00


 Subtotal                                                                                                                                                       93 000,00

                                                                                                                                                                       53
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan




TOTAL                                               410 000,00
CONTINGENCIES (10%)                                  20 525,00
GRAND TOTAL                                         430 525,00




                                                            54
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




6. GRIEVANCE MECHANISM
A Grievance Mechanism is a system that allows not only grievances, but also queries, suggestions, positive
feedback, and concerns of project-affected parties related to the environmental and social performance of a project
to be submitted and responded to in a timely manner. Amongst the grievances and complains that the IAPs may
present, the following stand out:
Project negative impacts on communities – finantial losses, physical harms and nuisance from the civil works and/
or from the operational activities of the project;
    •    Health and Safety risks – dangerous circulations of civil works vehicles; emission of fumes and dust from
         the machinery and civil works vehicles; disputs of spaces over the community roads, between the civil
         works vehicles and community members;
    •    Community land ownership concerns related to resettlement and compensation process;
    •    Negative impacts on the surrounding environment – west management, water contamination,
         exacerbation soil erosion, habitat distruction, etc;
    •    Unnacceptable behavior by the contactor’ staff or employees, including disrespect for local cultural norms;
         gender-based violence, including sexual explotation and abuse, and sexual harassment;
    •    Project workers-related concerns for construction works conditions – project commitment with national
         labor law, as well as international standards (H&S work requirements).
Within the engagement scope of the IAPs, the GRM should promote IAPs engagement through awareness of the
availability of mechanisms to present their grievances and complaints related to the project implementation and
getting feedback without costs or fear of reprisals.
The GRM should be deployed before the project starts and widely disseminated to the IAPs. The level of
stakeholders engagement will also be measured by the accessibility of the GRM and the degree of severety of the
grievances that araise throughout the lifecycle of the project, as well as its feedback flows.
The stakeholders involved in the implementation of SEP, including community leaders, E&S safeguard experts,
Technical Units (TU) and other stakeholders that may be indicated at the implementation level of the subprojects
play a key role in the engagement of the IAPs and grievances and complaints resolution.
The project GRM should be periodically reviewed, modified and adapted to the context of the specific subprojects
or activities.
6.1 Discription of Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
Complaint resolution forums should be stablished at three levels, namely: (i) Technical Unit level which is
responsible for the implementation of specific activities in the project/ subcomponents of the projects; (ii) Project
Implementation Central Unit level; (iii) Project Community Management level. The main activities of the mentioned
forum include: (i) deliberate on complex issues and stakeholder complaints that are presented over the project
cycle; (ii) collectively find appropriate solutions, seek constructive results and, whenever is required, formulate
responses on behalf of the project to be communicated to the appropriate stakeholders.
Within the existent cultural and legal frameworks, the GRM will encompass three boards of grievances and
complaints resolutions, namely (i) community or public board; (ii) project management/ implementation board
(includes Technical Unit level and Central Unit level); and (iii) Mozambican judicial system. The mechanism should
be guided by the schema presented below, through figure 2 and detailed in the table 6.




                                                                                                                  55
                                                Stakeholder Engagement Plan



 Figure 3: Flowchart of the General Grievance Redress Mechanism Procedure

                                                  Toll-free telephone hotline
Step I             Grievance uptake               E-mai
                                                                                                                               End
                                                  Grievance Register Forrn; Letter
                                                  Complaint Book; Complaint Box
                                                  In-person at physical facility
                                                  Online form (websites)


                                                  Logged in the GRM Log
                      Sorting and
Step II                                           Categorize as:
                      processing
                       grievance                      −     Community Grievance
                                                      −     Labor Grievance
                                                      −     VBG/SEA/SH Grievance


                                                                         No    Notify the
                                                          Validate
                                                                              complainant

                                                Yes
                                                                                                                        Implement the
                                                                                                                      solution/agreement
Step                                                                               Step
                    Aknowledgement
 III                 and Follow-up                                                 VI (a)
                                                                                                                     Notify the complainant
                                                                                                                    and reach an agreement



 Step               Verification and
  IV                 Investigation




                      Grievance                                                                                          Yes
Step V                                                Solution Proposal                                    Accept
                      Resolution

                                                                                   No


                                                           Central PIU
                                                          intervention




                                                                                        Grievance solved
                                                          MOHRH GRC




                         Grievance not solved
                                                          intervention
Step
VI (b)
                                                            PMC GM
                                                          intervention




                                                          Court system
                                                          intervention



                                                                                                                                       56
                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan




At the level of local communities there are cultural and traditional mechanisms for solving problems through family
structures, as well as community and/ or traditional leaders. It is expected that some of the disputes that arise at
the local level can be resolved using these mechanisms, without the direct involvement of the proponent, contractor
or government representatives at the local and national levels. However, issues raised by the Project such as
increased levels of land disputes involving areas for Project implementation must have the official involvement of
local authorities and the owner(s) of the land in question.
When problems caused by the project are raised and resolved through existing community resolution mechanisms,
the local government structure should report to the project for recording and acknowledgment. Therefore, all
complaints and grievances, including the results of the resolution process and the persons involved, are recorded
in the Project. It is expected that any disputes at this level can be resolved appropriately. Otherwise, they are
transferred to the next level.
    A. Grievances Redress Principles
The team involved in the receipt, review and response to grievances relating to the project will be guided by the
following principles:
    •    All complainants should be treated with courtesy, equally and fair at all times;
    •    If the complainant does not want to be exposed, he/she should be treated as anonymous;
    •    All complaints should be treated seriously, regardless the channel through which the complaint was
         presented, whether by telephone, by letter, by e-mail or other means. Regardless of form of
         communication and submission (Irrespective of the means of presenting the grievance, the grievance
         shall be registered in a standard Grievance Registry Form, see Appendix II);
    •    All complaints should be registered, documented and responded in writing;
    •    Timescales set down within the adopted procedures should be made public through meetings with the
         stakeholders;
    •    No complainant should be treated less favourably than anyone else because of their:
               o Gender, social and marital status or age;
               o Residence status, provincial origin or location;
               o Sexual orientation;
               o Colour, race, ethnic or nationality origin;
               o Religious or political believes or affiliation;
               o Institutional affiliation;
               o Other unjustifiable factors such as language, age, etc.;
    •    All complainants, if requiring, will receive assistance in making and filing their complaint by the board in
         charge of GRM;
    •    All complaints should be treated with confidentiality and confidential treatment of all information, personal
         and institutional facts relating to the complaint.




                                                                                                                   57
                                                                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Table 6: Illustrative table on GRM Steps – to be adjusted to each project/ subproject
 Steps                  Description of Process                                                                                    Timeframe   Responsability
 GM                     Complaint resolution forums should be stablished at three levels, namely:
 implementation
                             •   Technical Unit level which is responsible for the implementation of specific activities in the
 structure
                                 project/ subcomponents of the projects;
                             •   Project Implementation Central Unit level;
                             •   Project Community Management level.
                        Within the existent cultural and legal frameworks, the GRM will encompass three boards of grievances
                        and complaints resolutions, namely (i) community or public board; (ii) project management/
                        implementation board (includes Technical Unit level and Central Unit level); and (iii) Mozambican
                        judicial system.
 Grievance uptake            •   Step 1:
 (Receive and Track
 Complaints)                      Ensure the GRM is accessible to all IAPs - regular meetings, dedicated telephone
                                  line(s), complaints box, and physical register books, e-mails, on-line forms and
                                  websites - operational and available on each work site and surrounding areas related
                                  to the project. Thus the Complaints Officer/ Local grievances focal point completes
                                  the form in case of oral complaints and records all complaints in a simple electronic
                                  database, with a back-up regularly maintained in progress reports.
                        Grievances can be submitted via the following channels:
                             •   Toll-free telephone hotline (800700680), SMS/WhatsApp operated by the E&S PIU team;
                             •   E-mail (e-mail address to be set and activated) operated by the E&S PIU team;
                             •   Latter to PIU or implementation agency/ Subproject implementation TU (the address should
                                 be provided once the PIU is consolidated) or to the consultants hired;
                             •   Grievance register form / complaints book/ or suggestion boxes located in the public or
                                 community institutions related to the project, contractor camps and work fronts, strategic
                                 areas of community neighbourhoods surrounding or near by project implementation areas;



                                                                                                                                                               58
                                                                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                     •   In-person at a physical facility such as public or community institutions related to the project,
                         contractor camps, project affected neighbourhood headquarters;
                     •   Online form on the PIU/ implementation agencies website;
                     •   Corporate WB Grievance Redress Service: http://www.worldbank.org/GRS; e-mail:
                         grievances@worldbank.org)
                     •   WB’s Inspection Panel: ipanel@worldbank.org or to the fallowing address: Inspection Panel,
                         World BANK, 1818 H Street NW, Mail Stop: MC10-1007 Washington, DC 20433 USA. Cell.:
                         +1 (202) 458-5200; Fax: +1 (202) 522-0916
Sorting,             •   Step 2;                                                                                             Upon receipt of Local grievance focal points
processing                                                                                                                   complaint
(Preliminary             Any complaint received is forwarded to corresponding Subproject Unit Implementation/
Assessment of the        Technical Unit/ Contractor/ grievances focal point; logged in GRM log; categorized according
Claim)                   to the following complaint types: community grievance; labor grievance; GBV/SEA/SH
                         grievance.
Acknowledgement      •   Step 3                                                                                              Within 2 days of Local grievance focal points
and      follow-up                                                                                                           receipt
                         Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged to the complainant by the targeted Subproject Unit
(Initial Response
                         through the local grievance focal point.
to Complainant)
                         Human Resources, through the Complaints Officer, will write or communicate verbally (as
                         appropriate) to the complainant within 2 days to explain the complaints management
                         process.
Verification,        •   Step 4:                                                                                             Within 5 working Complaint      Committee
investigation,                                                                                                               days             composed of Contractor,
                         Investigation of the complaint is led by GRC;
action                                                                                                                                        Resident Supervisor and
                     •   Step 5:                                                                                                              Community/ Municipalty
                                                                                                                                              authority representatives/
                         A proposed resolution is formulated by GRC;
                                                                                                                                              PROSIR
                     •   Step 6:
                         Communication to the complainant is carried out by the GRC’s head. A seeking of an
                         agreement of the proposed solution between the GRC and the complainant is required; The
                         Complaint Officer/ GRC/ PROSIR follows up with the complainant to ensure his satisfaction

                                                                                                                                                                      59
                                                                           Stakeholder Engagement Plan



                               with the resolution and obtains written agreement from the complainant who confirms his
                               position and files the documents in the database.
                          •    Step 7:
                               Implementation of the response to resolve the grievance based on the egreement reached
                               in the previous step, then Close the complaint if everthing is sort-out.
Monitoring   and The Contractor Complaints Officer (Social Control Officer) and Safeguards Team monitor on a Monthly                            GRC/ SCO/ RS /PROSIR
evaluation       monthly basis the number and type of complaints received, resolved and pending and report to the
                 RS. Data on complaints are collected from Grievance register form / complaints book/ or suggestion
                 boxes every 15 days and reported to the RS monthly.
                      The information of number, purpose/expectation of grievances submitted and status of resolution of
                      grievances will be shared with the PIU monthly and will be included in routine performance reports.
                      The RS and contractor (for overall project operations activities) and PROSIR as well as the PIU GRM
                      representative assess the trends over time and stages of Project development.
Provision         of The Complaint Officer/ GRC/ PROSIR follows up with the complainant to ensure his satisfaction with Throughout the GRC/ SCO/ SCO/ PROSIR
feedback             the resolution and obtains written agreement from the complainant who confirms his position and files complaint redress
                     the documents in the database                                                                         process
Appeals process       The subproject responsible for the grievance should be strive to come up with a solution within 5 days.
                      Otherwise, the following steps should be taken:
                          •    Step 8:
                               Scalate the grievance to the next level if no agreement was met.
                                  i.     The first instance of appeal refers to the intervention of the Central PIU and should Within 10 days   Central PIU GRC
                                         not exceed 10 days after notification;
                                  ii.    The second instance of appeal refers to the MOPHRH intervention and should not Within 15 days          MOPHRH GRC
                                         exceed 15 days after notification;
                                 iii.    The third instance of appeal refers to Project Management Committee (PMC) and Within 21 days           PMC Grieavance Manager
                                         should not exceed 21 days;
                                 iv.     In addition, if one of the side remains dissatisfied, the affected party can take the Depends       on Court
                                         claim to the court where it will be treated in accordance with Mozambican law         Mozambican law

                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan



    B. Labor-related Grievances
There will be specific procedures in place to deal with labor grievances in accordance with ESS2 and national
legislation to be detailed in the LMP that is part of the ESMF for this project. This labor GRM will have clear
mechanisms to immediately notify the WB in the events of specific complains or grievances.
    C. Gender-Based Violence/ Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual Harrassment-related Grievances
Specific procedures for handling complaints and grievances related to GBV/SEA/SH situations should be
estabilished considering confidentiality provisions, as well as secure and ethical documentation, such as:
    •   Establishment of a specific mechanism, administered by a specialized service provider with feedback to
        the project GRM; specific project workers should be trained on how to confidentially document
        GBV/SEA/SH cases;
    •   The project should provide multiple complaint channels;
    •   No identifiable information about the survivor should b stored in the GRM logbook or database;
    •   No identifiable information about the victims should be stored in the GRM logbook or database;
    •   The GRM should assist victims of GBV/SEA/SH by referring them to spcialist Services Providers to
        immediate support after receiving a grievance.
Therefore, after receiving a case of GBV/SEA/SH complaints, it shoud be referred to the general project GRM and
sent immediately to the PIU Social Safeguard Specialist, considering the Survivor Centered Approach.
For GBV/SEA/SH related cases, a committee for reception and analysis of GBV cases composed by the Social
Control Officer (SCO) and Community Based Organization related with the GBV to be identified in the area of the
project should be considered as responsible for capturing the basic information related with the case.
The committee should share the complaint with the PIU Social Safeguard Specialist within 24 hours from the time
of the event. The event shall be reported to the WB safeguard team within 24 hours.
The following survivor-centered response to a GBV complaint should be followed:
    1. The GBV specialist of the GBV Service Provider receiving the report prioritizes psychological support as
       the first support to the survivors. Also, must ensure that the complainant understands the confidentiality
       policy and that is her/his choice to file a formal report;
    2. The complainant should be given information on available external support (e.g. medical, legal, financial,
       psychosocial support) by the GBV service provider;
    3. The survivors should give the consent;
    4. Listen and inform the survivor of potential steps that could be taken, action to be done by the GBV service
       provider;
    5. Let survivors lead the process and decide if, when, and how to report;
    6. Upon receipt of a GBV complaint report, only administrative investigation should be done by a GRM
       committee for GBV (GBV service provider, contractor, engineer and PIU). Ideally, investigations should
       occur within three business days of the report; Before the administrative investigation start, the SCO must
       precautionary measure to protect the survivor if she/he agrees with. E.g. place the perpetrator temporarily
       on another team until the investigation is complete;
    7. The perpetrator should be given an opportunity to answer the allegations in writing and to produce
       evidence to the contrary; He should be formally informed of the results of the investigation. He must
       acknowledge receipt of the note informing about the investigation result;
    8. Appropriate disciplinary measures are assigned to the perpetrator based on the level of offense.
The specialized GBV referral should report the close of the case to the project with the consent of the survivor.
The contacts by the project team with the survivor about the case should be avoided.




                                                                                                               61
                                            Stakeholder Engagement Plan



The involvement of the project team in the investigation of the GBV cases will be limited to administrative
investigation.
Confidentiality should be maintained at all times, with information shared only on a need-to-know basis. It is
important to clarify that any information related to the survivor should be in the form of codes, and relevant
information must be registered and treated respecting privacy and confidentiality.




                                                                                                           62
                                              Stakeholder Engagement Plan




7. MONOTORING AND REPORTING
E&S PIU experts will be responsible for coordinating and internal monitoring the implementation of the SEP with
the stakeholders and will be held quarterly. FIPAG PIU will be the head of this activity and should get support from
DNAAS PIU and AURA, as well as ARA-SUL PTU. External monitoring (TPM) of the SEP may be contracted and
carried out in simultaneous with project overall external monitoring, considering an annual basis.
7.1 Summary of how SEP will be monitored and reported upon (including indicators)
The SEP will be monitored based on both qualitative reporting (based on progress reports) and quantitative
reporting linked to results indicators on stakeholder engagement and grievance performance. SEP reporting will
include the following:
     (i) Progress reporting on the ESS10-Stakeholder Engagement commitments under the Environmental and
           Social Commitment Plan (ESCP);
     (ii) Cumulative qualitative reporting on the feedback received during SEP activities, in particular (a) issues
           that have been raised that can be addressed through changes in project scope and design, and reflected
           in the basic documentation such as the Project Appraisal Document, Environmental and Social
           Assessment, Resettlement Plan, Indigenous Peoples Plan, or SEA/SH Action Plan, if needed; (b) issues
           that have been raised and can be addressed during project implementation; (c) issues that have been
           raised that are beyond the scope of the project and are better addressed through alternative projects,
           programs or initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by the project due to technical,
           jurisdictional or excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes of meetings summarizing the views of the
           attendees can also be annexed to the monitoring reports.
     (iii) Quantitative reporting based on the indicators included in the SEP. An illustrative set of indicators for
           monitoring and reporting is included in Annex 3.
Table 7: Monitoring indicators
 Activities             Preferred              Degree of achievement in relation to what was planned
                        indicator
                                               Acceptable                   Good              Very good
 Meeting        for Number                 of 30% to 50% of 51% to 70% of > 70% of planned
 dissemination and meetings                   planned       planned
 mobilization       held/planned
 Engagement          Number                of 30% to 50% of 51% to 70% of > 90% of planned
 activity evaluation meetings                 planned       planned
 meeting             held/planned
 EIA/ESIA/ESMPs    Number                  of 80% to 95% of 96% to 99% of 100% of planned
 meetings       of meetings                   planned       planned
 subprojects       held/planned
 Meetings for the Number                   of 80% to 95% of 96% to 99% of 100% of planned
 preparation    of meetings                   planned       planned
 RAPs          for held/planned
 subprojects
 Involvement    of Number            of 80% to 95% of 96% to 99% of 100% of planned
 vulnerable groups meetings             planned       planned
 in     engagement held/planned
 meetings
                   Participation     of 15%           25%           40%
                   vulnerable
                   groups/individuals


                                                                                                                 63
                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan



 Grievance Redress Number             of 80% to 95% of 96% to 99% of 100% of planned
 Mechanism         complaints filed and planned        planned
                   resolved at level 1
                        Number             of 80% to 95% of 96% to 99% of 100% of planned
                        complaints filed and planned        planned
                        resolved at level 2
                        Number             of 80% to 95% of 96% to 99% of 100% of planned
                        complaints filed and planned        planned
                        resolved at level 3
                        Number           of 10% - 20%                        < 10%             0%
                        complaints
                        proceeded to court


7.2 Reporting back to stakeholder groups
The SEP will be revised and updated as necessary during project implementation in order to ensure that the
information presented here is consistent and updated, as well as that the methods of dissemination of protected
information maintain protection and recommendations in relation to the project context and specific phases of
development. Any major changes to project-related activities and the timeline will be consistently reflected in the
SEP.
Quarterly and annual summaries, as well as internal (monthly) reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related
incidents, together with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventative actions will be collated
by responsible staff and referred to the project managers. Specific mechanisms to report back to the stakeholders
include the following:

   i. Monthly Reports – The Contractor will prepare monthly summary reports (Progress Reports) on
      stakeholders engagement activities to be submitted to Resident Supervising (RS) and the Implementing
      Agencies/ PIU. The report will highlight stakeholders activities conducted on a monthly basis; public
      outreach activities stakeholder meetings, social media and digital engagement; entries in the complaints
      register; new issues or challenges emerging and how these are/ were considered by the project; grievances;

  ii. Quarterly Reports – The central PIU will prepare quarterly reports on stakeholder engagement activities to
      be submitted to the WB and this will include:
        • Stakeholder activities carried out on a quarterly basis;
        • Public outreach activities (meetings with stakeholders) carried out during the reporting period and
            key findings or issues discussed;
        • Record and redress of complaints related to the reporting period and the solutions hold to overcome
            the grievances;
        • New stakeholder identified and their inclusion in the SEP;
        • New emerging problems or challenges and how these are/ were considered by the project.

  iii. Annual Stakeholder Engagement Reports – the PIU will compile a report summarizing the results of the
       SEP annually. This report will provide a summary of all issues raised in the engagement process with the
       IAPs, the status of the grievances resolution for the reporting period, relevant findings for the public
       consultations. This report should be submitted to the WB.

  iv. Reporting to the communities – it will be the responsibility of the PIU/ Contractor to report to the communities
      on issues related to:

         •   How community views are incorporated into the project;
         •   Key findings and conclusions of monitoring activities;
                                                                                                                   64
                                             Stakeholder Engagement Plan




         •   Mains events and changes in the project dynamics;
         •   Means of sharing and publishing reports (disseminations channels such as websites, distribuition of
             printed copies to IAPs, community radios, local leaderships, social media, emong others);
         •   Summary of results published in relevant public access locations;
         •   Contracting issues and other actions of great interest to the community.
The monitoring report will be based on a set of indicators that must be reported on a regular basis, specifically
defined in table which will be integrated into the general monitoring system defined for the project.




                                                                                                              65
                                       Stakeholder Engagement Plan




8. REFERENCES
  1. Ministério das Obras Públicas Habitação e Recursos Hidricos (2024). Manual de Operações do
     Programa. Programa Segurança Hidrica Urbana (PSHU). Projecto No. P149377.
  2. United Nations (1993). Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women
  3. World Bank Group General Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines, April 2007
  4. World Bank (2023). Program Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant. Urban Water Security Program.
     Water Global Practice, Eastern and Southern Africa Region.
  5. World Bank (2023). Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) Report. Mozambique Urban
     Water Security Project (P178653). Program for Results (PforR).
  6. World Bank (2022). Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary. Concept Stage. Mozambique
     Urban Water Security Project (P178653).
  7. World Bank (2018). Good Practice Note on Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual
     Harassment (SEA/SH) in World Bank-Financed Projects




                                                                                                  66
                                           Stakeholder Engagement Plan




9. APPENICE I
Public Consultation Reports – Preparation of E&S Instruments




                                                                         67
                                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan




10. APPENICE II: GRIEVANCE REGISTER FORM

A unique code should be assigned to each complainant / or Project Affected Person (PAP) at the first time they
report a concern, and the same code should be used for all future concerns reported by the same person.


1. INCIDENT IFORMATION


1.1 Received By:                           1.2 Date received:                       1.3 Reported by:




1.4 Grievance category - (Circle as appropriate)
(Compensation/Land access/Inadequate Notification/Disruption to business or property/ Property
damage/Environmental damage/Safety Risk/Traffic/Boundary Dispute/Other)


1.5 Project Related?                       1.6 Date of the report to Contractor:    1.7 Date of the report to ANE:
Yes: ☐ No: ☐
- If the grievance is not related to the
project do not continue.


1.8 Case ID:                               1.9 Location                             1.10 District:




1.11 Contract Number:                                            1.12 Name of the contractor:




3.6 Risk of retaliation: Yes: ☐ No: ☐




3.7 Description of concern:




3.8 Pictures or other documents that support the concern (if any)


                                                                                                                 68
                                                        Stakeholder Engagement Plan




 11. APPENICE III: GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION REPORT

                                             GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION REPORT
Complaint N˚                                                          Complaint Receipt Date

Name                    of                                            Neighborhood
Complainant


Complainant's                                                         Census      Registration
Identification Number                                                 Number (If applicable)
Complainant Contact                                                   Assunto Resolvido Por
                                                  Description of Resolution Taken




                                Complainant Acceptance of the Resolution Measure Applied


I,........................................................................., hereby declare that I agree with the proposed action to resolve
my complaint.
Name of the person who submitted the complaint:
Complainant's signature or index finger:




Name of Community Officer:




Signiture:




Name and signature of witnesses:




                                                                                                                                         69
                                                                                                                          Stakeholder Engagement Plan




12. APPENICE IV: SAMPLE FORM TO RECORD AND MONITOR GRIEVANCES


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Satisfeito
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Satisfeito
                                                                                                                                             Entidade                        Proposta de                                                                             com a
                                                                                                                         Data que se                                                                                                  com o
    Nr da            Data da                           Nome do                                                                             responsável        Pessoa         resolução e       Data de                                             Se não,        resolução?
                                                                                                                            toma                                                                                                    processo?                                    Se não, motivo
 reclamação         recepção        Recebido por      reclamente     Comunidade     Reclamação         Categoria                           pela solução    responsável           data         resolução        Data de fecho                      motivo (If      (Sim/Não)
                                                                                                                        conhecimento                                                                                               (sim | não)                                     (If no, why
(Grievance #)         (Date         (Received by)      (Name of      (Community)    (Grievance)        (Category)                          (Responsible     (Complaint        (Proposed        (Date of        (Date Closed)                       no, why         (Satisfied
                                                                                                                            (Date                                                                                                   (Satisfied                                         not?)
                    Received)                        Complainant)                                                                             Unit or         Owner)          Resolution      Resolution)                                           not?)             with
                                                                                                                        Acknowledged)                                                                                             with Process)
                                                                                                                                            Contractor)                       and date)                                                                            Outcome)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (yes/no)?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (yes/no)?
                                                                                                     Compensação,                                                                                               Data em que a
                                                                                                         Saúde,                                                                                                  empresa e o
                                                                                                                                                                                                Data em
                                                                                                      Segurança,                                                                                                  reclamante
                                                                                                                             Data de                                                             que a
                      A data é                                                                       Recrutamento,                                                                                              concordam que                     Justificação    Com base no
                                       Nome da                                                                           apresentação à                    Gestor com a                         empresa                                                                          Justificação dos
                  rastreada para                                                                     Desinformação                         Podendo ser                           Data da                       todas as acções                    dos motivos      feedback
                                     pessoa que                                                                              Unidade                       responsabilid                       resolve e                                                                           motivos que
                      medir a                                                                          ou falta de                               o                              resposta                      para resolver uma                   que levam a      verbal ou
 Número de                            recebeu e                                                                         responsável pelo                    ade final de                      implementa                                                                             levam a
                 resposta geral e                                                                     informação,                          Contratante,                        formal por                     reclamação foram     Opinião do     insatisfação     escrito do
  registro da                         registrou a     Pode incluir     Local do     Descrição da                         seguimento da                       resolver a                         a queixa                                                                           insatisfação
                    o tempo de                                                                      Comportamento,                         o projecto, o                       escrito ao                         tomadas e        reclamante        com o         queixoso.
 reclamação                          reclamação       anonimato       incidente     reclamação                             reclamação                       reclamação                                                                                                                 com a
                     resolução                                                                           Outros                             governo ou                        reclamante                          esgotadas                         processo
                                                                                                                                                                                               (Date when                                                                           resolução
                                                                                                                                               outro                                                                               (feedback                       (Based on
 (Grievance                          (Name of the     (Can include   (Location of   (Description                             (Date of                      (Manager with                           the
                 (Date is tracked                                                                   (Compensation,H                                                             (Date of                         (Date when         from the       (Reasons         verbal or
identification                        person who     "anonymous')      incident)    of grievance)                         submission to                           final                       resolution to                                                                       (Reasons for
                   to measure                                                                         ealth-Safety,                        (Project/cont                     formal written                     company and       complainant)         for            written
  number)                            received and                                                                            the Unit                       responsibility                     a complaint                                                                       dissatisfaction
                      overall                                                                         Recruitment,                         ractor/govern                      response to                        complainant                      dissatisfacti     feedback
                                    registered the                                                                       responsible for                     for resolving                          is                                                                               with the
                  response and                                                                      Disinformation or                       ment/other)                           the                           agree that all                    on with the        from the
                                      complaint)                                                                           handling the                    the complaint)                     implemente                                                                            outcome)
                 resolution time)                                                                        lack of                                                             complainant)                     necessary actions                     process)      complainant)
                                                                                                                            complaint)                                                           d by the
                                                                                                      information,                                                                                               to resolve a
                                                                                                                                                                                                company)
                                                                                                       Behaviour,                                                                                              complaint have
                                                                                                          Other)                                                                                                 been taken)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                 Stakeholder Engagement Plan




13. ANNEX I: PUBLIC CONSULTATION MEETING FOR PREPARATION AND DISCLOSURE OF ESSA




                                                                                  71
Stakeholder Engagement Plan




                              72
Stakeholder Engagement Plan




                              73
Stakeholder Engagement Plan




                              74
                                 Stakeholder Engagement Plan




14. ANNEX II: TEMPLATE TO CAPTURE CONSULTATION MINUTES


Stakeholder (Group or    Summary of Feedback Response of Project   Follow-up
Individual)                                  Implementation Team   Action/Next Steps




                                                                                       75
                                        Stakeholder Engagement Plan




15. ANNEX III: SAMPLE TABLE – MONITORING AND REPORTING ON THE SEP

Key evaluation Specific Evaluation questions               Potential Indicators                Data   Collection
questions                                                                                      Methods
GM. To what •          Are project affected parties •            Usage of GM and/or            Records from the
extent       have      raising issues and grievances?            feedback mechanisms           implementing
project-affected   •   How quickly/effectively are the •         Requests                for   agency and other
parties      been      grievances resolved?                      information          from     relevant agencies
provided      with                                               relevant agencies.
accessible and                                             •     Use of suggestion
inclusive means                                                  boxes placed in the
to raise issues                                                  villages/project
and grievances?                                                  communities.
Has            the                                         •     Number of grievances
implementing                                                     raised by workers,
agency                                                           disaggregated           by
responded to and                                                 gender of workers and
managed such                                                     worksite,        resolved
grievances?                                                      within a specified time
                                                                 frame.
                                                           •     Number of Sexual
                                                                 Exploitation,         and
                                                                 Abuse/Sexual
                                                                 Harassment (SEA/SH)
                                                                 cases reported in the
                                                                 project areas, which
                                                                 were referred for
                                                                 health, social, legal and
                                                                 security          support
                                                                 according       to     the
                                                                 referral process in
                                                                 place. (if applicable)
                                                           •     Number of grievances
                                                                 that have been (i)
                                                                 opened, (ii) opened for
                                                                 more than 30 days, (iii)
                                                                 resolved, (iv) closed,
                                                                 and (v) number of
                                                                 responses             that
                                                                 satisfied              the
                                                                 complainants, during
                                                                 the reporting period
                                                                 disaggregated           by
                                                                 category of grievance,
                                                                 gender, age, and
                                                                 location                 of
                                                                 complainant.




                                                                                                              76
                                        Stakeholder Engagement Plan



Stakeholder        •   Was there interest and support •          Active participation of     Stakeholder
engagement             for the project?                          stakeholders           in   Consultation
impact         on •    Were there any adjustments                activities                  Attendance
project design         made during project design and •          Number of actions           Sheets/Minutes
and                    implementation based on the               taken in a timely
implementation.        feedback received?                        manner in response to
                                                                                             Evaluation forms
How          have •    Was        priority   information         feedback       received
engagement             disclosed to relevant parties             during     consultation
activities made a      throughout the project cycle?             sessions with project
                                                                 affected parties.           Structured surveys
difference      in
project design                                             •     Number of consultation
and                                                              meetings and public
                                                                 discussions where the       Social
implementation?                                                                              media/traditional
                                                                 feedback            and
                                                                 recommendation              media entries on the
                                                                 received is reflected in    project results
                                                                 project design and
                                                                 implementation.
                                                           •     Number                 of
                                                                 disaggregated
                                                                 engagement sessions
                                                                 held, focused on at-risk
                                                                 groups in the project.
Implementation •       Were the activities implemented •         Percentage of SEP Communication
effectiveness.         as planned? Why or why not?               activities implemented. Strategy
Were stakeholder •     Was        the       stakeholder •        Key       barriers     to (Consultation
engagement             engagement approach inclusive             participation identified Schedule)
activities effective   of disaggregated groups? Why or           with         stakeholder
in                     why not?                                  representatives.
implementation?                                         •        Number of adjustments Periodic          Focus
                                                                 made         in      the  Group Discussions
                                                                 stakeholder
                                                                 engagement approach
                                                                 to improve projects’ Face-to-face
                                                                 outreach, inclusion and meetings        and/or
                                                                 effectiveness.            Focus         Group
                                                                                           discussions      with
                                                                                           Vulnerable Groups
                                                                                           or              their
                                                                                           representatives




                                                                                                                77
