Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/06/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04748




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 11, 2025                                                                                             Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P509357                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       RESILAND CHAD                2026

                     Operation Name            SAHEL RESILAND CHAD: Building Resilience through Sustainable Natural Resource Management

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Chad                      Chad                                     WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Environment, Natural
                                                                                        AFRICA                       Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                     Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance,      Ministry of Environment, Fisheries and   10-Oct-2025                  28-Nov-2025
                     Budget, Economy           Sustainable Development
                     and Plan




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     05-Feb-2025               109,310,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To support climate resilient landscapes and livelihoods through sustainable natural resource management in targeted
                     areas in Chad.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project aims to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable rural populations in the face of climate change, including the
                     fight against land degradation and desertification, and to support the integrated and inclusive management of natural
                     resources and land, including increased availability of water resources to support livelihoods. The project will support
                     the development of low-carbon, nature-positive, value chains from non-timber forest products (NTFP) for vulnerable
                     populations, particularly women and young people in the Great Green Wall intervention zone. Value chains such as gum

                    Feb 11, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)



                     arabic, balanites, and forage crops, will be part of nature based solutions to improve resilience to climate variability,
                     restore degraded lands and improve economic resilience of vulnerable populations. Investments will include planting
                     native and drought-resistant trees and crops, forest conservation, assisted natural regeneration, agroforestry, land
                     restoration, adequate management of surface water (stabilization of dunes, stone lines, hedges, water catchments),
                     reforestation with local and non-invasive species. The project will invest in improving knowledge and management of
                     water resources, essential for maintaining livelihood activities, and will include water retention weirs and underground
                     water harvesting practices.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed project intervention area will mostly coincide with the geographical limits of the Great Green Wall (GGW)
                     intervention area (provinces) but also include areas further south of the GGW boundaries. The provinces potentially
                     targeted include Bahr El Gazal, Batha, Borkou, Ennedi Est, Ennedi Ouest, Guerra, Hadjer Lamis, Kanem, Ouaddai, Sila and
                     Wadi Fira. The precise identification of intervention areas for investment projects (land rehabilitation; irrigation
                     systems; etc.) will be the subject of in-depth studies in consultation with local populations. These areas are sparsely
                     populated and were recently ranked as among the least developed in terms of access to basic services and governance
                     under the Local Development Index (LDI). Economy in this area is mostly focused on agriculture and livestock, which are
                     highly depending on the rainy season. However, the area is also the most vulnerable to climate change. In addition,
                     flood events have affected this area from 2022 causing enormous human and material damages.
                      Food insecurity and long term conflict especially in the border areas with Libya, Sudan and Niger have also contributed
                     to deepening and entrenching poverty in these regions. Since the beginning of the conflict in Sudan in April 2023, Chad



Public Disclosure
                     has received over 600,000 refugees fleeing the violence, further straining the project's area already limited resources.
                     The impacts of climate change have been profound on the entire country. The project area is considered a buffer zone
                     for desertification. Climate change and refugees influx exacerbates existing conflicts among resource users and may
                     contribute to intercommunal violence in several provinces especially in the east of the country. This Project will affect
                     positively natural reserves such as Ouadi-Rime Ouadi-Achime and Ennedi with a global importance to biodiversity.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the Ministry of the Environment, Fisheries and Sustainable Development. Their
                     mandate includes the design and implementation of strategies, policies and programs that ensure the sustainable use of
                     natural resources and the protection of the environment. The Ministry has several technical directorates and specialized
                     agencies including those focused on combatting desertification, conserving biodiversity, enforcing environmental
                     regulations, preventing pollution and fighting wildlife poaching. The Direction of environmental assessment and
                     controlling pollution and nuisances (DEELCPN) is responsible for providing environmental permits in Chad and for
                     validating Environmental and Social Impact studies (including the safeguard instruments prepared for World Bank
                     financed projects). The DEELCPN has proven experience with ESF implementation for projects such as Lake Chad Region
                     Recovery and Development Project (P161706), Chad Territorial Development and Resilience Project (P177163) among
                     others. The Ministry of Environment has experience implementing recent World Bank projects, such Chad Local
                     Development and Adaptation Project ALBIA (P171611) and the ALBIA PIU will assist in the preparation of this new
                     project. A new PIU will be set up under the guidance of the Ministry of Environment, including the hiring of dedicated
                     E+S specialists. Capacity building and training on the ESF will be needed throughout the life of the project and will be
                     outlined in the ESCP.


                    Feb 11, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)



                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     The environmental risk is considered to be substantial at this stage, as project activities aim to strengthen and sustain
                     the livelihoods of local populations and promote climate-smart agriculture practices and value chains including
                     facilitating access to improved seeds and fertilizers, and better extensions services. The project will support access to
                     water through water points and distribution as well as promote positive health outcomes. The Project will reinforce
                     and strengthen natural reserves such as Ouadi-Rime Ouadi-Achime and Ennedi through investments in communities
                     around these areas to reduce pressures on the areas of global importance to biodiversity. The project activities are
                     designed to improve the sustainable management of natural resources and promote diversified and resilient
                     livelihoods. Risks identified at this stage include negative impacts on (i) water quality and quantity and pressure on
                     scarce water resources; (ii) soil erosion due to earthworks and runoff; (iii) health (injuries, STIs/HIV/AIDS, COVID-19)
                     and safety (accidents, vehicular traffic, etc.) of workers and communities associated with the activities; (iv) nuisance
                     from air and noise emissions; and (v) possible impacts on biodiversity (flora and fauna). The environmental risk rating
                     will be confirmed as project activities and areas are further developed.
                                                                                                                                        Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risk is rated as moderate at this stage due to small scale civil works; potential exclusion and discrimination of
                     marginalized groups such as youth, IDPs and refugees in access to project benefits; difficulty to access some of the


Public Disclosure
                     project areas due to insecurity; and potential labor influx. Contextual security risks include the presence of refugees
                     and internally displaced persons (IDPs) as well as the overall fluid security situation in the project regions. The social
                     risk rating will be confirmed as project activities and areas are finetuned.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      An assessment of environmental and social risks and impacts will be required for all project activities during
                      implementation. Potential impacts are expected to be related to the nature of the sub-project (and associated with
                      the construction/rehabilitation of small infrastructure and equipment for agrosylvopastoral activities), and the
                      environmental sensitivity of potential project areas. As the exact scope and specific sites of public works and
                      livelihood activities are not yet defined, a framework approach (ESMF) will be used to provide guidance on the
                      appropriate instruments to be prepared after approval, such as Environmental and Social Impact
                      Assessments/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESIAs/ESMPs). The ESMF will make use of the general and
                      sector-specific EHSGs for the identified subprojects in relation to occupational and community health and safety. The
                      ESMF will provide guidance regarding mitigation and management measures during all phases.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant



                    Feb 11, 2025                                                                                                          Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)



                      The client will prepare a SEP that will address the challenges related to communication and participation of
                      stakeholders in a very sparsely populated and widely geographically dispersed area. The project will build on existing
                      consultative platforms as relevant. Key stakeholders include local populations who derive their livelihoods from
                      agriculture and livestock as well as local authorities or traditional leaders. Women are also included as beneficiaries
                      specifically in the income generating activities. Vulnerable populations such as women and youth will be consulted
                      and the project will reach out to IDPs and/or refugees in collaboration with partners managing these areas. In
                      addition, the SEP will include project specific GRM that will guide the management of any concerns or complaints that
                      may arise during project implementation. Resources for implementation of SEP and social communication and
                      capacity building activities are included in the project design.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The project is likely to finance short term, unskilled workers from neighboring communities as well as some skilled
                      engineers. The project is expected to have direct, contract and potentially community workers. All workers involved
                      in project implementation will be required to adhere to the ESS2. A Labor Management Procedure (LMP) that
                      specifies the terms and conditions of employment, non-discrimination and equal opportunities, workers'
                      organizations, prohibition of child and forced labor, grievance redress mechanism for labor disputes, occupational
                      safety and health measures for the workers (direct and contract), and provisions to prevent and manage GBV will be
                      prepared.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The construction and rehabilitation of the basic infrastructure and water access infrastructure are likely to generate
                      some air pollution and consume scarce water resources in the project areas. If deemed necessary, water balance
                      analysis will be conducted to ensure that these activities will not generate conflicts among users. The construction
                      works may also cause short-term nuisance to the local communities. The ESMP(s) will outline measures to promote
                      the sustainable use of resources (energy, water and raw materials) and how to minimize pollution, noise and dust. In
                      addition, the ESMP(s) will include mitigation measures to minimize and manage the noise levels. The waste generated
                      by the construction/rehabilitation works will be disposed of at approved sites according with the national laws and
                      regulations. The use of pesticides and fertilizers could generate impacts to environment and health. The ESMF will
                      include a Pest and pesticide management plan and a waste management plan.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      The project finance small civil works, use of agriculture inputs and landscape restoration. The activities may result in
                      social risks and negative effects on the health, safety and security of the communities. While most of the workers are
                      likely to be from the local communities, experience shows that any influx of workers into a project area can lead to
                      adverse impacts (GBV/SEA, sexually transmitted and communicable diseases). The Operations Manual will include
                      provisions on managing GBV. The ESMP will use of the general and sector-specific EHSGs for the identified
                      subprojects in relation to community health and safety. A security risk assessment will be conducted during project
                      preparation as part of the ESMF as sites for project activities are confirmed, and if deemed necessary, a Security
                      Management Plan (SMP) will be integrated into the Project Operations Manual. Project does not anticipate using
                      security forces. Code of Conduct will be signed by all workers.




                    Feb 11, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)



                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      The planned civil works may involve small-scale land acquisition. Given that the project activities and locations are
                      not fully defined at this stage, it is not possible to exclude the potential for economic resettlement. To avoid and
                      minimize involuntary resettlement, activities leading to physical resettlement will not be eligible under the project.
                      Resettlement Plans (RPs) will be prepared, as needed, during implementation. . All activities and sites will undergo an
                      environmental and social screening, which will determine the need for Resettlement Plans (RPs) and/or Process
                      Frameworks (PFs) to be prepared, as needed, during implementation.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project will not affect or involve activities with negative impacts on biodiversity or natural resources. Activities
                      aim to restore or conserve biodiversity, as under component 2 the project will finance land restoration activities
                      through: Planting drought resistant trees, natural regeneration, replanting grazing lands. However, there is a
                      potential risk that civil works and some livelihood (agriculture) activities may lead to some encroachment on
                      protected areas. Potential risks and impacts to habitats and protected areas will be captured in the ESMF to minimize
                      such impacts during any emergency response and as a result of any rehabilitation or construction works. The specific
                      baseline studies to feed project preparation will include ecological risk factors (wildlife corridor between countries,
                      parks, reserves and classified forests). Only existing protected areas may be supported under the project; the project
                      will not include the creation of new protected areas.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This ESS is not relevant as there are no communities nor peoples who meet the WB criteria for Indigenous
                      Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities in Chad.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      Excavation is likely during construction of the small infrastructure and water access for irrigation. During construction,
                      it is possible that both known and unknown physical and cultural resources may be uncovered. Though the possibility
                      is not considered significant in the project area, the ESMF will describe the probability of physical cultural resources in
                      the project are and provide guidance om chance finds; the ESIA will include assessment of the cultural heritage sites
                      in the project area. Any sites identified will be avoided as much as possible and if not possible, the ESMP will identify
                      measures required to address these impacts in accordance with the mitigation hierarchy. The treatment of physical
                      cultural resources (PCR) including archaeological relics, fossils, human graves, shrines, sacred trees or groves that may
                      be encountered will follow a Chance Finds Procedure that will be elaborated in the ESMPs for the sub-projects.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant as this is not an FI operation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply


                    Feb 11, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                  TBD
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                             No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                           No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following documents are expected by appraisal:
                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including Waste management Plan, Pest and Pesticide
                     Management Plan, and a security risk assessment
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     - Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) Including GRM and Communication Strategy




Public Disclosure    III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Erik Reed                           Title:        Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                 ereed1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Taibou Adamou Maiga                 Job Title:    Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                 tmaiga@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Feb 11, 2025                                                                                                 Page 7 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Sahel Resiland Chad: Building Resilience Through Sustainable Natural Resource Management (P509357)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                    Erik Reed, Taibou Adamou Maiga

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                           Halime Mahamat Hissene

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                  Paivi Koskinen-Lewis




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 11, 2025                                                                                              Page 8 of 8
