Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Alafia I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 05/12/2026 | Report No: ESRSA05010




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 12, 2026                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Alafia I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P509225                   Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)      ALAFIA Phase I               2026

                     Operation Name            ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Benin                     Benin                                     WESTERN AND CENTRAL           Health
                                                                                         AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Benin         Agence Nationale de l’Alimentation et     12-May-2026                   16-Jun-2026
                                               de la Nutrition (ANAN)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     07-May-2026               300,800,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve the utilization of quality integrated nutrition, health, and child development services in targeted areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Rationale and Context: Good nutrition is foundational for jobs, empowering individuals with the health and nutrients
                     needed to learn, develop skills, and perform effectively in the workplace. However, Benin continues to face serious
                     nutrition and human capital challenges, with over 30% of children under five suffering from chronic malnutrition and
                     high rates of anemia among children adolescent and women, which continues to impair their physical and cognitive
                     development and hinder future productivity and economic opportunities. These issues are exacerbated by poverty, food
                     price volatility, and limited access to diverse, nutritious foods. Poor feeding practices, low exclusive breastfeeding rates,
                     and high prevalence of infectious diseases further worsen the situation. Gender inequality worsens nutrition challenges,
                     as women—who provide most agricultural labor—have limited access to land and resources, restricting their ability to

                    May 12, 2026                                                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Alafia I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)



                     improve household nutrition. Their lower socio-economic status and long working hours also reduce time for childcare.
                     Governance is a major challenge, as nutrition goals are often overlooked in sectoral plans and budgets due to poor
                     integration and coordination across ministries. Resource allocation is consistently inadequate, with limited specialized
                     staff and weak steering capacity, while funding streams are unpredictable and partner efforts lack effective
                     coordination. Policies remain fragmented, focusing on isolated interventions instead of a comprehensive, multisectoral
                     approach. Climate change further threatens food security, with frequent droughts and floods impacting agricultural
                     yields. Despite national warning systems, agricultural actors remain vulnerable due to inadequate risk management.
                     Other factors include poor access to health services and water, hygiene, and sanitation services as well as improving
                     access to quality and nutritious foods. Investing in nutrition yields high returns, with every US$1 invested in
                     undernutrition expected to generate US$23 in economic benefits, and each dollar spent on the national integrated
                     school feeding program can generate up to 5.2 dollars in GDP returns, especially when linked to local agriculture in
                     partnership with the private sector. Benin has also made early childhood development (ECD) a national priority,
                     focusing on combating malnutrition through multi-sectoral, community-driven approaches and strong government
                     commitment. Addressing these challenges requires strengthening governance, ensuring predictable and sufficient
                     resource allocation, strategic partnerships and empowering vulnerable groups, especially women, to improve food and
                     nutrition security in Benin. Proposed Program Scope and Boundaries: On July 26, 2023, the Government established a
                     National Agency for Food and Nutrition (Agence Nationale de l’Alimentation et la Nutrition, ANAN) under the
                     Presidency to ensure the implementation of policies, strategies, standards and regulations in all areas of food and
                     nutrition, in accordance with the national policy on food and nutrition. Almost a year later, on July 24, 2024, the
                     Government adopted its new National Policy on Food and Nutrition for 2024-2033, laying out the need for better cross-
                     sectoral approaches and integrated interventions to combat every form of malnutrition and improve food security. The




Public Disclosure
                     PforR will support a subset of the government’s national nutrition program, focusing on regions with the highest burden
                     of malnutrition based on the National Strategy on Food and Nutrition for 2026-2030. The program boundaries are
                     defined by a set of results areas that align with the government’s strategy and the World Bank’s Country Partnership
                     Framework (CPF) in preparation. The operation will finance a results-based portion of the government’s expenditure
                     program, with Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) that reflect key milestones in service delivery, coverage, and
                     outcomes. PrDO proposed: To reduce stunting among children under five years of age. PDO of ALAFIA I proposed: To
                     improve utilization of quality integrated nutrition, health, and child development services in targeted areas. Key Results
                     Areas being proposed: • RA1: Increase utilization of quality integrated nutrition, health, and child development services
                     • RA2: Enhance community resilience and access to quality nutritious food supply through local engagement and private
                     sector partnerships An IPF Component is also being proposed to improve multisectoral coordination, governance, and
                     evidence-based nutrition program design.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     ALAFIA I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program is a large-scale, multisectoral operation targeting improved nutrition,
                     health, and early childhood development outcomes across the Republic of Benin. The project will be implemented in
                     phases, initially covering 46 communes including urban, peri-urban, and rural areas and expanding to all 77 communes
                     nationwide. Activities will be delivered through a combination of community-based platforms, primary health facilities,
                     schools, and local food systems, with a strong emphasis on integrated service delivery, climate resilience, and
                     institutional capacity building. The project is anchored in Benin’s National Food and Nutrition Policy (PNAN 2024–2033)
                     and the draft National Food and Nutrition Strategy (SNAN 2026–2030), and is fully aligned with the country’s Nationally
                     Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement. The program targets women, newborns, children under

                    May 12, 2026                                                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Alafia I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)



                     five, and adolescents/young people, who are considered vulnerable groups. In terms of E&S benefits, the IPF
                     component will prioritize the digitization of data systems, the environmental benefit of which is dematerialization
                     (paper reduction, virtual meetings), thus decreasing the carbon footprint and potential drawbacks include greenhouse
                     gas emissions, digital pollution, and high energy and water consumption. This component will also promote job creation
                     in the health, agriculture, water, sanitation, and environment sectors, and will support the institutionalization of
                     systems that generate sustainable gains and reach underserved populations.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The TA component will be implemented by a newly established Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the National
                     Food and Nutrition Agency (ANAN) prior to project effectiveness. As a result, ANAN’s ESF-related experience is expected
                     to be limited. While Benin maintains an acceptable legal and regulatory framework for environmental and social (E&S)
                     management and several national agencies have benefited from World Bank–financed capacity-building on ESF
                     requirements, gaps remain. The Agence Béninoise de l’Environnement (ABE) is the competent authority for ESIA review,
                     approval, monitoring, and evaluation, but it is often constrained by limited staffing. At this stage of preparation, there is
                     also no assurance that the Program’s implementing partners have adequate familiarity with ESF. Targeted capacity
                     building will therefore be required for ANAN, ABE, and other relevant agencies and implementing partners to effectively
                     manage E&S risks and impacts under the Program, which addresses the sensitive domain of nutrition.
                     A recent Environmental and Social systems assessment has identified gaps with related mitigation measures. An action
                     plan was also issued and should be integrated in the program after the validation from the borrower.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS




Public Disclosure
                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                    Low


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                             Low
                     The IPF component will focus on strengthening multisectoral coordination, governance, data systems, and local
                     capacities. Key activities of this component include: (i) Technical assistance and analytics to enhance multisectoral
                     platform and joint planning sessions across sectors; (ii) conduct capacity building workshops on data management
                     and financial planning; (iii) operations management, governance, fiduciary and M&E. These activities will have limited
                     impacts on the environment al and the associated risks include road safety, electronic waste management; they are
                     predictable, reversible, and manageable with standard mitigation measures. Implementation will further inform the
                     needs of any assessment.
                                                                                                                                               Low
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The IPF TA component consists in soft activities like analytical work, capacity building, training, and knowledge
                     products, digitalization and does not finance civil works or site-specific planning likely to induce direct social impacts.
                     As designed, activities are unlikely to generate large-scale or irreversible social risks. Foreseeable, limited risks relate
                     to: (i) labor and working conditions for direct and contracted consultants (e.g., fair terms, non-discrimination,
                     occupational health and safety), (ii) risks of sexual harassment among project workers in professional settings,
                     assessed as low given no labor influx and limited field presence, and (iii) potential exclusion of disadvantaged or
                     vulnerable groups from participation in trainings/consultations if not proactively targeted. Where data collection is




                    May 12, 2026                                                                                                           Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Alafia I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)



                     envisaged, there is also a manageable risk of data privacy and confidentiality breaches. These risks are expected to be
                     low in magnitude and readily managed through standard ESF measures.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The TA finances analytical work, policy/regulatory support, and capacity building only; no
                      civil works are planned. Anticipated risks are low and manageable and related to (i) labor and OHS for project
                      workers; (ii) community health and safety during travel/events; (iii) data privacy and digital inclusion in information
                      systems; (iv) distributional/inclusion risks from advice; and (v) e-waste from IT upgrades. Management measures will
                      be proportionate: screen TORs/outputs for downstream effects; apply the mitigation hierarchy; align with ESF and
                      OESRC TA guidance; consider disadvantaged/vulnerable groups; and provide accessible feedback and grievance
                      mechanisms. An ESCP including GM; and targeted ESS2/ESS4/ESS10 actions will be prepare and WBG EHS Guidelines
                      will be used as relevant. The implementation agency ANAN will assign dedicated staff, including an E&S specialist, and
                      build PIU capacity to implement and monitor ESF measures.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The IPF TA component will not fund civil works, focusing on strategic support and technical assistance. The project



Public Disclosure
                      will conduct proportionate stakeholder engagement and ensure transparency, inclusivity, and responsiveness,
                      prioritizing early identification and meaningful involvement of key stakeholders, including government agencies,
                      consultants, verification agencies, and vulnerable groups potentially affected by downstream use of TA outputs.. All
                      engagement and information disclosure will comply with ESF. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) requirement has
                      been included in the ESCP and will be implemented throughout the project lifecycle. These requirements has
                      provided timely, accessible, and culturally appropriate disclosure; meaningful consultations; documentation of
                      feedback and how it is addressed; and a project-level grievance mechanism (GM) for project-affected parties, with
                      measures to identify and enable participation of disadvantaged or vulnerable groups.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. The TA will engage direct workers (PIU staff) and contracted workers (firms/consultants for studies,
                      capacity building, IT/digital work, facilitation). Government civil servants remain under public-sector terms unless
                      formally transferred. The use of community workers is not overseen for this IPF component. Risks are limited and
                      related to fair terms and non-discrimination; OHS for office, travel, and events; codes of conduct with SEA/SH
                      provisions; protection of worker data; and access to confidential workers’ GM. Proportionate Labor Management
                      Procedures have been included into the ESCP and ensure written contracts with clear terms; equal opportunity and
                      non-discrimination; OHS consistent with WBG EHS Guidelines; prohibition of child and forced labor; freedom of
                      association per national law; codes of conduct (incl. SEA/SH); contractor management; and a confidential workers’
                      GM. TORs/deliverables will embed ESS2 requirements. Incident reporting will follow ESF/ESIRT timelines.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant


                    May 12, 2026                                                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Alafia I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)



                      This ESS is relevant since the IPF component will finance acquisition and system digitalization. To manage this risk, the
                      client will prepare during implementation an Electronic Waste Management Plan (EWMP) in consistent with ESS3
                      requirements and the Good International Industry Practices (GIIPs) measures in line with digitalization measures.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. While the TA will not finance civil works, in-person consultations, trainings/workshops, and related
                      travel may pose limited community health and safety risks: road/traffic safety; communicable disease transmission; IT
                      fraud, cybersecurity, and data privacy; exclusion of stakeholders; and SEA/SH in engagement settings. Proportionate
                      measures related to safe travel and event protocols, accessibility and emergency procedures, codes of conduct with
                      SEA/SH clauses, and confidential referral pathways will be embedded in the ESCP, consultant contracts, POM, and TA
                      TORs/deliverables. TA outputs that inform policies, standards, or services (including digital) will include “safety of
                      services,” universal access, and clear complaint/referral information. If needed at a later stage, specific measures will
                      be defined and the ESCP updated accordingly.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant

                      N/A

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                    Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      N/A



Public Disclosure
                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      N/A

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      N/A

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      N/A



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         In Part


                    May 12, 2026                                                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Alafia I - Nourishing Benin's Future Program (P509225)



                       The borrower framework can be used for the management of the low risk subprojects


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                           No
                       N/a

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The client has prepared and disclosed the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) which integrates the
                     requirements of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan(SEP) and the Labor Management Procedures (LMP).


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Fatima Barry                         Title:             Senior Health Specialist

                     Email:                   fbarry1@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                              Fatima Barry

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                     Mamady Kobele Keita

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                            Adjoua Veronique Ouattara




                    May 12, 2026                                                                                                 Page 7 of 7
