Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/05/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04746




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 20, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P509738                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     KEWASIP                     2025

                     Operation Name            Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Kenya                     Kenya                                  EASTERN AND                 Environment, Natural
                                                                                      SOUTHERN AFRICA             Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                  Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Kenya         State Department of Forestry           28-Feb-2025                 18-Jun-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     09-May-2024               200,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable watershed and landscape
                     management for livelihoods and conservation in the project areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The KEWASIP will support a subset of activities contained in The National Landscape and Ecosystems Restoration
                     Programme Strategy. Under the KEWASIP the selected activities are expected to be grouped under three Results Areas:
                     (i) strengthened watershed planning, governance, and monitoring; (ii) watershed services and landscape restoration
                     (private/communal lands); (iii) Public land management and restoration (public/protected lands).




                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                   Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     KEWASIP is a nationwide intervention and will target prioritized sub-basins as guided by the Land Degradation Index
                     Map, with considerations on vegetation cover and quality, rainfall erosivity, soil erodibility, and population density. Also,
                     the selection of sub-basins to benefit from the Project considered degradation in vegetation as measured by net
                     primary productivity (NPP) and normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), inherent risk of soil erosion, potential
                     beneficiaries of interventions, conservation priorities, and the projected costs associated with implementing sustainable
                     landscape and watersheds management (SLWM) practices. Component 1a being technical assistance to strengthen
                     policy, regulatory, and institutional frameworks to support conservation, protection, and sustainable management of
                     landscapes and ecosystems as well as knowledge management and capacity building will have a national outlook.
                     Through strengthening governance structures under Component 1, the project seeks to promote diversified rural
                     livelihoods, improved access to information through an integrated monitoring system, built resilience to climate change
                     and enhanced sustainable management of natural resources.

                     A subset of activities under component 1c and 2 will be implemented in six watersheds covering 18 counties of
                     Garrissa, Isiolo, Kajiado, Kiambu, Kitui Kwale, Laikipia, Marsabit, Makueni, Meru, Muranga, Nakuru, Nyandarua, Nyeri,
                     Samburu, Taita Taveta and Tana River. The areas of project intervention include those where indigenous peoples-also
                     known as of vulnerable and marginalized groups (VMGs)- in Kenya have a presence and a collective attachment to land
                     and natural resources. VMGs in Kenya have had a notable history of involvement in actively petitioning the government
                     in Bank financed projects.




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will adopt a three-tiered implementation arrangement involving national, county, and community levels. At
                     the national level, a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will provide overall project oversight and policy
                     guidance, while a National Technical Advisory Committee (NTAC) will offer technical support to ensure environmental,
                     social, and economic objectives are met. The project will have a National Project Coordinating Unit (NPCU) established
                     under the State Department for Forestry. The main role of NPCU is the day-to-day coordination and management of
                     project activities, and implementation of activities at National Level. At the county level, the County Project Steering
                     and Advisory Committee (CPSAC), the County Technical Advisory Committee (CTAC) and the County Project
                     Coordinating Units (CPCUs) will be established in relevant counties. The CPSAC will provide overall project oversight and
                     policy guidance at the County level. While the CTAC will provide technical advice to the CPCU which is responsible of the
                     day-to-day execution, and will be composed of technical officers from KFS, National Environmental Management
                     Authority (NEMA), Water Resources Authority (WRA)R, Kenya Forestry Research Institute (KEFRI), and county officers.
                     The NTAC will coordinate between different CTACs to ensure participatory plans from the different counties are
                     integrated and activities proposed complement each other. The NPCU under the State Department for Forestry will
                     handle daily project management, monitoring and evaluation, and review and approval of CPCUs’ work plans. The
                     CPCUs will oversee project execution, consolidate plans, and monitor activities at county level. At the community level,
                     project implementation will be executed by Community-Based Organizations (CBOs), which will represent beneficiary
                     communities at the grassroots and ensure participatory identification, preparation, and implementation of restoration
                     and livelihood sub-projects.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS



                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                 High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     Component 1a will offer technical assistance in drafting various legislative instruments, including, but not limited to,
                     the Forest Conservation and Management Act; regulations for the sustainable management of landscapes and
                     riparian reserve protection; charcoal rules and regulations; gums and resins rules; and private forest registration
                     rules. Insufficient technical input from environmental experts may result in provisions and requirements that are
                     ineffective and too rigid, limiting their adaptability to changing circumstances. The restoration of degraded riparian
                     zones, wetlands, and the rehabilitation of water harvesting structures could have varying effects on water flow and
                     availability as the interventions could lead to reduced volumes. Water resources are scarce in many areas targeted by
                     KEWASIP, and improper management could worsen the situation, leading to reduced access to water for downstream
                     users. Large-scale restoration can prevent erosion, but in the short term, soil disturbance (e.g., tree planting,
                     construction of terraces or gabions) could lead to increased sediment runoff into rivers and lakes, further contributing
                     to water degradation and affecting aquatic ecosystems. Erosion management in catchment areas will also reduce
                     sediment loads and deposition in downstream floodplains, which may deprive aquatic habitats and agricultural
                     activities of essential nutrients found in the sediments. As climate variability increases, the projected rise in extreme
                     weather events—such as prolonged droughts and intense rainfall—could exacerbate land degradation, making it
                     difficult for restored ecosystems to stabilize. The project involves significant ecosystem restoration, including
                     afforestation, reforestation, agroforestry, and the creation of green corridors. While the goals of these interventions
                     are positive, there are inherent risks.




Public Disclosure
                                                                                                                                            High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social risks are anticipated to be High as the potential risks and impacts are temporary, predictable and/or
                     reversible, with a limited degree of social conflict. There are potential risks related to; a) restrictions on land use or
                     access to land and natural resources; b) social conflicts or exacerbation of existing conflicts resulting from challenges
                     in establishing equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms for investments on community land as well as access to grants;
                     c) physical and economic displacement of communities with impacts on both their economic status and social
                     cohesion; d) adverse impacts on livelihoods from failed or unsuitable livelihood restoration activities; e) exclusion
                     from Project benefits especially for VMGs and other vulnerable target populations; f) gaps in stakeholders
                     engagement, information disclosure and grievance redress particularly on Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) for
                     VMGs emanating from capacity implementation gaps, and; g) child labor particularly in initiatives requiring communal
                     labor.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      Under Component One, risks and impacts relate to adverse cumulative and downstream impacts of Technical
                      Assistance (TA) and particularly the development of policies and regulations as well as training and capacity building.
                      These type 2 and 3 TAs on supporting the formulation of policies and strengthening borrower capacity, as per the


                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      relevant requirements of the Operations Environmental and Social Review Committee (OESRC) Advisory Note on
                      Technical Assistance and the Environmental and Social Framework (May 21, 2019), TA Guidance Note. Key prevention
                      and mitigation measures include: (i) ESHS mainstreaming in ToRs and bidding documents by the NPCU E&S officers;
                      (ii) capacity building for TA service providers on ESHS, including obligations to prevent and address cases of SEA/SH;
                      (iii) adherence to relevant national laws and security protocols as per the ESCP; (iv) inclusive and culturally
                      appropriate approaches to stakeholder targeting and inclusion for IPs and VMGs;

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      Stakeholder consultations have been conducted to guide Project preparation, design, and implementation. The
                      stakeholder consultations were conducted in an inclusive and culturally appropriate manner through key informant
                      interviews and focus group discussions including with County governments at Nyeri and Laikipia in the Upper Tana
                      region, Nakuru and Narok in the Mau Forest complex, as well as with Kenya Forest Service (KFS) Ecosystem
                      Conservators, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), County Directors of Environment, Water
                      Resources Authority (WRA) Regional Officers, Kenya Water Towers Agency (KWTA) Regional Coordinators, Ewaso
                      Ngiro South Development Authority, Tana and Athi Rivers Development Authority, Community Forest Associations,
                      Water Resources Users Associations, local community conservation groups, indigenous communities, and other key
                      stakeholders.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                Relevant

                      The Project will include community workers (community members), direct workers (implementing entities),




Public Disclosure
                      contracted workers (consultants involved in the technical assistance and capacity building activities) and primary
                      supply workers (suppliers to enhance systems e.g. drone technology and surveillance). Labor management provisions
                      in line with ESS2, the World Bank Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines and national labor laws have
                      been included in the ESCP. Details of these procedures will be reflected in the project operational manual (POM),
                      including a separate Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for workers, conditions of employment, non-
                      discrimination and equal opportunity, worker’s organizations, prohibition of child and forced labor, code of conduct
                      against SEA/SH in the workplace, and OHS aspects.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                 Relevant

                      The screening carried out during project preparation did not identify activities that will result in significant use of
                      energy, water and raw materials , adverse impact on human health and the environment, emissions of short and long
                      term lived climate pollutants, and generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste. The MoECCF will ensure
                      assessment of ESS3 risks in TA outputs including the adoption of climate mitigation and adaptation measures in
                      interventions, ensuring consistency with the requirements of this standard

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                 Relevant

                      Community involvement in labor-intensive restoration activities, such as tree planting and soil conservation, carries
                      risks of injuries, particularly in areas with difficult terrain or extreme weather conditions. In addition, invasive species
                      management, particularly through the use of herbicides or other chemical agents, could expose workers to harmful
                      substances if proper safety measures are not in place. Mitigation measures shall include (a) establishing clear OHS
                      guidelines and conduct training for all community workers and project staff involved in restoration activities, and (b)


                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                           Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      providing the necessary personal protective equipment (PPE) and implement chemical safety protocols where
                      applicable. The measures will be articulated in an Environmental and Social Management Framework. Additional
                      measures to respond to the risk of SEA-SH will be included as part of the LMP.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      The Project interventions may include aspects relevant to restrictions on land use or access to land and natural
                      resources, establishing equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms for investments on community land, and the
                      displacement of communities, which could affect economic status, livelihoods and social cohesion. The E&S
                      assessment being undertaken includes a process framework that will inform the development of a (a) Resettlement
                      Plans, (b) Livelihood Restoration Plans, (c) Indigenous Peoples Plans, and/or (d) Benefit Sharing Plans/Agreements.
                      The plan/s will be implemented by the project in management of access restrictions on local communities and
                      stakeholders, including on livelihoods, living standards, traditional and cultural practices related to the watersheds,
                      public health and others. The Project E&S screening tool will be applied for interventions and the TORs for the TA
                      activities will consider potential risks and apply appropriate E&S mitigation and management measures.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The initial screening did not identify any activities that will result in potential adverse risks and impacts to living
                      natural resources and biodiversity. Activities in support of the operation will not be carried out in biodiversity
                      hotspots and the exclusion list in the project’s ESCP will include this. By applying the Environmental and social




Public Disclosure
                      screening tool, early E&S screening of proposed activities will be undertaken by the PIU E&S officers, to exclude those
                      that are likely have significant adverse impacts on local biodiversity. Invasive plant species such as Prosopis juliflora
                      and Lantana camara have been observed in some project areas, and these would need well organised removal
                      measures.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The project will benefit regions that include VMGs. Attention is given for the Project throughout the implementation,
                      to facilitate their targeting, meaningful consultation, respect to human rights and recognition of their unique
                      relationship with land and natural resources. The Process Framework will incorporate elements of ESS7 and guide the
                      development of appropriate mitigation measures or plans for VMGs which may include; a) processes and
                      mechanisms to determine and guide the application of Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC); b) measures to
                      integrating VMG considerations in the broader Participatory Forest Management Plans; c) processes for
                      determination, delivery, and distribution of compensation and shared benefits to affected VMGs; d) additional
                      considerations to ensure culturally appropriate stakeholders engagement and grievance redress (which will also be
                      integrated in the SEP).

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      Restoration activities could interfere with local cultural heritage resources such as shrines and circumcision sites, or
                      limit access to these sites. Civil works could also lead to damage or loss of unidentified archeological resources in the
                      project areas. Stakeholder engagement would be necessary to establish the cultural value the community attaches to


                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                      proposed project areas, and the ways of preserving this value, while chance find procedures will be required during
                      implementation of civil works to protect unidentified archeological resources in the project area.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                               Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                     TBD
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Not envisaged

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities




Public Disclosure
                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The following instruments will be prepared by appraisal;
                     1. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)- to describe the timing and methods of engagement with stakeholders
                     throughout the life cycle of the project as agreed between Bank and the Government of Kenya. distinguishing between
                     project-affected

                     2.      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)- to set out the material measures and actions required for
                     the project and the obligations, and timeframe for Government of Kenya to implement the said measures

                     The following instruments will be prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed by project implementation
                     3.       Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to set out sets out the principles, rules, guidelines
                     and procedures to assess the environmental and social risks and impacts once the sites and sub-projects have been
                     identified.
                     4.       Social and Conflict Analysis to assesses the degree to which the project interventions, particularly under
                     component 2a may exacerbate existing tensions and inequality within communities (both beneficiary and non-
                     beneficiary)
                     5.       Labor Management Procedures (LMP) to outline measures by which the different categories of workers will be
                     managed in accordance with the requirements of national law and ESS 2 (including relevant aspects to respond to the
                     risk of SEA-SH)




                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)



                     6.       Process Framework to assess restrictions in access to natural resources in gazetted forests. The Process
                     Framework will include principles and guidelines for the development of i) Resettlement Plans, ii) Livelihood
                     Restoration Plans, iii) Indigenous peoples plans, iv) benefit sharing plans/agreements as required.
                     7.       Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)- to systematically examine the E&S implications of
                     policies and plans under component 1.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman          Title:         Senior Environmental Engineer
                                              Mohammed

                      Email:                  hosman1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Victor Vazquez Alvarez               Job Title:     Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  vvazquez@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman Mohammed, Victor Vazquez Alvarez

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Abdirahman Zeila Dubow

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Raymond Simon Maina Kirwa




                    Feb 20, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 8
