Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01503




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                    Operation Name
                                                         EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                             Green and Future Cities
                          Turkiye                                                       P509293
                                                         ASIA                                                           Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         24-Mar-2026                    05-Jun-2026                     Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          ILLER BANKASI ANONIM           ILBANK, Local
                          SIRKETI (ILBANK)               Administrations

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          Improve access to sustainable and resilient municipal infrastructure and services in participating cities.

                          Components
                          Component 1. Integrated, multi-sectoral investments in participating cities
                          Component 2. Strengthening capacity of ILBANK and municipalities for future investment projects
                          Component 3. Project management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                               226.05

                            Total Financing                                                                                                    226.05
                                       of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   226.05
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00

                          DETAILS


                                                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)



                              World Bank Group Financing
                                 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                                                       226.05




                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial


                            Decision
                            The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context




_For Official Use Only_
                            Project Strategic Context
                               1. The proposed Green and Future Cities (GFC) Project is part of a coordinated World Bank Group (WBG)
                               initiative that integrates International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and International Finance
                               Corporation (IFC) support to ILBANK1 and metropolitan municipalities in Türkiye to deliver scalable, sustainable
                               and resilient urban infrastructure and services. Cities in Türkiye have been central to the country’s economic
                               development and job creation. In 2024, Türkiye’s 30 metropolitan cities generated over 84 percent of total national
                               GDP. Within this group, secondary metropolitan cities2 are at the core of Türkiye’s recent urban development,
                               accounting for nearly 40 percent of national GDP. However, the lack of availability of long-term financing has
                               constrained these municipalities’ ability to fund the key infrastructure and services needed to support people and
                               growing economic activities. For the 30 metropolitan municipalities alone, the aggregate investment needs for
                               municipal infrastructure and services over 2025–2029 are estimated at approximately US$112 billion,3 underscoring
                               the scale of the financing gap. In addition, municipalities often lack the capacity to prepare bankable, climate-smart
                               investments that meet the standards required for international or commercial financing. The proposed coordinated
                               WBG GFC initiative will help participating municipalities address these urban development and municipal investment
                               challenges by expanding access to tailored financing instruments and leveraging the international expertise of IBRD
                               and IFC in the municipal sector, while safeguarding the long-term debt sustainability of the municipalities. Going
                               forward, the initiative could create replicable structures and a scalable financing model for cities across Türkiye
                               based on lessons learned and growing familiarity with WBG financing instruments available to ILBANK and
                               municipalities.
                               2. Through parallel and complementary operations, IBRD and IFC will provide a package of investment financing
                               and technical assistance to the metropolitan municipalities of Antalya and Konya aimed at enhancing municipal

                          1 ILBANK (İller Bankası Anonim Şirketi) is a Turkish development and investment bank that is established in 1933 and primarily focused on supporting municipalities

                          and local administrations.
                          2 These include all metropolitan cities in Türkiye except Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir. Antalya and Konya are among this group of 27 metropolitan municipalities.
                          3 This estimate was calculated in 2025 prices by World Bank experts based on an analysis of the five-year strategic plans, annual performance programs, and budget

                          documents of the 30 metropolitan municipalities.


                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                               infrastructure and services. IBRD will provide EUR 189 million through ILBANK as financial intermediary (FI) for
                               priority urban transport and wastewater investments in Antalya and Konya, along with EUR 6.5 million for technical
                               assistance and project management for ILBANK and eligible municipalities to strengthen their capacity for project
                               implementation and future investment operations. IFC will provide relatively shorter maturity and local currency
                               investment financing through ILBANK as FI for priority wastewater, renewable energy, and urban transport
                               investments in both cities. Together, the coordinated initiative leverages complementary IBRD and IFC financial
                               instruments to support multisectoral municipal investments from a joint subproject pipeline aligned with the
                               participating cities’ local development and climate priorities. Consistent with their mandates, IBRD will focus on
                               public service–oriented and non-commercial investments, while IFC will prioritize more commercially viable
                               investments and financing solutions, alongside complementary WBG capacity building support to strengthen overall
                               municipal creditworthiness. Overall, this coordinated package will support municipalities by enhancing their
                               municipal infrastructure, fiscal responsibility and capacity, which could, over time, help them attract and mobilize
                               private sector participation in the subnational sector.
                            Sectoral and Institutional Context
                              3. Türkiye has experienced rapid urbanization over the past decades, driven by population growth, rural-to-urban
                              migration, and economic development which has prompted large-scale public and private infrastructure
                              investments. The proportion of Türkiye’s population living in cities rose from approximately 38 to 78 percent between
                              1970 and 20244. It is expected to reach 86 percent by 20505. This has led to the rapid expansion of cities and a sharp




_For Official Use Only_
                              increase in demand for municipal services. Yet, the development of essential municipal infrastructure has not kept
                              pace, and municipalities face difficulties to plan, develop, and finance adequate infrastructure and services for existing
                              and newly developed areas. Compounding this, many cities have aging and inefficient infrastructure requiring
                              significant upgrade and maintenance. As a result, non-revenue water losses average over 40 percent in metropolitan
                              municipalities, wastewater reuse remains limited at just 0.5 percent, and energy expenditures make up 20 percent of
                              the total budgets for municipal water utilities (with only 4 percent share of renewable energy sources in energy
                              consumption).6 In addition, municipalities have been relied on to host and address the basic needs of various vulnerable
                              groups, including households displaced following the devastating earthquakes in February 2023, and need to be better
                              prepared to service and accommodate a dynamic population. Many metropolitan municipalities also face extreme
                              changes in seasonal populations due to both tourists and seasonal residents that add further challenges for right-sizing
                              infrastructure and services.

                              4. Adequate provision of well-functioning municipal infrastructure and services in Turkish cities is foundational to
                              support the economic development and jobs needed for sustainable growth. This is particularly critical for secondary
                              metropolitan municipalities with growing populations and important economic sectors, such as Konya, that need to
                              further improve and expand municipal infrastructure and services to ensure their sustainability and to remain attractive
                              for people and firms seeking predictable environments for operations and talent retention. Inefficiencies in
                              infrastructure provision and operation are an obstacle to the efficient functioning of the private sector, as this can
                              increase operational costs and therefore deter investment. It is estimated that a one-unit increase in investment in
                              municipal services and infrastructure would raise the production and trade index by approximately 1.41 units on
                              average across all Turkish cities.7 Improvement and expansion of municipal transportation, water, sanitation, and waste


                          4 World Bank, World Development Indicators, “Urban population (% of total population) – Türkiye,” accessed October 6, 2025,

                          https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.URB.TOTL.IN.ZS?locations=TR[20].
                          5 World development indicators. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
                          6 https://www.suen.gov.tr/uploads/suki-mukayeseli-performans-degerlendirmesi_ana-rapor.pdf
                          7 Ipek and Oksuz, 2021, Türkiye’de Yerel Yönetimlerin Üretim ve Ticaret Üzerindeki Etkisi, https://doi.org/10.31454/troyacademy.938880




                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
                                      The World Bank
                                      Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                                management systems is also critical for tourist cities like Antalya, which hosted 28.5 million tourists in 2024. 8 Tourist
                                cites must accommodate massive influxes of visitors, thereby supporting economic growth and jobs, while maintaining
                                quality of life for both residents and tourists alike. Investments in public transport, energy efficiency, urban water, and
                                ecosystem restoration also have multiplier effects creating direct jobs (e.g., construction) while generating additional
                                employment opportunities by enhancing productivity and making cities more attractive to invest and live in. Well-
                                targeted, low-carbon urban investments can outperform traditional infrastructure in generating jobs: for every US$1
                                million invested, public transport and electric vehicles create 15 to 28 jobs (compared to 8 jobs in conventional road
                                construction), energy efficiency yields 8 to 21 jobs, and nature-based solutions such as ecosystem restoration can
                                generate up to 40 jobs, twice the rate of gray infrastructure.9
                                5. Türkiye’s rapid urbanization has led to clustering of people, infrastructure, and economic assets in areas
                                vulnerable to significant seismic risk and other natural hazards. With about 70 percent of the country’s population
                                living in high-risk seismic zones, earthquakes pose a significant risk to lives, livelihoods, and infrastructure, and have a
                                disruptive impact on the economy. Türkiye has experienced 45 earthquakes with a magnitude of 5 and above between
                                1914 and 2024 affecting 20.5 million people and causing direct damages exceeding US$79 billion.10 The February 2023
                                earthquakes alone caused over 50,000 fatalities, destroyed or severely damaged 260,000 buildings, and led to an
                                estimated US$1.02 billion in damages to municipal infrastructure (including water and sewage networks, water and
                                wastewater treatment plants, municipal buildings, and municipal roads).11 In addition, weather-related disasters such
                                as flooding, droughts, wildfires, and extreme heat have been striking with greater frequency and intensity in Türkiye




_For Official Use Only_
                                over the past two decades,12 causing both economic losses and casualties. The average population affected by flooding
                                annually is about 600,000 and the average affected GDP annually is around US$5 billion.13 As Turkish cities become
                                increasingly exposed to hazards, they will need to play a pivotal role in national efforts to build resilience of the
                                country’s people and economy. At the same time, well-planned and resource-efficient urban infrastructure
                                development can significantly enhance resilience, reduce water and air pollution, and lower greenhouse gas emissions,
                                thereby improving the quality of life for urban residents and safeguarding urban economies.
                                6. Municipalities in Türkiye, even creditworthy metropolitan municipalities, have limited access to repayable long-
                                term finance for municipal infrastructure investments. Despite improvements in financial management and
                                creditworthiness, municipal borrowing remains low at about 2 percent of GDP in 2023— much below levels in the
                                OECD3614 (21.5 percent) and EU27 (11.4 percent) — due to limited growth and constrained market development.15 The
                                commercial market for municipal debt remains underdeveloped, with most municipal borrowing locked into short-
                                term maturities that are ill-suited for large-scale infrastructure projects. This limits the financing options available to
                                Turkish municipalities, resulting in a substantial level of long-term infrastructure financing through investment
                                development banks like ILBANK16 – a publicly owned development and investment bank dedicated to supporting sub-
                                national authorities. ILBANK plays an important and central role by on-lending funds from International Finance
                                Institutions (IFIs) and donor financing for municipal investments, leveraging its strong capitalization, technical
                                expertise, and privileged regulatory status to fill gaps left by commercial banks. However, accessing finance for multi-
                                sectoral municipal infrastructure investments remains a key structural constraint in the Turkish commercial banking

                          8
                              https://yigm.ktb.gov.tr/TR-201120/konaklama-istatistikleri.html
                          9 Banking on Cities, Washington, DC. World Bank
                          10 EM-DAT, CRED / UC Louvain, Brussels, Belgium (https://www.emdat.be/)
                          11 https://www.sbb.gov.tr/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/2023-Kahramanmaras-ve-Hatay-Depremleri-Raporu.pdf
                          12
                             1,257 extreme weather and flood events were recorded in 2024 – the highest number since at least 1944. Turkish State Meteorological service (2025). State of the
                          Climate in Türkiye in 2024 (https://www.mgm.gov.tr/FILES/iklim/yillikiklim/2024-iklim-raporu.pdf)
                          13 https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/Turkey.pdf. (2015)
                          14 Data for Chile and Costa Rica is not available.
                          15 OECD (2025) Subnational governments structure and finance in OECD countries: Key data, EOCD, Paris.
                          16 Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT). (2025). Money and Banking Statistics. Electronic Data Delivery System (EVDS). Retrieved 10.31.2025, from

                          https://evds2.tcmb.gov.tr/


                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 4



                                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                              market. Furthermore, many municipalities have limited capacity to prepare and structure viable infrastructure projects
                              and have limited understanding of the requirements of commercial financiers, which further hampers their ability to
                              mobilize financing and attract private investment. This underscores the need for continued technical assistance and
                              institutional strengthening alongside much needed financial sector reforms.
                              7. Antalya and Konya are two important secondary metropolitan municipalities that require significant
                              investments in upgrading and expanding municipal infrastructure to boost their potential as engines of growth and
                              to improve resilience. As large, fast-growing metropolitan municipalities, they face mounting infrastructure pressures
                              driven by rapid urbanization, economic expansion, and intensifying climate impacts. With Antalya’s population
                              reaching 2.7 million and Konya’s 2.3 million, the cities rank 5th and 6th nationally by population, with their population
                              growth rates far exceeding the national average.17 Antalya contributes around 3.5 percent (US$39.9 billion in 2023) to
                              national GDP and is rapidly urbanizing with strong investment in tourism, agriculture, and smart-and-green-city
                              initiatives. Konya is a historical city operating as an industrial and logistics hub, specializing in agriculture and machinery
                              manufacturing, while also attracting a growing number of heritage and spiritual tourists, and contributes about 2.1
                              percent (US$23.8 billion in 2023) to national GDP.18 Both municipalities contend with major urban development
                              challenges in managing fast population growth and urban sprawl, and providing basic municipal services and
                              connectivity across their large metropolitan footprints. Both cities are vulnerable to weather-related risks.19 Antalya
                              faces growing risks from rising temperatures, water scarcity, increasing wastewater volumes, heavy precipitation,
                              coastal flooding, and wildfires, threatening its tourism-based economy and urban infrastructure services. Konya is




_For Official Use Only_
                              highly exposed both to heavy precipitation causing flash floods and drought, groundwater depletion, and
                              desertification, endangering agricultural productivity and water security, as well as a growing urban heat island effect
                              in city center areas. Both municipalities have robust financial positions and performance, giving them the potential to
                              raise additional long-term debt for infrastructure investments with prudent management of their municipal finances.
                              8. Over the past decade, IBRD and IFC have built an increasingly strong partnership in the municipal sector in
                              Türkiye that creates a solid foundation and platform for coordinated investment financing and efforts to increase
                              private sector participation. Traditionally, IBRD worked with ILBANK to provide financing to municipalities and their
                              associated utilities without access to commercial finance or for investments that would not attract commercial or IFC
                              financing, while IFC worked with large metropolitan municipalities or utilities with the capacity to borrow without a
                              sovereign guarantee and for more commercially attractive investments. IBRD currently has an active portfolio of seven
                              operations totaling EUR2.1 billion with ILBANK, with the portfolio now diversified in terms of its sectoral and geographic
                              coverage.20 IFC has about US$600 million in direct lending to large metropolitan municipalities in Türkiye for major
                              municipal infrastructure investments.21 Leveraging IBRD’s and IFC’s municipal engagement in Türkiye, there is an
                              opportunity to bring tangible synergies between these two WBG institutions and establish a One WBG model to support
                              ILBANK and secondary metropolitan municipalities both to access financing and to maximize their municipal finance,
                              and to build and improve creditworthiness over time.


                          17 Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat). (2024). Address Based Population Registration System. Retrieved from https://data.tuik.gov.tr/Bulten/Index?p=Adrese-

                          Dayali-Nufus-Kayit-Sistemi-Sonuclari-2024-53783
                          18
                             Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat). (2023), Gross Domestic Product by Provinces. Retrieved from https://data.tuik.gov.tr/Bulten/Index?p=Yillik-Gayrisafi-Yurt-Ici-
                          Hasila-2024-54187
                          19 City Scan Studies have been completed for Antalya and Konya metropolitan municipalities with support from Bank-Executed Trust Fund grant through the Japan-

                          World Bank Program for Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Management in Developing Countries. City Scan is a rapid, geospatial diagnostic produced by the World Bank’s
                          City Resilience Program (CRP) to quickly assess a city’s key development, climate, and disaster-risk challenges.
                          20 These operations include Sustainable Cities Project 2 (P161915), Türkiye Earthquakes, Floods, Wildfires Emergency Reconstruction Project (P176608), Climate and

                          Disaster Resilience Cities (CDRC) Project (P173025), Türkiye Water Circularity and Efficiency Improvement Project (P174915), Public and Municipal Renewable Energy
                          Project (P179867), Municipal Services Improvement Project (P169996), Türkiye Earthquake Recovery and Reconstruction Project (P180849).
                          21 These include support to Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality’s metro line project (#37093), Antalya Metropolitan Municipality’s tramline project (#38506), and Izmir

                          Metropolitan Municipality’s water and wastewater investments (#44190, #36080). This is the total cumulative commitment – the current outstanding exposure is
                          US$160 million.


                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5



                                                                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                               9. This coordinated initiative is expected to be the first step in a longer-term engagement to establish a one WBG
                               model to unlock access to long-term infrastructure investment financing and technical support for secondary
                               metropolitan municipalities in Türkiye. The coordinated initiative will initially combine IBRD and IFC financial
                               instruments to support ILBANK and the metropolitan municipalities of Antalya and Konya to finance critical multi-
                               sectoral municipal investments aligned with local development and climate plans. By piloting a coordinated IBRD–IFC
                               approach, this first initiative has the potential to establish a replicable implementation model, setting up a clear
                               collaboration workflow among IBRD, IFC, ILBANK and the participating municipalities, and strengthening capacity in
                               ILBANK to facilitate access to a broader package of diversified financing for sustainable and resilient municipal
                               infrastructure investments in the future through new projects. By leveraging the complementary expertise of both
                               institutions in project preparation, planning, and financial structuring, the initiative will also build the foundations for
                               the future use of market-based financing instruments and crowding in private sector participation, and enable
                               replication through subsequent operations across additional municipalities and sectors. The IBRD loan-financed GFC
                               Project is detailed in the sections below.
                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                             10. The Project development objective (PDO) is to improve access to sustainable and resilient municipal infrastructure
                             and services in participating cities.
                               11. The Project will measure progress toward the PDO via the following indicators:




_For Official Use Only_
                                    • People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (number, of which female and youth) – a sub-indicator
                                      to the Corporate Results Indicator (CRI) ‘People with enhanced resilience to climate risk’
                                    • Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (number,
                                      of which female and youth) - a sub-indicator to the CRI ‘People benefiting from improved access to
                                      sustainable transport infrastructure and services’
                                    • People provided with water, sanitation and hygiene of which (%) is safely managed (number, of which female
                                      and youth) – CRI

                               D. Project Description
                               12. The Project will include three components: (i) Integrated, multi-sectoral investments in participating cities; (ii)
                               Strengthening capacity of ILBANK and municipalities for future investment projects; and (iii) Project management.
                           Component 1. Integrated, multi-sectoral investments in participating cities (EUR 189 million)
                               13. This Component will support ILBANK to provide sub-loans (in Euro) to eligible municipalities and their affiliated
                               utilities for municipal investments contributing to more livable, productive, and climate-resilient municipal
                               infrastructure and services in the participating cities. It will finance civil works, goods, consulting and non-consulting
                               services for municipal infrastructure investments and subproject management and implementation support to
                               municipal sub-borrowers22. Eligible investments under this Component will fall under the following categories:
                                a. Urban Transport: construction or rehabilitation of mass transit systems (such as tramlines and associated
                                   facilities); purchase of public transport vehicles (such as trams, clean energy/low emission buses); construction of
                                   non-motorized transport infrastructure; and establishment of digital systems for traffic management; road safety
                                   improvements; establishment of evacuation routes and emergency corridors; improvements for universal
                                   accessibility; and integrated greening along transport corridors. Investments will focus on supporting a modal shift


                          22
                            Municipal sub-borrowers refer to Konya Metropolitan Municipality and the water utilities of Antalya and Konya—Antalya Water
                          and Wastewater Administration (ASAT) and Konya Water and Wastewater Administration (KOSKI).

                                                                                                                                                      Page 6



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                                towards sustainable mobility modes and improving access to main urban centers and, thus, their markets,
                                essential public services and employment opportunities.
                             b. Water and Sanitation: construction and rehabilitation of drinking water, sewerage, and stormwater networks,
                                transmission lines, water tanks, pumping stations, and water and wastewater treatment plants; and purchase of
                                goods for related municipal services.
                            14. This component will cover Antalya and Konya. A total of six municipal infrastructure subprojects, with a total
                            estimated cost of EUR 189 million, were identified for financing under the Project. In Antalya, the proposed
                            investments comprise a series of water and sanitation subprojects with an approximate total cost of EUR 105 million.
                            Collectively, these investments aim to extend sustainable sanitation services and promote cleaner, more sustainable
                            wastewater treatment and reuse across the province. In Konya, the proposed subprojects —totaling around EUR 84
                            million— cover sustainable urban mobility, water and sanitation. These initiatives are expected to improve urban
                            mobility and enhance environmental sustainability in Konya.
                          Component 2. Strengthening capacity of ILBANK and municipalities for future investment projects (EUR 1.5 million)
                            15. The Component will finance consulting and non-consulting services, training, and provision of goods to support
                            ILBANK and eligible municipalities and/or their affiliated utilities to build institutional and technical capacity in
                            municipal finance, sustainable and resilient urban management, and preparation of viable municipal infrastructure
                            investments to enable potential future financing. The Component will support municipalities and/or their affiliated




_For Official Use Only_
                            utilities in: (i) strengthening their creditworthiness and technical capacity in municipal finance and financial
                            management; (ii) preparing policy documents, planning documents, and/or municipal infrastructure investment and
                            financing plans; (iii) developing pipelines of priority subprojects and preparing technical, environmental and social
                            (E&S) studies for potential future investments; and (iv) enhancing institutional capacity on subproject preparation,
                            management and supervision. The funds under this Component will be directly managed by ILBANK and will not be on-
                            lent to municipalities or utilities
                          Component 3. Project management (EUR 5 million)
                            16. This Component will finance consulting and non-consulting services, provision of goods, operating costs, and
                            training to ILBANK for project management and implementation support activities, including, inter alia, procurement,
                            financial management, E&S compliance, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, grievance redress, stakeholder
                            engagement, communications and outreach.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                        Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                       No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                 No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                            17. ILBANK will act as the Financial Intermediary (FI), providing sub-project loans and implementation support to
                            the Participating Municipalities. Participating Municipalities are the implementing agencies for the proposed
                            Project. ILBANK has been collaborating with municipalities and working on IBRD-financed projects. Overall E&S
                            performance of these projects has been satisfactory.



                                                                                                                                             Page 7



                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                           18. With support from the IBRD, ILBANK has established its own Environmental and Social Management System
                           (ESMS), which provides a framework for managing E&S risks and impacts under IBRD-financed projects and sub-
                           projects. Within ILBANK, the International Relations Group is authorized and responsible for management of the
                           projects financed by IFIs through its two departments: the Department of Financial Institutions and Investor Relations
                           (DoFIIR), and the Department of International Operations (DoIO). The compliance to IFIs’ E&S standards is covered by
                           Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU) under the DoFIIR. The ESMU has an ESMS Coordinator, social
                           specialists, environmental specialists, occupational health and safety (OHS) specialists, and a team of consultants who
                           are responsible for applying the ESMS procedures including monitoring, supervision, and reporting. The Project-specific
                           E&S staff in the ESMU shall include one OHS specialist, one environmental specialist, and one social specialist at a
                           minimum. At the regional level, ILBANK operates through 18 Regional Directorates across Türkiye, each of which has a
                           designated E&S and OHS staff. These teams contribute to the E&S screening process, participate in site visits, conduct
                           regular monitoring during construction and operation phases, and serve as contact points for municipal borrowers and
                           local stakeholders. The ESMS has been functional since August 2024, and six IBRD-funded projects are being
                           implemented through the ILBANK ESMS. The ILBANK ESMS has been performing well and is staffed with adequate
                           human resources. The GFC Project will be implemented under this Bank-approved ESMS.
                           19. It is assessed that both Konya and Antalya have sufficient E&S capacity to prepare and implement their
                           respective subprojects, being already beneficiaries of several IBRD-financed investments through ILBANK. Both
                           municipalities have adequately staffed Project Implementation Units (PIUs). PIUs will be responsible for preparing the




_For Official Use Only_
                           required E&S instruments, conducting supervision activities, implementing sub-project level grievance mechanisms,
                           and ensuring stakeholder engagement as part of the ILBANK ESMS. All PIUs will recruit supervision consultants to
                           oversee the contractors’ activities. The supervision consultants will include adequate E&S and OHS experts to oversee
                           the E&S performance of the contractors. The Terms of Reference (ToR) for recruitment of supervision consultants will
                           be reviewed and approved by IBRD. The ILBANK ESMS includes detailed procedures for preparation and
                           implementation of Environmental and Social Management Plans, Resettlement Plans, Sexual Exploitation and
                           Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH)-specific mitigation measures including Code of Conduct for workers, a mechanism
                           to report SEA/SH cases, and training and awareness sessions for project workers and affected communities. The
                           participating municipalities and utilities will follow these procedures. ILBANK prepared an Environmental and Social
                           Commitment Plan (ESCP) that has been reviewed by IBRD and will be finalized during the Project’s negotiations.
                           Additionally, ILBANK has prepared a project-level Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be implemented throughout
                           the project life. Participating municipalities will be required to prepare subproject-specific SEPs to identify relevant
                           stakeholders, including vulnerable and disadvantaged groups who may be impacted by the planned subprojects.
                           Preliminary E&S capacity assessment conducted by ILBANK and IBRD regarding the E&S capacity of the participating
                           municipalities and affiliated utilities (Antalya and Konya municipalities as well as KOSKI- Konya Water and Wastewater
                           Administration and ASAT- Antalya Water and Wastewater Administration) reveals that they have good capacity and
                           established E&S Management Units. Existing grievance mechanisms, such as the use of CIMER and YIMER, are
                           operational. The municipal sub-borrowers also recruit consultants to prepare E&S instruments and monitor
                           implementation by the contractors. All these agencies have long experience of implementing IBRD-financed projects.
                           Project specific capacity building measures to be conducted by ILBANK are included in the ESCP.
                          E. Implementation
                            20. The Project builds on existing engagement and implementation arrangements under the current municipal
                            operations of IBRD with the Government of Türkiye, represented by the Ministry of Treasury and Finance (MoTF),
                            ILBANK, and participating municipalities. The Project will have a Loan Agreement with ILBANK and a Guarantee
                            Agreement with the MoTF, as well as sub-loan agreements between ILBANK and municipal sub-borrowers in Antalya
                            and Konya.


                                                                                                                                               Page 8



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                           21. ILBANK, a municipal development and investment bank, will be the implementing FI responsible for
                           coordinating and supervising the implementation of Component 1 and for providing support to the municipal sub-
                           borrowers, which will implement the Project activities under Component 1; ILBANK will also be responsible for
                           implementing Project activities under Components 2 and 3. The Project will be managed by the existing Project
                           Management Unit (PMU) under ILBANK’s International Relations Group, which has extensive experience in overseeing
                           the implementation of municipal infrastructure subprojects supported through IFI financing. Through previous and
                           ongoing IBRD-financed operations, ILBANK has continuously strengthened their capacity. The ILBANK PMU has assigned
                           a team to work on technical, fiduciary, E&S aspects for project preparation and may revise and strengthen the team by
                           assigning additional specialists or consultants with terms of reference and qualifications acceptable to IBRD to support
                           project implementation. Additional experts may also be mobilized as needed during implementation.
                           22. ILBANK meets IBRD’s requirements for financial management, disbursement, and oversight. Specifically, the
                           IBRD assessment confirms that ILBANK has in place adequate systems and institutional capacity to manage project
                           funds, maintain accounting records, and submit audited financial statements in accordance with OP 10.00, and any
                           identified risks are addressed through targeted mitigation measures and ongoing implementation support provided by
                           IBRD. ILBANK shall prepare and adopt a Project Operations Manual in the form and substance satisfactory to IBRD prior
                           to the Loan Effective Date.
                           23. Municipal sub-borrowers will sign sub-loan agreements with ILBANK for their respective subprojects under
                           Component 1 and will be responsible for subproject implementation in accordance with their sub-loan agreements.




_For Official Use Only_
                           The participating municipal sub-borrowers have relatively strong implementation capacity with previous experience in
                           implementing IFI-financed operations, including ongoing IBRD-financed investments through ILBANK. They have
                           adequately staffed PIUs. The municipal PIUs will be responsible for procurement of civil works, goods, consulting and
                           non-consulting services for the subprojects, with technical support and oversight of ILBANK. They are also responsible
                           for preparing E&S instruments and conducting supervision activities. The PIUs may be supplemented by individual
                           consultants as necessary during project implementation.
                           24. The borrowing and implementation capacity of the participating municipal sub-borrowers have been assessed
                           by ILBANK and WBG (using IFC standards for assessing creditworthiness). Both IFC and ILBANK conducted
                           creditworthiness assessments of the participating municipalities and utilities, concluding that they have overall
                           adequate administrative and financial capacities to borrow for municipal infrastructure investments under the Project.
                           The creditworthiness assessments also determined the overall borrowing limit for each municipal sub-borrower. The
                           WBG task team, comprising IBRD and IFC staff, is jointly working with the municipalities to further improve their
                           creditworthiness.


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank




                                                                                                                                               Page 9



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Green and Future Cities Project (P509293)


                           Ahmet Kindap
                           Senior Urban Specialist

                           Bontje Marie Zangerling
                           Senior Urban Development Specialist

                           Xueman Wang
                           Senior Urban Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           ILLER BANKASI ANONIM SIRKETI (ILBANK)

                          Implementing Agencies
                           ILBANK

                           Local Administrations




_For Official Use Only_
                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Ahmet Kindap, Bontje Marie Zangerling, Xueman Wang

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Peter D. Ellis                      10-Mar-2026

                          Country/Division Director:              Agata Pawlowska                     30-Mar-2026




                                                                                                                              Page 10



                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
