Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01210




Public Disclosure Authorized
         The World Bank
         Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)         Operation ID                 Operation Name
Brazil                           P509041                      Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development
                                                              Project
Region                           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND                15-Aug-2025                  13-Feb-2026                  Transport
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument             Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project               Government of Tocantins      Secretary of Planning /
Financing (IPF)                                               Secretaria de Planejamento
                                                              - SEPLAN

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To enhance access to safe and resilient transport infrastructure and improve the climate resilience of family farmers
and tourism activities in vulnerable communities in selected areas of Tocantins.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            250.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                 250.00
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              120.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                120.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing

                                                                                                                     Page 1
         The World Bank
         Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


       Commercial Financing                                                                                          100.00
          Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                          100.00
       Counterpart Funding                                                                                             30.00
          Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                    30.00




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                          Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                           The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.    Brazil’s real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 2.9 percent in 2023 and is projected to expand by 3.7 percent
in 20241 - driven by strong consumption, supported by a resilient labor market, strong consumption, recovering
investment and fiscal transfers. Growth in 2023 was fueled by private consumption, fiscal stimulus, and declining inflation,
while exports benefited from a record grain harvest and favorable external conditions. Growth is expected to moderate
to 2.2 percent in 2025 and stabilize at 2.3 percent in the medium term. The government has made progress in reforms to
improve the business environment, financial sector, and indirect taxes. However, faster, inclusive, long-term growth
requires additional reforms to enhance competitiveness, reduce financial and market distortions, expand infrastructure
investment, integrate into global value chains, and improve education quality.

2.     In 2023, the poverty rate (US$ 6.85 per day) fell to 21.8 percent, linked to improvements in economic conditions
and social protection policies. In July 2024, the unemployment rate fell to 6.8 percent (the lowest since 2014), and real
household incomes rose 4.8 percent year-over-year. The rapid decline in the poverty rates from 2022 and 2023 has slowed
down in 2024 as Bolsa Familia transfers have stabilized. Still, the poverty rate (US$ 6.85/day per capita, 2017 PPP)
continued to decrease gradually to 21.3 percent in 2024, driven by a 3 percent increase in the real minimum wage and
the strong labor market. Sustained job growth, strengthening the targeting of the social protection system and lowering
inflation could support faster poverty reduction over the coming years.

3.      Although deforestation has diminished by 21.8 percent in the Amazon region in 2023, climate change risks are
still pressured by the high levels of land use emissions in the Amazon and Cerrado ecosystems. Brazil’s greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions are dominated by land use change (40.1 percent) and agriculture (30.4 percent). Climate change is
altering temperature and rainfall patterns in the country, resulting in reduced water availability and extended droughts;
it could push another 800,000 to 3 million Brazilians into extreme poverty as soon as 2030.


1 According to the International Monetary Fund estimations.




                                                                                                                             Page 2
            The World Bank
            Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


    Sectoral and Institutional Context

4.       The State of Tocantins (TO), Brazil’s newest state, faces significant challenges related to rural development,
economic inclusion, and infrastructure gaps, particularly in road transport. Created in 1988, Tocantins spans 277,620
km² with a population of only 1.5 million. Its economy is heavily reliant on agribusiness, with 13.8 million hectares of
arable land driving agricultural output, which contributed to a GDP of R$ 58.2 billion in 2022. However, the state ranks
below national averages in socioeconomic indicators, including monthly household income of R$ 1,581 and Human
Development Index (HDI) of 0.7312 (national averages of R$1,848 and 0.766, respectively), which embeds substantial
disparities across its 139 municipalities. Rural poverty and economic vulnerability remain pervasive, exacerbating rural-
to-urban inequalities.

5.     Tocantins' agriculture and tourism sectors have grown remarkably, contributing 28.6 and 3.8 percent to the
state’s gross value-added in 2021 respectively. Tocantins is an agriculture powerhouse, and its grains harvest is the largest
in Brazil's Northern region, with 70% of soy production exported to China. Yet, rural poverty remains ubiquitous.
Agriculture revenue increased sixfold over the past decade, yet family farmers3 remain excluded from these gains: nearly
40% of the 300,000 inhabitants in rural areas depend on Bolsa Familia to survive.4 The state’s share of Brazil’s agricultural
value-added rose from 1.1 percent in 2011 to 2.26 percent in 2021, driven by an expansion in planted area from 656,000
hectares in 2011 to 2.2 million in 2024 and significant productivity improvements. However, family farmers face systemic
barriers, including limited access to modern inputs, credit, markets, land, and technical assistance, which prevent them
from benefiting proportionately. Employment in agriculture declined from 17.7 percent of the labor force in 2012 to 13.2
percent in 2024 due to mechanization and consolidation among large-scale agribusinesses, with family farms losing
workers every year. In 2017, family farms accounted for 60.7 percent of agricultural employment, involving 124,000
people across 44,900 units, yet nearly 80 percent of these farmers lacked participation in cooperatives or other
organizations, hindering their ability to access markets and certifications. In irrigated areas, cooperation among producers
is limited, despite past attempts to enhance the productivity.5 Regarding tourism, the state's natural attractions, such as
Jalapão, Cantão, and Serras Gerais, are key destinations, with Jalapão alone attracting close to 50 thousand visitors
annually. However, the sector faces challenges including limited diversification, with a predominant focus on ecotourism,
and inadequate infrastructure, particularly in road access to tourist sites. This even despite the large investments in rural
roads done by the past two projects in TO, non-paved roads are still plagued with critical spots that impede all-season
access, further isolating rural producers, underscoring the need for targeted investments to integrate family farmers into
Tocantins’ agricultural growth

6.      Support to family farming amongst poorest rural communities, and investments in low-carbon climate-resilient
infrastructure, are critical to promote social inclusion in Tocantins, promoting convergence with the average levels of
socioeconomic development in Brazil. In Tocantins, the challenges to the competitiveness and inclusion agendas are
twofold: an infrastructure gap and unequal growth in agriculture productivity. One major effect of these challenges is the


2
    Source : http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/
3 Fulfilling the four criteria set out in the Brazil’s Farming Law (Law 11.326/2006). It defines family farmers as follows: (i) does not have under any tenure regime an area

of more than four fiscal modules; (ii) predominantly relies on its own family labor; (iii) household income predominantly originates in the family farm; and (iv) family
members operate the farm.
4 Toledo Fonseca et al. (2021) “Rural Poverty in Northern Brazil: an analysis of the socioeconomic profile of the beneficiaries of the Bolsa Família Program”, in: Revista

do Desenvolvimento Regional, vol. 26, 2021 (link).
5 For instance, the PDRIS project included activities in support of the São João irrigated perimeter.




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 3
         The World Bank
         Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


cost of transport disproportionately affecting family farmers, since 60 percent of freight is transported by road although
Brazil lags peer countries in transport connectivity.6 Without improved transport connectivity to support critical sectors
such as tourism and agriculture, Tocantins will struggle to climb the competitiveness ranking in Brazil – currently 15th out
of 27 states – as the 2024 report shows.7 Productivity inequality is persistent between family farms and commercial
enterprises in Tocantins. Family farming, despite accounting for more than 70 percent of rural establishments with some
production in 2017, managed to generate only 16.9 percent of farm output, with an average value per productive unit of
R$26,783. Meanwhile, the 17 thousand farmers with more than four fiscal modules8 were responsible for 83 percent of
the agricultural revenue generated by the state 2017, averaging a production value of R$ 321,354.

7.       Investments in supporting family farming and promoting sustainable infrastructure are critical to enhance
social inclusion in the Northern Region of Brazil, including in TO, reducing rural-urban economic disparities. Between
2000 and 2022, the share the State’s population living in rural areas dropped from 25.7 to 14.6 percent, an 11-point decline
compared to a national average of 6.4 percentage points. Poor connectivity to markets limits the commercialization of
produce and income generation, exacerbating vulnerability. Although 90 percent of farmers have access to electricity, and
only 10% of farmers receive any type of Technical Assistance and Rural Extension services, compared with a national
average of 20%. Access to credit is similarly constrained, with just 18.3 percent of family farmers able to secure loans.

8.       Positioned as an entrepot of national logistical corridors, Tocantins relies heavily on road transport for the
efficiency of its agricultural sector, but maintenance remains a big challenge. The state manages a 5,841 km paved road
network,9 for accessibility and integration with national logistics corridors, such as the BR-153 and the North-South
Railway. However, 20.1 percent of paved roads remain in poor or very poor condition despite recent large investments in
the sector,10 causing high transport costs and safety risks, including 572 annual road fatalities in 2023.11 Insufficient
maintenance funding and climate-induced vulnerabilities, such as erosion and pavement failures, further exacerbate the
challenge – leading to rapid deterioration that requires large investments to repair much of the network.

9.     Traffic deaths and severe injuries in Tocantins are a severe problem in rural areas, with one of the highest fatality
rates in Brazil, compounded by the poor condition of the road network and lack of safe designs. According to data from
Ministry of Health, between 2019 and 2023, road traffic fatalities have increased by 12 percent in the state, from 490 to
572 traffic-related deaths, or from 31.1 to 34.8 fatalities per 100 thousand inhabitants, doubling the 16.9 national rate.
Tocantins roads continue to lack adequate safe road designs – especially when crossing urban perimeters – and
underinvest in maintenance of road safety infrastructure (signaling, median barriers, etc.). Despite implementing a road
safety policy for the past decade, crash data system management, and equipment and policies for enforcement have yet
to comply with best practices.



6
  More efficient modes such as rail and waterborne – both present in Tocantins - typically require very large scales of operation and are out of reach for small producers
individually. Brazil ranks 74th in the Road Connectivity Index and 51st in the 2023 Logistics Performance Index, compared with China’s 19th and India’s 38th.
7 Source : https://rankingdecompetitividade.org.br/norte/to/ranking-geral/nota-do-pilar?year=2024

8 Fiscal modules refer to a measurement unit in hectares established by the National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform (INCRA) for each municipality.

Regarding size, rural properties are classified as: Smallholdings: rural properties with an area below the Minimum Parcel Fraction; Small Property: properties with an
area between the Minimum Parcel Fraction and 4 fiscal modules.
9 Based on the GIS data obtained at the State Geoportal. See Annex 3 for a map of the state’s paved network.

10 Chronic lack of maintenance gives rise to a pattern of accelerated pavement degradation and cycles of costly reconstruction, which is well-documented in Brazil. See

for instance Fiscal implications of historic maintenance strategies in Brazil, a study undertaken under the Green and Resilient Mobility and Logistics PASA (P179908).
11 Pavement conditions are obtained from AGETO’s 2022 visual survey of the state road network. Road crash fatalities are from DATASUS 2023.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4
         The World Bank
         Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


10. Gender disparities significantly affect Tocantins' agriculture, transport and tourism sectors, particularly
disadvantaging women family farmers. Women run only 18.1 percentage of family agriculture units (and just of 11.8
percent conventional farms), reflecting persistent inequalities in access to resources and opportunities.12 Women face
structural barriers, including lower access to productive inputs, credit, and land compared to men, as well as insufficient
access to information, technical assistance, and extension services. Social norms and the unequal division of domestic
labor further restrict women’s mobility, autonomy, and agency, limiting their participation in producer organizations and
access to markets. These challenges are compounded by the need to balance household responsibilities, which reduces
the time available for productive activities and applying for financing. Moreover, pervasive domestic violence undermines
women’s well-being and agency, exacerbating their economic vulnerability.

11. Tocantins is highly vulnerable to climate change, with profound impacts on agriculture and road transport
infrastructure, particularly for family farmers. Rising annual average temperatures from 23,9°C to 27,5°C by 2050, in one
of the hottest States already in Brazil, as well as increasingly frequent extreme events, will affect lives and livelihoods
across the state. Key crops like pineapples, cassava, soybeans, and corn, which are rainfed or increasingly reliant on
irrigation, face growing risks from prolonged droughts and water scarcity, compounded by the loss of 28.3 percent of
Tocantins’ native vegetation since 1985. Family farmers, disproportionately affected by climate impacts, also struggle with
degraded pastures and poor environmental compliance, and often have their environmental cadaster (CAR) in irregular
situation. Additionally, extreme weather events accelerate erosive processes (e.g. gullies), threatening road integrity and
disrupting access to markets. Poor road conditions, exacerbated by inadequate drainage and lack of maintenance, shorten
infrastructure lifespans and increase transport emissions by 4-5 percent.

 Relationship to CPF

12. The Project is fully consistent with Brazil’s 2024-2028 Fiscal Year (FY) Country Partnership Framework (CPF -
Report CPF0000013). It is aligned to three focus areas of the CPF13: (i) greater productivity and employment; (ii) greater
inclusion of the poor and underserved populations; and (iii) greener economy with reduced vulnerability to climate shocks.
The project will support the agriculture and logistics competitiveness and employment with focus on underserved
population and will promote climate resilient practices to reduce climate vulnerability.

13. The Project is aligned with the Bank’s maximizing finance for development (MFD) strategy and contributes to the
private capital mobilization (PCM) agenda supporting fiscal sustainability by providing a longer-term revenue stream for
the private sector partner. The new generation of Performance-Based Contracts (PBCs) envisioned will not require tolls
but will further delegate to the private sector responsibility in the management of the road infrastructure. PCM is
envisioned for the rehabilitation and maintenance of specific roads through PBCs, with Government’s commitments to 90
percent of the funding, while the private sector is responsible for the remaining 10 percent for road rehabilitation CAPEX
investments. Additionally, the program will finance the structuring and implementation of several long-term CREMA PPPs,
potentially counting as partial counterpart financing but contributing to the PCM agenda.




12 IBGE. Censo Agropecuário 2017.

13Link to the Brazil Country Partnership Framework - FY 24 to FY 28




                                                                                                                       Page 5
          The World Bank
          Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


14. The Project is consistent with Brazil’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC – updated in 2024)14 by focusing
on resilience and adaptation to climate change for family farmers and road networks in Tocantins. Guided by an
assessment of Tocantins’ vulnerability to climate hazards, the Project integrates adaptation measures to address risks
such as floods, landslides, and droughts. Improved road maintenance will provide all-season access to rural areas, ensuring
reliable connectivity to markets, healthcare, and essential services, while climate-smart agricultural practices will
strengthen resilience in rural communities. The Project aligns with the Sectoral Adaptation Plan for a Low Carbon
Agriculture for Sustainable Development 2020-2030 (Plan ABC+)15 and the Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for the
Brazilian Agriculture and Livestock Sector.16 Both addressing the importance of adaptation as it is fundamental to the
agriculture and livestock sector in the face of climate change. Finally, the Project respond to the agriculture and transport
sector priorities identified in the World Bank Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) for Brazil,17 which includes
increasing agricultural productivity, resilient maintenance of roads and climate gains as priority actions to be financed.
The World Bank’s Climate Change Action Plan 2021-25 and the Roadmap for Climate Action in LAC are also supported.

15. The proposed Project is also aligned with key World Bank priorities, such as closing gender gaps. The Project will
apply a gender lens, by developing specific targeting approach to ensure outreach and capacity-building tailored to
women, as well as disaggregate beneficiary indicators to track their participation and to tackle some of the gender gaps
identified following the WBG’s Gender Strategy (2024-2030)18 and improve the economic vulnerability of women in rural
Tocantins in all three sectors (transport, agriculture, and tourism). Gender gaps will also be identified throughout the
Project design phase to inform gender indicators to be proposed relating to specific activities benefiting women.

     C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
     16. To enhance access to safe and resilient transport infrastructure and improve the climate resilience of family
     farmers and tourism activities in vulnerable communities in selected areas of Tocantins.

     Key Results (From PCN)

17. The achievement of the project development objective is envisioned according to a Theory of Change (see Annex 1)
linking project activities to outcomes, which would be measured through the following proposed indicators. At the PDO
level:

Enhance access to safe and resilient transport infrastructure:
Component 1 aims to increase the safety of road infrastructure and adoption of climate-resilient practices in road
networks. This will be measured by two main PDO indicators:
       a) Share of paved roads with PBCs and resilient management response (percentage);
       b) Reduction in annual road crash fatalities along targeted state road corridors in the State of Tocantins (number)

14 Brazil. 2023. Adjustments to the National Determined Contribution to the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC. (link)

15
 In addition to stimulating the adoption and maintenance of production systems, processes, and practices, the Plan incorporates the Integrated Landscape Approach,
where the management of agricultural land considers the different elements of the rural landscape.
16 Which is divided in four initiatives: R&D and Innovation, Technical Assistance and Rural Extension, Public Policy and Industry, Trade and Markets; and covers diverse

axes that are contemplated in the Tocantins Project, such as: technological practices, diversified farming, or integrated land management.
17 World Bank. 2023. The Brazil Country Climate and Development Report. Washington, DC.

18 The Project covers all 3 of the strategic objectives of the new proposed 2024-2030 Gender strategy: End Gender-based Violence & Elevate Human Capital; Expand

and Enable Economic Opportunities; and Engage Women as Leaders.


                                                                                                                                                                  Page 6
         The World Bank
         Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


Improve the climate resilience of family farmers and tourism activities in vulnerable communities:
Component 2 aims to increase the climate resilience of family farmers through the adoption of Climate Smart Agriculture
(CSA) activities. Component 3 promotes inclusive and sustainable tourism development by supporting tourism revenues
in vulnerable communities, and strengthens environmental management through enhanced conservation efforts,
improved monitoring, and activities aimed at increasing biodiversity and resilience to climate shocks. Therefore,
improvement in climate resilience will be measured through the following Indicator:

     c) People benefiting from increased resilience of livelihoods, jobs or firms (Number of people, disaggregated by
        gender and youth, Score Card (CRI) – measuring PDO 2, Component 2 and 3).

 D. Concept Description

18. Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (Projeto Tocantins Produtivo, according to the
Government terminology) is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) Loan of US$120 million, with a total Project cost of
US$250 million, including US$30 million in counterpart funding and US$ 100 million in estimated PCM for the road PPPs.
Implemented over eight years, the Project’s main interventions in transport infrastructure, support to family agriculture,
and support to community-based tourism aim to reduce rural vulnerability, improve living conditions, and increase
economic opportunities for family farmers, Indigenous Peoples (IPs), other Traditional Peoples, Communities and
Quilombolas, and other vulnerable groups. Environmental protection activities are also integrated. The Project will be
prepared in close coordination with the Sustainable Development Project of Tocantins by the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB) in the same three sectors (transport, agriculture, and tourism), supporting collaboration
between the two institutions. An additional financing is envisaged by the Government in the next 2 or 3 years, likely
expanding the scale of the three main components.

19. By targeting approximately 800 km of state roads for a CREMA-DBM pilot,19 the Project will build on previous
CREMA experiences done in the State and will implement CREMA-PPP corridors for the first time in Tocantins to support
agricultural trade. The selection of the 800 km of paved roads is being done based on a criticality analysis of infrastructure
in different regions of the State, weighing local economic conditions, relation to family farming, access to jobs and services
together with climate vulnerability (see Annex 2). Special emphasis will be placed on regions with socially vulnerable
populations and areas at higher risk of climate impacts, ensuring that the Project contributes to a more inclusive and
resilient rural economy. Regarding support to family farming, environmental protection and community-based tourism,
the project will finance technical, financial and marketing support, among others. The road selection analysis will
complement this selection in parallel, ensuring that the selected region for implementing road maintenance and
improvements supports integrated strategies for the development of family farming and sustainable tourism routes,
leveraging Tocantins’ rich cultural and natural heritage to create jobs and boost incomes. Thus, the Project connects
remote populations as well as family farmers and tourism hubs to markets and public services. As a result, the Project will
enhance the livelihood of beneficiaries, while reducing transport costs, ensuring long-term maintenance, improving
climate resilience, and enhancing road safety. For specific corridors that are connected to other States, where heavy traffic
and increased capital expenditure is needed, the implementation of low-tariff PPPs will be sought. The Project is structured
into three main components plus a fourth one concerning Project implementation.

19 CREMA refers to Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Contracts, which in its new generation is being implemented in several Brazilian states under two main

modalities: DBM (Design-Build-Maintain), for low-traffic paved segments, and PPP (public-private partnership), for high-traffic segments with potential for raising user
revenues.


                                                                                                                                                                  Page 7
          The World Bank
          Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)




20. Component 1 – Proactive Maintenance, Resilient and Safe Road Infrastructure (US$206 million – including US$
100 million for PCM). This component aims to strengthen Tocantins' road infrastructure by restoring, maintaining, and
enhancing approximately 800 km of paved state roads with CREMA-DBM, which transfer maintenance responsibility and
risk to contractors, incentivizing better road quality and cost efficiency. CREMA-PPPs are envisioned in three main State
corridors with heavy truck traffic. CREMAs will include climate-resilient interventions such as improved drainage systems
to reduce vulnerability to erosion and extreme weather events. Safety enhancements, such as better road signage and
pedestrian protection in urban areas, will also be integrated. This component will contribute to reducing road fatalities,
improving connectivity for rural populations, and ensuring the sustainability of investments through institutional capacity-
building for road management. Elimination of critical spots providing all-season access to 200 km of non-paved State
roads, as well as the enhancement of road safety in selected roads and urban places will be included as another
subcomponent. Finally, an institutional strengthening subcomponent will focus on supporting sustainable and inclusive
transport policies and providing road safety and climate resilience equipment and trainings.

21. Component 2 – Enhanced Livelihoods and Climate Resilience of Family Farmers (US$33 million). This component
seeks to strengthen the climate resilience of family farmers in Tocantins, increase their productivity, and enhance their
integration into agrifood and sustainable community-based tourism markets. Using the productive alliance model,20 this
component will provide targeted support to Producer Organizations (POs) and Community Associations (CAs) at different
organizational levels. POs and CAs will benefit from matching grants to co-finance business plans respectively designed to
improve productivity, market competitiveness, and climate resilience. The target outcomes include enhanced climate
resilience of agrifood and agrotourism activities, increased inclusion of vulnerable family farmer groups — including
women, IPs, Quilombolas, and youth — and improved market linkages and sales performance of family farmers. A first
subcomponent will support linking family farmers to markets, focusing on integrating family farmers into agrifood and
sustainable tourism value chains. 21 It will achieve this through targeted technical assistance (TA) and rural extension
services provided by the Project, and matching grants under the productive alliance model, co-financing business plans
for market-oriented activities.22 Pre-investment support will include targeted TA for developing comprehensive business
plans, ensuring inclusivity by incorporating gender-sensitive assistance.23 Training centers will also be established.24 A
second subcomponent will focus on strengthening institutions and systems of small CAs of Family Farmers.25 Activities are
divided into two key areas. First, targeted TA will support the development and cofinancing of simplified Business Plans26


20 The productive alliance model traditionally refers to a business relationship (alliance) between a group of producers, technical assistance provider, commercial

financial institution, and identified market or buyer. These parties enter a joint business plan to meet a market demand while improving productivity, value addition,
market position, and sales on a benefit-sharing basis. The participation of buyers is critical to the productive alliance model, as buyers provide the market linkages and
may continue to do so after Project support has ceased. The WB has successfully implemented the productive alliances model in several agricultural operations across
the LAC region (link).
21
  The definition of priority areas of action for this subcomponent will consider the selection of production chains and the presence of a production and market base to
support the formation of production alliances. Some sectors included might be fluvial aquiculture, cattle and agriculture production of typical Cerrado fruits, among
others.
22 Business plans will be selected through a transparent public call for expressions of interest, using clear eligibility criteria. Mentorship and TA will be provided for

eligible POs and CAs to prepare and implement their plans. Beneficiary contributions will constitute approximately 20 percent of the total value of the business plan,
delivered in financial resources, assets, or in-kind contributions.
23 It will also involve the development of gender-aware training modules tailored to specific community needs.

24 Such as the one envisioned at the Mauro Mendanha Agrotechnology Park

25 The definition of priority areas of action for this subcomponent will consider the presence of family farmers in a situation of greater social and environmental

vulnerability, but with identified productive potential.
26 including logistics, marketing, and resilience-focused production systems.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 8
         The World Bank
         Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


for the adoption of resilient agroecological production systems and training programs emphasizing agroecological
practices, gender sensitivity, and youth inclusion, and support for promotional activities, such as participation in national
and international agrifood and tourism fairs. The expected results include increased adoption of CSA practices and
technologies,27 greater resilience to climate vulnerabilities, and enhanced participation in agrifood and tourism markets
by family farmers.

22. Component 3 – Regional Sustainable Development (US$7 million). This component promotes inclusive and
sustainable tourism while strengthening environmental management in rural areas. Key activities include enhancing
tourism infrastructure, such as signage and connectivity in priority regions like Jalapão, Cantão and Bananal Island; and
supporting community-based tourism initiatives that involve Quilombolas – as the Kalungas in the South, IPs such as the
Karajás, and other vulnerable groups. The component will also invest in improving the state’s capacity for environmental
monitoring and management, including the use of advanced tools like drones and other technologies to control
deforestation, manage natural resources, and restore degraded areas. Also, agri-forestry and restoration of Cerrado and
Amazon biomes will be contemplated. Those actions might have support from related ongoing forestry project in Brazil.
Those actions will aim to balance economic development with environmental conservation, protecting biodiversity and
fostering climate resilience in targeted rural areas.

23. Component 4 – Project Management (US$4 million). This component will finance the establishment and operation
of the Project Management Unit (PMU), ensuring effective project implementation, monitoring, and compliance with
environmental and social standards. It includes funding for technical support, capacity-building for implementing agencies,
and operational costs related to Project coordination, reporting, and auditing.

Beneficiaries

24. The Project directly benefits rural populations, family farmers, and tourism-dependent communities across
Tocantins. Approximately over half of the population will benefit from the CREMA-DBM and CREMA-PPP contracts,
especially in the North and East of the State. Additionally, 6,000 family farms, including women-led, youth, and indigenous
producers, will receive technical assistance and support to adopt climate-smart agricultural practices. Vulnerable groups,
such as Quilombolas and IPs, will benefit from tourism-related initiatives aimed at promoting cultural heritage and
economic inclusion. Improved road infrastructure will enhance access to markets, public services, and economic
opportunities for rural residents while also reducing transport costs and travel times. Indirectly, the broader population
of Tocantins will benefit from strengthened environmental management, reduced climate risks, and enhanced economic
opportunities stemming from the Project’s interventions.

Screening for climate change and disaster risks

25. This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks, resulting in a moderate
vulnerability rating in face of flooding, landslides, soil erosion, extreme temperatures and drought. All those risks will be
considered during the design and implementation, as climate adaptation and resilience is key in the proposed Project.


27 CSA farming practices and technologies, as defined by FAO’s sourcebook, are those contributing to climate change resilience, and/or climate change mitigation while

achieving two or more of the CSA pillars: (i) improving productivity, (ii) adapting and improving resilience to climate change, and (iii) mitigating climate change.
https://www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-sourcebook/en/


                                                                                                                                                                Page 9
       The World Bank
       Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




26. The environmental and the social risks of the Project are rated as substantial. The precise location, scope and
magnitude of diverse subprojects have not been defined, and the risks and impacts cannot be fully determined until the
program and subproject details have been concluded. These impacts are expected to be site-specific, few if any of them
irreversible, and in most cases mitigatory measures can be readily designed and implemented. Component 1 will support
the maintenance of 350 km of state highways, with long-term performance-based road management contracts and the
development of public private partnerships of state highway sections, in different parts of the State. The roads’
maintenance works may pose significant environmental impacts and risks, inherent to heavy construction works, (e.g.
excavation, earth movement, and paving). It may also require land acquisition and the clearing of right-of-ways in selected
sections of the road network. It also involves the construction of a bridge over the Rio do Sono, nearby the Xerente
Indigenous Land, in the TO 245 road, which may lead to temporary disturbances in nearby Xerente communities.
Furthermore, the improvement or creation of access roads to previously inaccessible locations in the Jalapão region may
indirectly lead to increased predatory tourism with adverse socioenvironmental impacts to local and traditional
communities. Components 2, 3 and 4 comprise technical assistance activities, (e.g., capacity building), including measures
to improve market access and climate resilience of family farmers and promotion of sustainable and inclusive tourism
activities. The direct adverse environmental impacts of the technical assistance activities are negligible, but the technical
assistance activities shall incorporate the ESS requirements in their design and implementation. Component 2 may also
face the risk of excluding the most vulnerable groups of family farmers as well as female farmers who lack behind on
access to information, technical assistance and participation in producers’ organizations. Aiming to promote community-
based tourism in the Jalapão region, Component 3 may foster the use of (tangible and intangible) cultural heritage of
indigenous and traditional communities. It shall be highlighted that – as many works and activities will occur in areas that
are hard to supervise and highly vulnerable – there are concerns related to SEA/SH and gender-based violence in the daily
interactions between project workers and between them and members of vulnerable communities.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank



                                                                                                                        Page 10
     The World Bank
     Tocantins Productive Resilient and Inclusive Development Project (P509041)


 Carlos Bellas Lamas
 Senior Transport Specialist

 Leonardo Bichara Rocha
 Senior Agriculture Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Government of Tocantins
 Sergislei Silva de Moura
 Secretary of Planning
 sergislei@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
 Secretary of Planning / Secretaria de Planejamento - SEPLAN
 Mauricio Fregonesi
 PIU Coordinator
 mauriciopdris@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Carlos Bellas Lamas, Leonardo Bichara Rocha

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Bianca Bianchi Alves                      04-Feb-2025

Country Director:                       Pablo Facundo Cuevas                      19-Feb-2025




                                                                                                Page 11
