Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 10/09/2025 | Report No: ESRSC05230




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 16, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P509293                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        GCF Project                  2026

                     Operation Name            Green and Future Cities Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Turkiye                   Turkiye                                   EUROPE AND CENTRAL           Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                         ASIA                         Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     ILLER BANKASI             Antalya Metropolitan Municipality ,       17-Dec-2025                  19-Mar-2026
                     ANONIM SIRKETI            Konya Metropolitan Municipality
                     (ILBANK)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     16-Sep-2025               350,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Improve access to sustainable and resilient municipal infrastructure and services in participating cities.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project is being designed as a joint operation of the World Bank and the International Finance Cooperation, and
                     aims to improve access to sustainable and resilient municipal infrastructure and services in participating cities. The
                     Project will have three components: (i) Component 1. Integrated, multi-sectoral investments in participating
                     municipalities: The component will support demand-driven municipal investments contributing to more livable,
                     productive, and resilient urban development in the participating municipalities. The eligible sector list is expected to
                     include public transport, water and sanitation, renewable energy and energy efficiency. This component will cover
                     Antalya and Konya Metropolitan Municipalities; (ii) Component 2. Strengthening capacity of ILBANK and municipalities

                    Oct 16, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)



                     in municipal finance and urban management for future investment projects. The component will support ILBANK and
                     municipalities to build institutional and technical capacity in municipal finance and urban management to prepare
                     integrated municipal infrastructure investments and financing plans. It will also support a next cohort of municipalities
                     to develop an investment plan and pipeline for future financing, advance creditworthiness, and prepare technical,
                     environmental and social studies for potential pipeline sub-projects; (iii) Component 3. Project Management: The
                     component will finance provision of goods, consulting and non-consulting services, operating costs, and training to
                     ILBANK for Project management and implementation support activities.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The proposed project aims to promote sustainable and resilient urban development and capacity at the municipal
                     levels, leading to improved livability, efficiency, productivity, and resilience to disasters in the selected cities. The
                     primary beneficiaries of this project will be the participating municipalities and residents of the selected cities who will
                     benefit directly from improved livability, accessibility, connectivity, infrastructure, and services, as well as enhanced
                     resilience of the cities to climate- and nature-related hazards. The geographic and socioeconomic conditions of Turkiye
                     make it particularly vulnerable to the impact of climate change and other environmental hazards, making adaptation
                     and resilience high priorities. Turkiye is assessed as highly vulnerable in 9 out of 10 climate vulnerability dimensions,
                     compared with the OECD median of 2 out of 10, in the latest Türkiye Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR)
                     (2022). People and assets in Turkiye are increasingly concentrated in cities, with above-average exposure to climate
                     risks exacerbated by inadequate infrastructure and services. Most of these municipalities encounter operational
                     problems such as high-water losses, inadequate water treatment facilities, inadequate access to wastewater collection,



Public Disclosure
                     and lack of wastewater treatment due to deficiencies in financial capacity and insufficient institutional capacity. The
                     rapid urbanization of cities has increased the share of air pollution and over 90% of the emission of harmful compounds
                     into the air is attributed to motor vehicles. Increased population density also has a negative impact on the number and
                     size of green areas. In order to improve the quality of life in cities, it is necessary to adopt new visions for the
                     development of urban space and their effective management.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     IlBank is a state-owned bank providing municipal infrastructure financing. Ilbank will act as the Financial Intermediary
                     (FI), providing sub-project loans and implementation support to the Participating Municipalities. Participating
                     Municipalities are the implementing agencies for the proposed Project and will be responsible for undertaking
                     procurement and contracting activities for their subprojects, with the technical support and oversight from Ilbank.
                     Ilbank has been collaborating with Municipalities and working on Bank-financed projects including Sustainable Cities
                     Projects (P128605, P161915), Municipal Services Improvement Project (P169996), Climate and Disaster Resilent Cities
                     (P173025) and Turkiye Earthquake, Floods, and Wildfire Emergency Reconstruction Project (P176608) Turkiye
                     Earthquake Recovery and Reconstruction Project (P180849). Overall E&S performance of these projects has been
                     satisfactory. With support from the World Bank, Ilbank has established its own Environmental and Social Management
                     System (ESMS). The ESMS has been functional since August 2024 and five World Bank-funded projects are being
                     implemented through their ESMS. The Ilbanks ESMS has been performing well and with adeqaute human resources. The
                     Green and Future Cities Project will be implemented under this Bank-approved ESMS. It is assessed that both Konya and
                     Antaliya have sufficient E&S capacity to prepare ansd supervise the proejct investments, being already beneficiaries of
                     several WB funded operations. This will be further confirmed during Project preparation. The IBRD financing will be
                     provided to Ilbank, whereas the IFC financing will go directly to the participating municipalities. The Environmental and

                    Oct 16, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)



                     Social (E&S) risk assessment and management arrangements for the IFC financing are currently being explored. The
                     details (once decided) will be incldued in the A-ESRS.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating for the project is classified as “Substantial” at the CN stage. The project activities under
                     Component 1 will include several investments with linear construction areas and wider influence for ancillary
                     activities like material sourcing. The investments planned under this component include urban transport, water and
                     sanitation, renewable energy and energy efficiency and green urban infrastructure projects. Such activities have
                     potential to adversely impact air, water and also soil quality, due to discharges / emissions of pollutants, if proper
                     measures are not undertaken during the site selection, planning, construction and operation of the infrastructure to
                     be supported. For construction of some infrastructure facilities, temporary or permanent changes to local drainage
                     may also be effected. Occupational health and safety concerns for laborers exposed to working in/close to water, in
                     confined spaces, at heights, and/or in proximity of moving traffic and in very urbanized areas will likely pose risk.
                     Given proximity of some cities to areas with important biodiversity values, adverse risks and impacts cannot be ruled
                     out. The Project will exclude high E&S risks operations, which will be reflected in E&S instruments and screening
                     protocols. ILBANK already has developed its institution specific ESMS, fully aligned with national legislation, and the
                     capacity of the Client in management of environmental risks is adequate and track record is positive. Relevant



Public Disclosure
                     provisions for screening, assessing, management and reporting will be reflected in E&S instruments and ESCP. TA
                     activities under the Project will follow the Bank’s Advisory Note for TA under ESF. The risk level will be reviewed and
                     modified if necessary at the Appraisal stage.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk for the project is classified as “Substantial” at the concept stage. The project activities will involve
                     construction works with land acquisition, labor and working conditions, OHS and community health and safety risks
                     and impacts. Component 1 includes design review, quality assurance, investment financing, and supervision services
                     for investments such as urban transport, water and sanitation, renewable energy and energy efficiency, green urban
                     infrastructure. Since the project activities may require new land acquisition or the usage of lands that are previously
                     acquired for the subproject purposes, it will cause temporary or permanent land acquisition, land use restrictions,
                     rights of easement, impacts on livelihoods or removal of assets and structures from the land. Although the project is
                     not expected to create significant adverse impacts on vulnerable groups, their needs and expectations will need to be
                     integrated into project design, considering the presence of vulnerable groups in the urban and semi-urban context,
                     such as the disabled, elderly, informal users etc. Regarding the risks related to labor and working conditions, Turkish
                     Labor Law is comprehensive and consistent with the requirements of ESS2. Turkiye also has a comprehensive OHS
                     legal framework; however, there is a risk that potential issues may arise during project implementation due to weak
                     enforcement of the law within densely populated urban contexts. Although the subproject locations being the urban
                     and semi-urban areas which are easily accessed and easy to supervise, SEA/SH risks have been assessed as Moderate
                     at this but will be re-assesed duirng Porejct preparation due to potential presence of vulnerable groups in the areas




                    Oct 16, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)



                     where different investments/activities will take place. Given that Ilbank has a very good functional ESMS in place,
                     these risks and impacts will be managed well by following the risk assessment and mitigation measures as per ESF.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      The investments will have positive environmental and social impacts. Positive impacts, among others, will be related
                      to health, safety of population, raising living standards and reduced water pollution. However, construction-related
                      risks and impacts including air and noise emissions, pollution of water and/or land, community health and safety (incl.
                      traffic management-related risks), temporary habitat disturbance and occupational health and safety risks, labor
                      influx, will be of concern. There is also a risk of negative impacts on culturally or naturally sensitive areas in selected
                      cities. Social risks are expected to be related to labor and working conditions, OHS, CHS, and land acquisition. The
                      project will be implemented in accordance with the ILBANK’s ESMS which has been approved by the World Bank.
                      Relevant E&S assessment tools specified under the ILBANK’s ESMS including positivae and negative lists, screening,
                      due diligence, cummulative impacts, ESMP will be utilized.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      The stakeholders include municipalities, government agencies, communities, civil society organizations, and



Public Disclosure
                      vulnerable groups requiring special engagement efforts to ensure their equal representation in the consultation and
                      decision-making process associated with the Project. The residents of the selected cities will benefit directly from
                      improved livability, accessibility, connectivity, infrastructure, and services, as well as enhanced resilience of the cities
                      to climate-related and environmental hazards. The different categories of stakeholders will need to be engaged
                      continuously to ensure their views are considered during the project design and implementation. ILBANK will prepare
                      a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) which will outline general principles and a collaborative strategy to identify
                      stakeholders and plan for an engagement process in accordance with ESS10 and Ilbank ESMS. The SEP will include a
                      Grievance Mechanism (GM), including procedures for handling SEA/SH complaints.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                Relevant

                      Project workers may include direct workers, contracted workers and primary supply workers. ILBANK will follow its
                      ESMS which is compliant with the country laws and ESF to adress labor related risks, including OHS risks. All labor
                      related risks will be assessed as part of the sub-project specific ESIAs/ESMPs and based on stakeholder consultation,
                      will inform the preparation of the Contactor ESMPs in line with ILBANK ESMS. Measures will include: procedures to
                      ensure that neither child labor nor forced labor will be employed under the Project; a GM for workers; and actions to
                      address risks of GBV including codes of conduct; PPE for workers, site safety arrangements, maximum hours of work,
                      limits to overtime work, mandatory rest periods, hygiene requirements, arrangements for medical care on site,
                      working arrangements for substantial-risk operations, site safety and security and other relevant activities among
                      others.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                 Relevant


                    Oct 16, 2025                                                                                                          Page 5 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)



                      The project aims to improve cities' GHG emission profiles by promoting non-motorized transportation, sustainable
                      mobility, renewable energy, and green urban infrastructure. However, activities under Component 1 may cause
                      adverse impacts, such as air, water, and soil pollution, noise, and waste generation, including hazardous waste.
                      Mitigation measures to be specified in ESMPs will focus on proper handling and disposal of hazardous materials and
                      wastes during construction and operation, in line with the national legislation and ESS3. The Ilbank ESMS,
                      incorporating WBG EHS guidelines and Good Industry Practice, will manage E&S risks through tools, processes, and
                      procedures addressing resource efficiency and pollution prevention during subproject design, construction, and
                      operation.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      The subproject activities are likely to be located in highly populated areas with intense community interaction which
                      may result in community health and safety risks such as noise and air quality, traffic management including
                      temporary road closures, incident risks, construction waste management and labor influx. Given the urban locations,
                      worker accommodation is not expected but low or medium-scale labor influx may occur depending on the scale of
                      the construction works. Other impacts, including odour, dust, disruption to utilities and local transport will be
                      managed thorugh specific measures in site-specific ESMPs. These impacts will be identified, assessed and addressed
                      within the scope of the Ilbank’s ESMS in accordance with ESS4 requirements once subproejcts are identified.
                      Subprojects investments which might be associated with significant impacts rated as High be considered ineligible for
                      financing. SEA/SH risks may arise from worker community interactions and labor influx.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      It is expected that the project activities may require new land acquisition or the usage of lands that are previously
                      acquired for the subproject purposes, which will inevitably bring along temporary or permanent land acquisition, land
                      use restrictions, rights of easement, impacts on livelihood or removal of assets and structures from the land.
                      Therefore, ILBANK will ensure preparation of Resettlement Plans (RP) and/or ex-post social audits that will conform
                      with the ESMS and meet the requirements of the ESS5 in order to mitigate potential economic or physical
                      displacement risks of subproject activities. Site-specific impacts will be determined by ILBANK and the relevant
                      municipalities, and subproject RPs/Ex-post social audits will be prepared and implemented by the municipalities.
                      IlBank’s policy on involuntary resettlement is based on the country laws and ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      As the locations of all subprojects are not known at this stage, there is a risk of potential negative impacts on
                      naturally sensitive areas. However for the first phase of the project, covering Antalya and Konya provinces and given
                      the urban settings of the activities, it is not likely that significant biodiversity values may be encountered in areas of
                      project activities. Nevertheless, on precautionary level, and if such a situation is encountered, the mitigation
                      hierarchy will be followed to develop relevant mitigation measure for implementation of the project activities, in line
                      with ILBANK ESMS and fully compliant with ESS6. In these cases, the sub-project specific ESIA/ESMPs will include
                      strategies to mitigate impacts and preserve biodiversity including but not be limited to mitigation and offset
                      emasures and others as directed by Biodiversity Managemnt Plan.




                    Oct 16, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)



                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This ESS is not relevant for Turkiye.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The locations of all subprojects are not known at this stage, so, there is also a risk of having impacts on cultural
                      heritage as a result of construction works planned under Component 1. Subprojects investments which might have
                      impacts on cultural heritage resources, will be managed through the Ilbank ESMS. Both tangible and intangible
                      cultural heritage in the subproject areas will be identified and measures to avoid, minimize and manage potential
                      adverse impacts will be included in the relevant project E&S documents. A chance finds procedure, as per the
                      requirements of the national legislation and requirements of ESS8 will be prepared by ILBANK and implemented by all
                      participating municipalities.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                 Relevant

                      Ilbank will be on-lending to municipalities to implement the project activities. Ilbank has developed its institution
                      specific ESMS that meets the requirements of the ESF. The ESMS includes the main elements of ESS 9: (i) Ilbank’s
                      corporate environmental and social policy which describes Ilbank’s priorities to manage the E&S risks of its lending
                      activities by minimizing the adverse E&S impacts of municipal finance portfolio, adopting principles of resource
                      optimization, and the aim to enhance positive E&S impacts of its lending activities (ii) clearly defined procedures for
                      the assessment and management of E&S risks and impacts of its lending activities (iii) ensuring adequate E&S



Public Disclosure
                      organizational capacity and competency (iv) monitoring and review of E&S performance of its municipal lending
                      portfolio, and (v) implementing an external communication mechanism. High E&S risk investments will be ineligible
                      for financing, will be specified in ESCP. Capacity of municipalities will be assessed.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No
                       Borrower Framework will not be used.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                   No
                       The Project will not use any common approach




                    Oct 16, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Green And Future Cities Project (P509293)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     ILBANK will prepare an ESMF describing its ESMS (E&S policies, standard operating procedure regarding E&S risk
                     assessment and management and its organizational capacity) by project appraisal. This document will also include the
                     process of cascading the E&S risk assessment and management at the sub-borrower and contractor’s level and
                     monitoring the compliance by ILBANK.
                     In addition, ILBANK will also prepare a stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) and Environmental and Social Commitment
                     Plan (ESCP) by appraisal.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Ahmet Kindap                        Title:          Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  akindap@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Bontje Marie Zaengerling            Job Title:      Senior Urban Development Specialist




Public Disclosure
                      Email:                  bzangerling@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Xueman Wang                         Job Title:      Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  xwang5@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                        Ahmet Kindap, Bontje Marie Zaengerling, Xueman Wang

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:               Nikola Ille

                     ADM Social Specialist:                      Ferdous Jahan



                    Oct 16, 2025                                                                                                  Page 8 of 8
