Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01380




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                  Operation Name
                               EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                        Mozambique Urban Water
Mozambique                                                   P509890
                               AFRICA                                                      Security Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               30-Apr-2025                   30-May-2025                   Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Ministry of Public Works,
Republic of Mozambique         Housing, and Water
                               Resources

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Increase access to water supply services and to improve the efficiency of urban water supply services.

Components
C1: Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services
C2: Improvement of performance and efficiency of services
C3: Water sector development support
C4: Project management support

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                            142.10

  Total Financing                                                                                                 142.10
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               142.10
  Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00


                                                                                                                     Page 1
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)



 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                142.10
            of which IDA Recommitted                                                                                             142.10
        IDA Grant                                                                                                                142.10




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Substantial


 Decision




 Other Decision (as needed)




 B. Introduction and Context
 Country Context
 1.      Mozambique has experienced significant economic fluctuations over recent decades. Following the end of the
 civil war in 1992, the country achieved strong growth, averaging 7.9 percent between 1993 and 2015. This was disrupted
 by the 2016 hidden debt crisis, natural disasters in 2019, and ongoing conflict in Cabo Delgado, reducing growth to 3
 percent from 2016 to 2019. Between 2020 and 2023, growth fluctuated from -1.2 to 5.4 percent, reflecting post-COVID-
 19 recovery. Despite these challenges, growth is projected at 8 percent over 2024–2027, supported by a rebound in
 services, rising liquefied natural gas production, and high commodity prices. The current account deficit is expected to
 remain high but will be financed through trade credits and foreign direct investment, with gross reserves remaining at
 comfortable levels.1 This context is reflected in the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
 Mozambique (FY23–27), which highlights the need for inclusive, green job creation, stronger public services, and
 improved human capital to address persistent poverty and inequality, particularly among the bottom 40 percent of the
 population, who remain underserved in essential services, including water supply and sanitation.
 2.     Mozambique is one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the region, with its economic growth closely
 linked to climate shocks. Catastrophe risk modeling estimates average annual losses of US$440 million from floods
 alone.2 Cyclones, floods, and droughts can reduce per capita food consumption by 25–30 percent and lead to 0.4 fewer

1 World Bank. 2023. Mozambique - Country Climate and Development Report (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
2 World Bank. 2018. Extreme Weather and Household Well-being: Evidence from Multiple Shocks in Mozambique. Policy Research Working Paper;

No. 8667.

                                                                                                                                      Page 2
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


 meals per person per day. The provinces of Maputo, Gaza, and Inhambane are highly exposed to extreme temperatures,
 recurrent droughts, heavy rainfall, and flooding, with moderate impacts on infrastructure and assets. Severe and life-
 threatening floods and droughts are expected to occur at least once during the 30-year lifespan of planned infrastructure.
 The project’s focus on climate-resilient infrastructure and adaptation aligns with Mozambique’s Nationally Determined
 Contribution (NDC) and supports the World Bank’s Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach.
 3.     Investments in water security have yielded substantial economic and human development benefits in
 Mozambique. In major urban centers, over two decades of consistent investments supported by the local private sector
 have increased water supply access from 60 percent in 2000 to nearly 90 percent in 2020. These improvements
 contributed to a decline in child mortality from 95 per 1,000 children in 2003 to 69 in 2011, and a reduction in diarrheal
 disease prevalence among children under five, from 13.4 percent in 2003 to 9.9 percent in 2018.3,4,5 Progress in the water
 sector has also supported gender equality and job creation. However, the sector remains behind in achieving its 2030
 targets. The project supports implementation of the country’s Water Sector Action Plan (PASA) 2015–20306 and
 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and contributes to the World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and
 promoting shared prosperity. It will enhance water service delivery, improve utility creditworthiness, and enable growth
 in micro, small, and medium enterprises in the water sector, while contributing to improved health and education
 outcomes, particularly for women and girls, directly supporting the CPF’s objectives.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context
 4.      A substantial share of Mozambique’s urban population still lacks access to safely managed drinking water.
 Although basic water services in urban areas reached 87 percent in 2022,7 supply remains intermittent. Many residents
 lack piped connections, with 8 percent using public standpipes and 17 percent relying on taps in neighbors’ dwellings.8,9
 None of the 21 main cities served by 15 primary systems10 have continuous supply; only 7 systems meet the Water
 Regulatory Authority’s (AURA) good performance threshold of 16 hours per day11. With an urban population growth rate
 of 4.4 percent per year12, public water services managed by state agencies are not expanding quickly enough. Private
 water providers (PWPs) are filling the gap,13 especially in peri-urban areas. In Greater Maputo, 97 percent of the
 population has access to improved water sources14, but public services cover only 49 percent 15, leaving over 50 percent
 reliant on mostly unlicensed PWPs16. These providers often rely on poorly drilled boreholes, increasing the risk of aquifer
 contamination, and charge tariffs 51 percent higher than the public utility, resulting in higher water costs for poor peri-
 urban households.17

3 MISAU (Ministério da Saúde). 2005. Demographic and Health Survey 2003 Report.
4 MISAU (Ministério da Saúde). 2013. Demographic and Health Survey 2011 Report.
5 MISAU (Ministério da Saúde). 2018. Inquérito de indicadores de imunização, malária e HIV 2015.
6 Resolution 40/2018 approved the Water Sector Action Plan for SDG implementation, 2015–2030.
7 WHO (World Health Organization), and UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2020. Joint Monitoring Program – Mozambique Rural and Urban

Service Levels.
8 In 2019, standpipe usage reached 26 percent in Nampula and Angoche, the highest among urban areas (AURA 2022).
9 INE 2021. Results from the Households Budget Survey 2019/20.
10 The Greater Maputo system illustrates how a single water system can serve multiple cities, Maputo and Matola, the country’s largest centers.
11 AURA 2024. Service Regulation Report for year 2023.
12 World Bank. 2022. Data Portal. Urban population growth (annual percent) – Mozambique. link:

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.URB.GROW?locations=MZ
13 A 2018 survey by DNAAS identified 1,830 private water providers (PWPs) supplying piped water to 1.8 million people, primarily in urban areas of

the Southern Region, with over 75 percent—nearly 1.4 million—served in Greater Maputo.
14 INE 2020. Results from the Census 2017.
15 AURA 2022. Service Regulation Report for year 2019.
16 Only 20 percent of the private water supply systems were licensed by the end 2019.
17 In November 2021, AURA set PWP tariffs at 70 MT per cubic meter for systems connected to the power grid and 80 MT for those using diesel

generators (Resolution 3/2021). The public utility’s average tariff in Greater Maputo was set at 46.28 MT per cubic meter (Resolution 2/2021).

                                                                                                                                              Page 3
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


 5.     Increased investment in urban water supply has not always led to improved services. The regulator’s 2023 report
 indicates that 12 of the 15 main urban water systems perform poorly.18 The 2020 Water Sector Public Expenditure
 Review19 found that from 2013 to 2018, higher investments by the Water Supply Asset Holding and Investment Fund
 (FIPAG) yielded only modest improvements in access and coincided with declining financial and operational performance.
 Currently, FIPAG is unable to service its debt due to inefficiencies within its structure and the poor performance of
 Regional Operating Companies (ROCs). Among the ROCs, collection rates below 80 percent pose financial challenges, but
 non-revenue water (NRW), averaging 50 percent, remains the primary operational issue. Reducing NRW to around 30
 percent would have a significant and positive impact on the financial sustainability of the ROCs. Although underfunding
 and rapid urban growth contribute to declining services, sustainable expansion requires moving beyond infrastructure-
 focused investment toward integrated approaches that strengthen management and institutions, with incentives to
 improve performance.
 6.     Strengthening urban water security in Mozambique requires addressing both environmental and institutional
 challenges that undermine service reliability. In the Southern Region, where droughts are most frequent, a prolonged
 drought in the Umbeluzi river basin (2014–2019) severely reduced water availability, limiting supply in Greater Maputo
 to nine hours per day. In addition to reduced volumes, water quality is declining due to poor watershed protection,
 including deforestation and fertilizer use in buffer zones, affecting rivers such as the Guiua, Inhanombe, and Jatingue—
 the main source for Chibuto city. Addressing these challenges requires better hydrological risk management to secure
 water quantity and quality, stronger institutions, and greater investment in infrastructure. Recent investments, including
 expanded storage at Corumana Dam20 and Phase I of the Sabie water treatment plant (WTP), and supporting transport
 and distribution systems21, have enhanced water security in Greater Maputo22. However, service reliability has not
 improved due to unresolved utility-level operational issues, particularly a high NRW rate, estimated at 48 percent in
 202423.
 7.     Women and girls are most affected by inadequate Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) services. Despite
 socio-demographic progress and greater female participation in the economy and society, women remain “time poor”
 due to unequal household labor and the time spent fetching water from public standpipes. With one in three women in
 Mozambique having experienced gender-based violence (GBV), lack of on-premises water access heightens their
 vulnerability. Evidence shows widespread fear and instances of GBV while collecting water or using shared latrines.
 8.    The Ministry of Public Works, Housing, and Water Resources (MOPHRH) holds overall responsibility for the
 water sector. Within MOPHRH, the National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation (DNAAS) leads policy
 development, planning, and investment promotion in WASH, while the National Directorate for Water Resources
 Management (DNGRH) oversees water resources management. In this sub-sector, operational management, allocation,
 conservation, and investment in water resources and related infrastructure are carried out by three Regional Water
 Administrations (ARAs) for the Southern, Central, and Northern regions.
 9.     The urban WSS sector operates under the Delegated Management Framework (DMF), which established three
 key institutions: FIPAG, the Water and Sanitation Infrastructure Administration (AIAS), and AURA. FIPAG, created during
 the DMF’s first phase, owns the main water systems serving 21 major urban areas and contracts operators for the ROCs.
 AIAS manages investments and assets in 130 small towns and district centers and oversees sanitation in both primary


18 A compounded performance index below 50 percent is rated “C,” the lowest on a five-tier scale (A+, A, B+, B, and C).
19 DH Infrastructure and MB Consulting. 2020. Public Expenditure Review of the Mozambican Water Sector 2010-2018
20 Mozambique - National Water Resources Development Project (P107350). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
21 Greater Maputo Water Supply and Expansion Project (P125120). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
22 The Umbeluzi WTP is currently the main water source, with a capacity of 240,000 cubic meters per day, followed by the Sabie WTP at 60,000

cubic meters, and boreholes in Kongolote, Intaka, Mali, and KaTembe producing 9,400 cubic meters per day.
23 Data on key performance indicators for primary systems shared by FIPAG.



                                                                                                                                               Page 4
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


 and secondary towns. AURA is responsible for economic regulation, ensuring service quality, safeguarding user interests,
 and promoting the financial sustainability of water systems.
 10.     Private sector participation in urban water operations has progressed slowly due to limited financial viability
 and operational complexity. To date, only one FIPAG system—the Greater Maputo water system24—has been
 transferred to a private operator, and it was only under private operator for few years, with no improvement in service
 delivery or performance despite two decades of separating operations from asset ownership. This underscores the need
 to revise the contracting strategy and accountability framework to incentivize private investment, service expansion, and
 quality improvements. Derisking the sector is also essential. Progress has been made with the approval of a decree
 establishing a transparent framework for annual tariff adjustments based on cost recovery and affordability, ensuring
 financial equilibrium can be restored when operating conditions change.
 11.     The water sector’s medium-term investment plan is defined in the PASA, 2015–2030, which aligns with the
 SDGs, the National Strategy for Urban Water and Sanitation (ENASU, 2011–2025), and the National Water Resources
 Plan (NWRP)25. Building on a consistent investment track record—including the National Water Development Projects I
 and II (P039015 and P052240, 1998–2009), the National Water Resources Development Program (P107350, 2012–2020),
 the Greater Maputo Water Supply Project (2015–2021), and the Water Services and Institutional Support projects, WASIS
 (P104566, 2007–2015) and WASIS II (P149377, 2016–present)—the Government of Mozambique remains committed to
 scaling up investments to secure water resources, expand treatment and distribution capacity, improve service efficiency,
 and promote sustainability to achieve universal access to safely managed water. The proposed project will support the
 implementation of PASA and the updated investment plan for the urban water sector.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

  12.      Increase access to water supply services and to improve the efficiency of urban water supply services.
 Key Results
            (a) People provided with access to basic water supply services (disaggregated by female and youth sub-
                groups) – WB Corporate Results Indicator
            (b) People benefiting from improved water services (disaggregated by female and youth sub-groups)
            (c) Operating cost recovery ratio (operating revenues collected divided by operating costs)

  D. Project Description
 13.    The project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) with Performance-Based Conditions (PBC) for a proposed
 amount of US$ 142.1 million equivalent, corresponding to the balance of SDR 106,115,238.18 to be cancelled from the
 parent project P178653, Grant IDA E2360. The project is expected to last for five and half years. The project will focus
 on the urban areas of the country, with initial investments in the Greater Maputo Region, complementing past
 investments from two WB-financed projects to increase water storage (the NWRDP) and production to meet the demand
 (the GMWSP) in this area. This operation will also support priority investments in WSS serving the Southern Region to
 improve their climate resilience (reducing their vulnerability to droughts) and improve their efficiency and sustainability.


24 Between 2000 and 2010, the Greater Maputo system was run by a consortium of Águas de Portugal (AdP) and SAUR. SAUR exited in 2001 after

Bouygues Group’s decision to divest, with AdP remaining until 2010, when FIPAG acquired its shares and became the main shareholder for the
state. AdM was renamed Águas da Região de Maputo, and its lease with FIPAG ended in November 2018.
25 Resolution 11/2019 from the Council of Ministers. Approval of the National Water Resources Plan.



                                                                                                                                             Page 5
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


 In addition, this operation will also support the completion of ongoing WSS investments in Tete city currently financed
 by two urban operations that are closing in 2025, specifically WASIS II and MUSP.
 14.     The Project’s four components are: (i) Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services;
 (ii) Improvement of performance and efficiency of services; (iii) Water sector development support to improving the
 enabling environment for private sector participation (PSP); (iv) Project Management support. In addition, the Project
 includes a cross-cutting area aiming at human capital strengthening. The scope of each component is described below.
 Component 1. Access to sustainable and climate resilient water and sanitation services (US$71.20 million equivalent).
 15.     Component 1 will support a combination of interventions from source to tap to strengthen the climate
 resilience and sustainability of urban water supply and sanitation services that are regularly affected by climate-change-
 exacerbated droughts and floods events, contributing to the implementation of priority climate-adaptation investments
 enacted in the country’s NDC, specifically under the water resources and resilient water supply and sanitation systems
 strategic area. C1 is structured in five sub-components, specifically:
      (a) Reducing climate hazards impacting water supply infrastructure and services through Integrated Water
          Resources Management (IWRM) and watershed management (US$2.85 million equivalent), including providing
          strategic support to ARA-Sul to fulfill its mandate, covering investments that will contribute to strengthening of
          climate-informed water planning and allocation, the enhancement of water quality through improved watershed
          management that reduces climate-change-exacerbated water-source contamination, assurance of water
          availability to meet urban demand via source diversification, and demand conservation.
      (b) Expansion of access to climate-resilient water supply services (US$48.70 million equivalent), including
          investments for the expansion of water treatment and transmission capacity, as well as downstream investments
          to expand the distribution network following the key principles for climate-resilient water infrastructure design,
          with key water treatment plant (WTP) investments from alternative sources that would improve the climate
          resilience of services by reducing the dependence into a single source, pumping stations, and bridge crossings
          for main pipes designed to withstand and be installed above historic flood levels, following the protocol for
          climate-proofing of water-supply infrastructure and service.26
      (c) Output-based payments (OBP) for low-income household connections (US$6.50 million equivalent), building
          on the successful experience of output-based payments implemented in WASIS II (P149377), aims at increasing
          access to piped water connections for low-income households in the main urban centers. Under this component,
          output-based grant payments are to be provided to regional utilities to cover the costs of connecting low-income
          households.
      (d) Improvement of the quality of services provided by PWPs (US$7.65 million equivalent) through grants for
          upgrading PWP water supply infrastructure to comply with technical standards, with best practices for climate-
          proofing of operations and service, and to enable them to distribute bulk water purchased from the regional
          utilities.
      (e) Access to safely managed sanitation (US$5.50 million equivalent) financing the completion of the ongoing Fecal
          Sludge Treatment Plant in Tete currently supported by the MUSP (P161777), which will close in September 2025,
          and to support the strengthening of fecal sludge management practices in urban areas of Mozambique.




26 WBG. 2020. Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief. Link: http://hdl.handle.net/10986/34448


                                                                                                                        Page 6
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


Component 2. Improvement of performance and efficiency of services (US$49.35 million equivalent).
16.     Component 2 will support the improvement of performance and efficiency of water supply services in the
Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area (GMMA) and Southern Region provided by AdRMM and AdRS respectively,
allocating one-third of the project investments to finance activities, through a grant mechanism, that will contribute to
lower energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, specifically NRW reduction and energy efficiency. C2 is
structured in four sub-components, specifically:
    (a) Performance improvement for the service area of the GMMA (US$12.0 million equivalent). Carrying out a
        performance-based program of activities defined under a Performance Improvement Action Plan (PIAP) for the
        GMMA, which include investments for: (i) NRW reduction led by the utility not covered by the NRW Performance-
        Based Contract (PBCt) (2.c); (ii) improving energy efficiency; (iii) improving the collection ratio and the
        operational cost recovery ratio; (iv) digitalization of operations; (v) training and capacity building in key areas for
        the utilities; (vii) women empowerment within AdRMM; (vi) improving the utility’s governance and
        accountability; and (viii) establishment of communications platforms for information sharing on water quality
        and services and timely resolution of complaints. To incentivize the achievement of performance improvement
        results, the financing of this subcomponent (US$12.0 million equivalent) is linked to PBC 1: Improved
        performance of water supply services in the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area.
    (b) Performance improvement for the Southern Region service area (US$10.5 million equivalent). Carrying out a
        performance-based program of activities defined under a PIAP for the Southern Region, which include
        investments for: (i) co-management contract for NRW reduction; (ii) improving energy efficiency; (iii) improving
        the collection ratio and the operational cost recovery ratio; (iv) digitalization of operations; (v) training and
        capacity building; (vi) women empowerment; (vii) improving utility’s governance and accountability; and (viii)
        establishment of communications platforms for information sharing on water quality and services and timely
        resolution of complaints. To incentivize the achievement of performance improvement results, the financing of
        this subcomponent (US$10.5 million equivalent) is linked to PBC 2: Improved performance of water supply
        services in the Southern Region.
    (c) Performance-based financing for NRW reduction in GMMA and Southern Region (US$25.0 million equivalent).
        PBCt for NRW reduction in the GMMA and Co-Management Contract for NRW reduction in Southern Region to
        be signed between FIPAG and a contractor to be selected on a competitive basis to implement investments to
        reduce NRW, including investments to reduce both physical and commercial losses, management technologies,
        and capacity-building program.
    (d) Revolving fund for a prepaid meter program (US$1.85 million equivalent). Investigating and potentially
        supporting the acquisition of pre-paid meters to be installed for consumers segments with high water bills and
        low billing collection ratios to support the desired improvement in operational cost recovery based on collections.
Component 3. Water sector development support (US$14.26 million equivalent).
17.    Component 3 will support several critical actions underpinning the sector reform effort led by the Government
of Mozambique (GoM) to improve the enabling environment for PSP and to achieve universal and equitable access to
safe and affordable drinking water. This component will be divided into three sub-components, specifically:
       (a) Improvement of the enabling environment for Private Sector Participation (US$0.50 million equivalent),
           which will support the development of the legal framework for the integration of PWP services into the
           regulated service provision (the development of technical standards, including best practices for climate-
           proofing of operations and service, and bulk water supply models), including the licensing and monitoring of
           water quality and services, and the dissemination and training of licensing authorities.


                                                                                                                          Page 7
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


       (b) Strengthening the regulatory role (US$2.00 million equivalent) to promote efficiency and inclusiveness in
           the provision of services by extending them to the poorest segments of the population and reducing the risk
           of investment in the sector through economic regulation that guarantees tariffs that fully cover operating
           costs, debt service, and a return on private investment, and ensure service to low-income households. To
           ensure that tariffs issued by the regulator reflect the principle of full cost recovery, i.e. they are sufficient to
           cover operating expenses, depreciation, and cost of capital in a reasonable time horizon, the financing of this
           subcomponent (US$ 2.0 million equivalent) is linked to PBC 3: Annual resolution on tariff review that secures
           the sustainability of operations issued and annual services performance report for the previous civil year
           published.
       (c) Strengthen ARA-Sul capacity to manage water resources (US$3.36 million equivalent) including licensing of
           water users, strengthening of management and ARA-Sul’s financial sustainability, capacity building, including
           in climate-risk prevention, management and response, institutional development support including the
           construction and equipping of its operational and water quality laboratory, and the implementation of a
           women empowerment program.
       (d) Institutional development support for FIPAG (US$4.95 million equivalent). This sub-component will support
           FIPAG in managing the process of restructuring the urban water supply sector, including strengthening it to
           be an institution focused on mobilizing funds for investment in the sector, migrating from its previous focus
           on operations, and strengthening private sector participation and private capital mobilization for urban water
           supply.
       (e) Preparatory studies for the next generation of WSS investments (US$3.45 million equivalent) will allocate
           resources to support the preparation of the future generation of priority investments in WSS.
Component 4. Project Management Support (US$7.29 million equivalent).
18.     Component 4 will support technical assistance and incremental project operational costs for the two Project
Implementation Units (PIU) based in FIPAG and DNAAS, and the Project Technical Units (PTU) based in ARA-Sul and
AURAS. It will also provide additional support for environmental and social safeguards compliance. Project management
support comprises technical assistance and incremental operating costs to ensure fiduciary compliance including
financial management (FM), procurement, environment and social safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
This component will support necessary equipment (e.g. computers, software and other goods), capacity building
(training), and incremental staff to allow the project implementing unit to carry out their responsibilities.
       (a) Project Management Support for FIPAG (US$2.90 million equivalent) to ensure technical and fiduciary
           compliance, including financial management (FM) and procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This
           component will support necessary equipment (e.g. computers, software and other goods), capacity building
           (training), travel, logistics and incremental staff to allow the PIU to carry out their responsibilities related to
           the project.
       (b) Technical Assistance and Project management support for DNAAS (US$2.09 million equivalent) to ensure
           technical and fiduciary compliance, including financial management (FM) and procurement, monitoring and
           evaluation (M&E). This component will support necessary equipment (e.g. computers, software and other
           goods), capacity building (training), travel, logistics and incremental staff to allow the PIU to carry out their
           responsibilities related to the project. It will also support technical assistance and incremental operating costs
           for the two implementation PTUs based in ARA-Sul and AURAS.
       (c) Support for Environmental and Social Compliance (US$2.30 million equivalent) to ensure compliance with
           the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan, the satisfactory implementation of the Stakeholders


                                                                                                                          Page 8
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


           Engagement Plan (SEP), the Environmental and Social Management Framework, and the Resettlement Policy
           Framework, including the compensation of people affected by the project (PAP) interventions.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


19.     The Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890) aims to enhance urban water access and resilience
through infrastructure investments in Greater Maputo and secondary cities. While the project is expected to improve
service delivery, it presents environmental and social risks that require comprehensive management to ensure
sustainability and community well-being. The project is subject to the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), with
key risks and mitigation measures outlined below.
20.    The project’s primary environmental risks include pollution, resource inefficiency, and construction-related
impacts such as soil erosion, noise, dust emissions, and traffic disruptions. Ancillary works, including access roads,
temporary camps, and laydown areas, will also be assessed under ESS1 and other relevant ESSs. To mitigate these risks,
the project will adhere to Mozambique’s EIA Decree and World Bank ESF standards, requiring Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for substantial-risk subprojects.
ESS3 highlights additional risks, including drinking water quality concerns, requiring compliance with national standards,
WHO guidelines, and WBG EHS standards; hazardous materials management, especially chemicals used in water
treatment and sludge disposal; waste management, covering construction debris, wastewater, and sludge from
treatment plants; water balance risks, requiring sustainable extraction and distribution to minimize non-revenue water
losses; cross-contamination risks, necessitating robust infrastructure design to prevent leaks and mixing with
wastewater; energy, water, and raw materials efficiency, ensuring sustainable resource use during construction and
operation; and climate risk screening, integrating resilience measures to withstand droughts and extreme weather. ESS6
ensures biodiversity protection, particularly for wetlands and riparian areas, through biodiversity management plans and
national conservation regulations. Cumulative environmental impacts will be considered in the ESIA to evaluate potential
long-term ecological effects of project activities.
21.     The project presents substantial social risks, including land acquisition, economic displacement, labor concerns,
community safety, and SEA/SH risks. Land acquisition and resettlement may impact households and businesses, requiring
RAPs under ESS5. Economic displacement risks may affect informal water providers, necessitating integration strategies
and livelihood restoration. Tariff reforms may challenge affordability for vulnerable households, requiring social tariff
mechanisms to ensure equitable access while sustaining operational costs. Stakeholder engagement on tariff structures
will be crucial and addressed through the SEP and the Citizen’s Charter. Labor risks are linked to large-scale construction
and labor influx, requiring Labor Management Procedures (LMPs) to ensure fair contracts, adherence to national labor
laws, and safe working conditions. Contractors will be required to comply with local labor regulations and provide clear
labor contract conditions. Community health and safety risks include construction hazards, traffic disruptions, and



                                                                                                                       Page 9
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


potential service interruptions, mitigated through safety protocols, emergency response plans, and public awareness
campaigns.
22.     The project will implement SEA/SH Action Plans to mitigate gender-based violence risks, including worker Codes
of Conduct with strict SEA/SH provisions, mandatory training for workers and project staff, and a SEA/SH-sensitive
grievance redress mechanism (GRM) for survivor-centered reporting. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will ensure
inclusive consultations with urban residents, informal water providers, civil society, and government entities. The GRM
will be standardized across FIPAG, DNAAS, AURA, and ARA-Sul, ensuring transparent and accessible channels for
grievances, including those related to SEA/SH. To enhance institutional capacity, the project will support E&S units at
FIPAG, AdRMM, and AdRS, ensuring sufficient staffing, including an OHS specialist. A clear implementation timeline for
E&S instruments will be established, with drafts ESMF, LMP, RPF, SEP, ESIAs, and ESMPs prepared and disclosed before
Appraisal, while more detailed assessments like the ESMS will be developed during implementation. By integrating robust
E&S risk management instruments, structured stakeholder engagement, and capacity-building measures, the project will
ensure sustainable outcomes, protect communities, and achieve full ESF compliance throughout implementation.


E. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
23.     Institutions responsible for implementation of the project and its various components. The project will be
implemented by the Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH) at the central level through
several of its subordinated institutions. FIPAG, DNAAS, AURA, and ARA-Sul will be responsible for implementing various
components, consistent with their respective mandates. Specifically, FIPAG will lead the implementation of water supply
infrastructure and performance improvement activities, while DNAAS will oversee activities related to private water
providers (PWPs), regulatory strengthening activities benefiting AURA, the project’s water resources management
(WRM) and watershed components benefiting ARA-Sul.
24.    A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be hosted by FIPAG, which is mandated under Government Decree
72/1998 to plan and manage the design and execution of water supply infrastructure for primary systems. This makes
FIPAG the most suitable agency to deliver the project’s water supply components. DNAAS will host a second PIU, while
the beneficiary institutions, AURA and ARA-Sul, will each host Project Technical Units (PTUs) responsible for technical
implementation of institution-specific activities, under the coordination and fiduciary oversight of the DNAAS PIU. DNAAS
will make use of the PIU currently serving the Rural and Small Towns Water Security Project (Água Segura, P173518).
25.    Procurement Arrangements. The two PIUs will manage procurement related to their activities. The two agencies
hosting the PIU have experience with World Bank fiduciary procedures, with FIPAG currently implementing the WASIS II
(P149377), and DNAAS currently implementing the MUSP (P161777) and the Agua Segura (P173518). A Project
Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) is being prepared, led by FIPAG and DNAAS. The project will apply the
World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (March 2025, as revised). Technical assistance will be provided
to address any capacity gaps identified during project appraisal. Procurement risk is rated Substantial, and mitigation
measures will be proposed in the PPSD.
26.   Financial Management (FM). A financial management (FM) assessment is being finalized and will be completed
by appraisal, following the Guidance on FM in World Bank IPF Operations issued on September 7, 2021. While FIPAG,
DNAAS, and AURA have gained FM experience through ongoing Bank operations (WASIS II (P149377), MUSP (161777),
and Agua Segura (P173518), ARA-Sul is a new implementing agency and will require capacity building and FM support.
AURA needs to continue working towards strengthening its internal FM capacity, and this proposed operation should

                                                                                                                    Page 10
      The World Bank
      Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


support these capacity-building efforts. The project will implement appropriate fiduciary measures to ensure sound FM
practices, and adjustments to FM arrangements will be made as needed during preparation.
27.     The most recent PEFA (2015) noted improvements in Mozambique’s public financial management (PFM) systems
since 2010, but the hidden debt scandal highlighted weaknesses in budget reporting, tax arrears collection, internal
controls—particularly at decentralized levels—and procurement practices. In ongoing projects, PIU FM performance is
rated moderately satisfactory, due to delays in fund justification, weak fixed asset management, staffing gaps, and late
submission of Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and audits. Nonetheless, auditors have issued unqualified opinions on
submitted financial statements, and no major FM issues have been identified. These findings have informed the design
of this project’s FM arrangements, with enhanced support to ensure timely reporting and compliance, particularly at
ARA-Sul.




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
  Jaime Palalane
  Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

  Pierre Francois-Xavier Boulenger
  Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Mozambique

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Public Works, Housing, and Water Resources
 Raul Mutevuie Júnior
 National Director
 bombatejunior@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate


                                                                                                                   Page 11
     The World Bank
     Mozambique Urban Water Security Project (P509890)


APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                  Jaime Palalane, Pierre Francois-Xavier Boulenger

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                     Luc Lecuit                             29-Apr-2025




                                                                                           Page 12
