Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development(P509756)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-May-2025 | Report No: PIDIC00199




Public Disclosure Authorized
          The World Bank
          BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development(P509756)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)         Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                               BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and
 Brazil                           P509756
                                                               Fostering Sustainable Economic Development
 Region                           Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)            Financing Instrument
 LATIN AMERICA AND                                             Macroeconomics, Trade           Development Policy
                                  09-Jan-2026
 CARIBBEAN                                                     and Investment                  Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                      Implementing Agency
 Government of Piauí              Secretariat of Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The proposed DPL supports reforms in the State of Piauí by (i) strengthening fiscal sustainability and efficiency in
 spending, and (ii) promoting private investment in infrastructure and sustainable growth.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                                 600.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                600.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                            600.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                                                                                                                        Page 1
      The World Bank
      BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development(P509756)




B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

Piauí faces significant development challenges but also demonstrates strong economic potential. It has the second-
lowest per capita GDP, nearly half the national average, and a poverty rate of 41.1 percent (US$6.85/day, 2017 PPP),
the fourth highest among Brazil’s 27 states. Only 18 percent of its 3.3 million residents (2022) have access to
sanitation, and the lack of access disproportionately affects rural and low-income communities. Located in the
Northeast, Piauí’s arid climate heightens vulnerability to climate change, with frequent droughts affecting water
access, agriculture, and living standards. Despite fiscal consolidation efforts, rising pressures on current spending
have weakened the State’s ability to finance essential investments, further limiting climate-resilient investments, as
the State also faces high debt service and rigid current expenditures. This operation supports Piauí in both
strengthening resource management to foster private investment and creating space for public investment. Given
Piauí’s limited fiscal space and infrastructure needs, expanding investment will depend on curbing current spending
and improving efficiency while attracting private capital.

Brazil’s macroeconomic policy framework is deemed adequate for the proposed operation. Activity remained
robust in 2024, driven by recovering investment and robust consumption. Real GDP is expected to grow 2.2 percent
in 2025, converging to its potential of about 2.3 percent. The Federal Government has advanced growth-oriented
structural reforms to improve the business climate, financial sector, and indirect tax system. Fiscal policy, guided by
a new framework, supports gradual consolidation and is expected to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio by decade’s end.
In 2024, the Government met its primary balance target, reinforcing fiscal credibility. Public debt remains sustainable,
and the external position is resilient, with low foreign currency debt and ample reserves. The Government is pursuing
a debt management strategy to extend maturities. Brazil’s macroeconomic framework is supported by an
independent Central Bank, a resilient financial system, inflation targeting, and a flexible exchange rate. Liquidity risks
are low, backed by strong cash buffers and limited FX exposure.

Relationship to CPF

The two pillars of the proposed DPF are closely aligned with the Government’s priorities, the guiding themes of the
PPA for 2024-2027, and with the long-term strategic development plan for the State of Piauí (Guidelines for the
Long-Term Development of the State of Piauí) and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF). Pillar 1 directly
supports the Government’s top priority of strengthening fiscal discipline and institutions and is closely aligned with
the public sector management axis of the PPA, specifically addressing fiscal management and modernizing public
administration practices. Additionally, it also underpins one of the three core guidelines of Piauí’s long-term strategy
to achieve fiscal stability and boost investment capacity. Pillar 2 is aligned to the government program's axis of
economic development, focusing on enhancing competitiveness, fostering a dynamic economy, improving the
business environment, and promoting logistical efficiency. Moreover, Pillar 2 underpins the priority of promoting
sustainable and accelerated growth while supporting the core guideline of economic openness and enhancing the
business environment. This operation is fully aligned with objective 1.1 of the CPF (strengthen fiscal management)
under Pillar 1, which supports fiscal management. The operation is also aligned with objectives 1.2 (promote greater
and greener competitiveness), 3.1 (improve management of natural resources) under Pillar 2, which supports the
enabling environment for the green private sector through policies regulatory entry barriers, and environmentally
sustainable practices. Pillar 2 is also consistent with the WBG Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025.

                                                                                                                         Page 2
      The World Bank
      BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development(P509756)




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


The proposed DPL supports reforms in the State of Piauí by (i) strengthening fiscal sustainability and efficiency in
spending, and (ii) promoting private investment in infrastructure and sustainable growth.


Key Results

In Pillar 1, the new fiscal framework is expected to help contain the expansion of current primary expenditures by
ensuring that their real growth remains below that of current revenues. The new Public Investment Management
methodology for assessment and prioritization is expected to lead to higher economic and social returns, timelier
implementation, and better aligned investments with the state’s development priorities. The implementation of a
unified public procurement platform will drive significant expedited efficiency gains by streamlining and standardizing
processes across all state agencies. In Pillar 2, the development of Porto Piaui as TUP is expected to attract private
investment to boost state maritime trade, support value chains, reduce cost of imports and enhance the
competitiveness of key exports. Private investment in water and sanitation is expected to expand both access to and
quality of services, particularly in rural areas and for poor females. The delegation, via public bidding, of a private
company to implement raw water fee collection aiming to expand coverage and improve the efficiency of the current
raw water usage mechanism. The new land regularization system aims to improve transparent and sustainable land
use, making regularization processes more efficient.




D. Concept Description

  The Development Objective of this standalone DPL is to support the state of Piauí to: (i) Strengthen fiscal
  sustainability and efficiency in spending, and (ii) promote private investment in infrastructure and sustainable
  growth. The proposed DPL is articulated around two pillars.

  The first pillar of the DPL support reforms that strengthen fiscal sustainability and efficiency in spending through
  the adoption of: (i) a fiscal framework aimed at controlling current expenditures which ensures fiscal space for
  public investment; (ii) strengthening the sustainable governance by introducing a new public investment
  management framework; and (iii) enhancing efficient and sustainable procurement processes.
  The second pillar of the DPL support reforms to promote private investment in infrastructure and sustainable
  growth through measures to: (i) attract private investment and efficiency gains in the logistic sector; (ii) mobilize
  private investment to broaden access to sanitation and water services; (iii) improve water resource management;
  and (iv) advance sustainable land management practices.


E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Poverty and Social Impacts


                                                                                                                       Page 3
      The World Bank
      BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development(P509756)


The prior actions (PAs) under Pillar I may generate positive poverty and social impacts if the fiscal space they create
is directed toward public investments. PA#1 seeks to increase current savings; PA#2 may reduce delays and cost
overruns; and PA#3 aims to lower public contract costs through more efficient procurement. These measures can
benefit the poor if translated into higher spending on health and education—sectors that make up 15% and 12% of
Piauí’s budget and disproportionately serve poor households (94% use public schools; 93% use SUS). PA#2 could
further help mitigate poverty by incorporating climate risk assessments, since the poor are more vulnerable to climate
shocks. Pillar II actions may support poverty reduction in the medium term by enhancing household resilience
through land regularization (PA#6) and improved water governance. PA#5 is expected to yield social benefits via
expanded access to water and sanitation. PA#4 has limited distributional effects, while PA#7 could generate medium-
term gains in employment and poverty reduction through improved logistics.




Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

No needed at PCN stage.



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
  Luigi Butron Calderon
  Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Government of Piauí

Implementing Agencies
 Secretariat of Finance
 Emílio Joaquim De Oliveira Júnior
 Secretary of Finance
 emiliojj@sefaz.pi.gov.br

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



                                                                                                                      Page 4
     The World Bank
     BR State of Piauí Strengthening Fiscal Sustainability and Fostering Sustainable Economic Development(P509756)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Luigi Butron Calderon

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Shireen Mahdi                           09-Apr-2025

Country Director:                       Johannes C.M. Zutt                      03-May-2025




                                                                                                                Page 5
