Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                           FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI01127




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                              INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                     ON A

                                                                              PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                                  IN THE AMOUNT OF EUR 176.1 MILLION
                                                                      (US$200 MILLION EQUIVALENT)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                    TO THE

                                                                             REPUBLIC OF KENYA

                                                                                     FOR A

                                                         KENYA WATERSHED SERVICES IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

                                                                                MAY 21, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Environment Department
                                Eastern and Southern Africa Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                    CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

            (Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2025)

               Currency Unit = US$
                        US$1 = €0.88

                           FISCAL YEAR
                         July 1 – June 30




  Regional Vice President: Ndiame Diop
Regional Practice Director: Anna Wellenstein
        Division Director: Qimiao Fan
        Practice Manager: Paul Jonathan Martin
      Task Team Leaders: Hisham Osman, Victor Vazquez Alvarez
                      ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AM        Accountability Mechanism
CALM      Climate Action through Landscape Management
CBK       Central Bank of Kenya
CEC       County Environment Committee
CFA       Community Forest Association
CIDP      County Integrated Development Plan
CIF       Climate Investment Funds
CIG       Common Interest Group
CoG       Council of Governors
CPCU      County Project Coordination Unit
CPF       Country Partnership Framework
CPSC      County Project Steering Committee
CPTAC     County Project Technical and Advisory Committee
CRF       County Revenue Fund
DANIDA    Danish International Development Agency
DPO       Development Policy Operation
E&S       Environmental and Social
ELRP      Emergency Locust Response Program
ENN       Ewaso Ngiro North
ESCP      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF       Environment and Social Framework
ESMF      Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESSs      Environmental and Social Standards
FAO       Food and Agriculture Organization
FCMA      Forest Conservation and Management Act
FLLoCA    Financing Locally-Led Climate Action Program
FM        Financial Management
FPIC      Free, Prior, and Informed Consent
GBV       Gender-Based Violence
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GEF       Global Environment Facility
GHG       Greenhouse Gas
GoK       Government of Kenya
GRM       Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS       Grievance Redress Service
Ha        Hectare
ICT       Information and Communication Technology
IDA       International Development Association
IFAD      International Fund for Agricultural Development
IP        Indigenous People
IPF       Investment Project Financing
IPT       Investment Prioritization Tool
ISLMP     Integrated Sustainable Landscape Management Plan
KCSAP     Kenya Climate-Smart Agriculture Project
KEFRI     Kenya Forestry Research Institute
KEMFSED   Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio-Economic Development Project
KEWASIP   Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project
KFS       Kenya Forest Service
KfW       Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
KISIP     Kenya Informal Settlement Improvement Project
KWS       Kenya Wildlife Service
LDN       Land Degradation Neutrality
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MFD       Maximizing Finance for Development
MoECCF    Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, and Forestry
MTP       Medium-Term Plan
NARIG     National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project
NAVCDP    National Agricultural Value Chain Development Project
NCCAP     National Climate Change Action Plan
NDC       Nationally Determined Contribution
NEMA      National Environment Management Authority
NLERS     National Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration Strategy 2023–2032
NPCU      National Project Coordination Unit
NPSC      National Project Steering Committee
NPV       Net Present Value
NT        National Treasury
PCM       Private Capital Mobilization
PCRA      Participatory Climate Risk Assessments
PDO       Project Development Objective
PES       Payment for Ecosystem Services
PFM       Public Finance Management
PFMP      Participatory Forest Management Plan
PforR     Program for Results
PIM       Project Implementation Manual
PP        Procurement Plan
PPSD      Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PS        Principal Secretary
RF        Results Framework
SCMP      Sub-Catchment Management Plan
SDF       State Department for Forestry
SEA/SH    Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
SEP       Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SIDA      Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
SLB       Sustainability-Linked Bond
SLM       Sustainable Land Management
SLWM      Sustainable Land and Water Management
SPA       Special Purpose Account
STEP      Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TA        Technical Assistance
THS-UC    Transforming Health Systems for Universal Care Project
ToR     Terms of Reference
UTNWF   Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund
VMG     Vulnerable and Marginalized Group
WCCPC   Water Catchment Conservation and Protection Committee
WRA     Water Resources Authority
WRUA    Water Resource Users Association
WWF     World Wide Fund for Nature
The World Bank
Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS

 DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
 I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
       A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
       B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................1
 II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 5
       A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................5
       B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................6
       C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................7
       D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................7
       E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................12
       F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................13
 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 15
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................15
       B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning ...............................................................................16
       C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................16
 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 16
       A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis .................................................................................16
       B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................18
       C. Environmental, Social, and Legal Operational Policies ..................................................................21
 V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 24
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 26
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Kenya                    Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project
                                                    Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                    Classification
                         Investment Project
P509738                                             High
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                    [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                  [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                       [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                             [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                   [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                         [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                Expected Closing Date
12-Jun-2025                           31-Dec-2030
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable land and watershed management
and to improve livelihoods of communities in the project areas.

Components



                                                                                                                    i
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                        PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 Component Name                                                                                      Cost (US$)
 Roots of Resilience: Policy, Legal, and Regulatory Framework                                            25.00
 Green Horizons: Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management                                         155.00
 Project Management, Training & Capacity Building                                                        20.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                     Republic of Kenya

 Contact                       Title                       Telephone No.      Email
 Chris Kiptoo                  Principal Secretary         +254 202 252 299   pstnt@treasury.go.ke
 Implementing Agency:          State Department for Forestry

 Contact                       Title                       Telephone No.      Email
 Gitonga Mugambi               Principal Secretary         +254 202 730 808   ps@forestry.go.ke



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                  200.00

  Total Financing                                                                                       200.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                          200.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                           0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                          200.00



                                                                                                                 ii
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


        IDA Credit                                                                                              200.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                             Guarantee
                            Credit Amount    Grant Amount           SML Amount                             Total Amount
                                                                                               Amount

National
Performance-Based                  200.00               0.00                 0.00                 0.00           200.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                              200.00               0.00                 0.00                 0.00           200.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                 2025          2026         2027               2028             2029          2030          2031

Annual               0.00          5.00         15.00             40.00             70.00         60.00        10.00
Cumulative           0.00          5.00         20.00             60.00          130.00           190.00       200.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                           Contributing Practice Areas
Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy              Water; Agriculture and Food

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                                Rating


                                                                                                                        iii
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ High
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ High
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Other                                                                    ⚫ Moderate
10. Overall                                                                 ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes    [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant



                                                                                                              iv
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                     Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                     Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                             Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                      Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall establish, and thereafter maintain throughout
the implementation of the Project, a National Project Steering Committee (“NPSC”) to provide overall project oversight
and policy guidance, including inter-ministerial coordination, with composition, terms of reference and resources
satisfactory to the Association, as further detailed in the PIM.
Not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall establish, and thereafter maintain throughout
the implementation of the Project, a National Technical Advisory Committee (“NTAC”) to provide technical support on
Project implementation and to ensure implementation of NPSC recommendations, with composition, terms of
reference and resources satisfactory to the Association, as further detailed in the PIM.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                              Citation                     Description                    Financing Source
                                                               The Recipient, through the
                                                               State Department for
                                                               Forestry, has established a
                                                               National Project
                                                               Coordination Unit (“NPCU”)
                                                               with qualified staff,
                                  Financing Agreement -        including but not limited to
Effectiveness                                                                                 IBRD/IDA
                                  Article IV - 4.01.           an environmental officer, a
                                                               social officer, a
                                                               procurement officer, a
                                                               financial management
                                                               officer, a monitoring and
                                                               evaluation officer, a
                                                               communications officer,


                                                                                                                         v
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                        and other staff as required,
                                                        with resources and under
                                                        terms of reference
                                                        satisfactory to the
                                                        Association.
                                                        The Recipient, through the
                                                        State Department for
                                                        Forestry, has prepared and
                                                        adopted a Project
Effectiveness               Financing Agreement                                        IBRD/IDA
                                                        Implementation Manual
                                                        (“PIM”) in form and
                                                        substance satisfactory to
                                                        the Association.
                                                        The Recipient, through the
                                                        SDF, has prepared, adopted
                                                        and publicly disclosed the
                            Financing Agreement -       Environmental and Social
Effectiveness                                                                          IBRD/IDA
                            Section III - A. and B.     Assessment for the Project,
                                                        in form and substance
                                                        satisfactory to the
                                                        Association.
                                                        The Recipient, through the
                                                        SDF, has established the
                                                        Project Grievance Redress
Effectiveness               Financing Agreement                                        IBRD/IDA
                                                        Mechanism, in form and
                                                        substance satisfactory to
                                                        the Association.
                                                        The Recipient, through SDF,
                                                        has prepared, adopted and
                                                        publicly disclosed the
                                                        Sexual Exploitation, Abuse
Effectiveness               Financing Agreement                                        IBRD/IDA
                                                        and Harassment Prevention
                                                        and Response Plan, in form
                                                        and substance satisfactory
                                                        to the Association.
                                                        Notwithstanding the
                                                        provisions of Part A of
                                                        Section III, no withdrawal
                                                        shall be made under
Disbursement                Financing Agreement                                        IBRD/IDA
                                                        Category (3) unless the
                                                        Recipient, through its SDF,
                                                        has prepared and adopted
                                                        a Community Grant


                                                                                                         vi
    The World Bank
    Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                       Manual, in form and
                                                       substance satisfactory to
                                                       the Association.
                                                       Notwithstanding the
                                                       provisions of Part A of
                                                       Section III, no withdrawal
Disbursement               Financing Agreement                                       IBRD/IDA
                                                       shall be made for payments
                                                       made prior to the Signature
                                                       Date




                                                                                                       vii
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




    I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT


    A. Project Strategic Context
1.      Over the past decade, Kenya has seen substantial economic growth yet faces challenges, including widening
fiscal deficits and high debt, low productivity growth, climate change, and degradation of natural resources that
threaten its economic and social development opportunities. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of
4.7 percent (2015–2019), with the poverty rate decreasing from 36.1 percent to 33.6 percent, as more workers found jobs
in urban areas.1 Public investment aimed at reducing infrastructure gaps raised debt, with interest payments rising from
2.7 percent of GDP in FY2014/15 to 5.3 percent in FY2023/24, limiting priority spending. Recent droughts exposed
vulnerability, reduced agricultural growth, increased rural poverty, and highlighted risks associated with rainfall-
dependent livelihoods and external credit reliance.

2.       Kenya’s natural resources are central to the employment, food security, and energy of its 54 million people.
They support over 80 percent of livelihoods, make up 35 percent of total wealth, 42 percent of GDP, and nearly 70 percent
of jobs. 1 The agriculture sector employs over 30 percent of workers2 and is highly climate sensitive. A more climate-
resilient agricultural sector will help Kenya face jobs and development challenges. Wildlife tourism is essential for 10
percent of GDP and 11 percent of formal jobs,3 while the forest sector generates 3.6 percent of GDP. These sectors face
pressure as landscape fragmentation due to agricultural expansion and urbanization drives forest cover and wildlife
population decline.

3.       Climate events pose a significant economic risk. Without mitigation, Kenya could see temperature increases of
1.5–3°C by the century’s end, with variable rainfall and more intense droughts and floods. Floods, such as in 2018, affected
350,000 people and displaced 211,188 while increasing waterborne diseases. The 2021–2023 droughts left 6.4 million
people food insecure, which increased internal migration and potential conflict. The 2023 flash floods caused
infrastructure disruptions, underscoring vulnerabilities in the water-constrained northern and eastern regions reliant on
fragile water catchment areas (referred to as water towers in Kenya) essential for ecosystem services.

    B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
4.       Land degradation puts Kenya’s economic and social gains at risk and, if not reversed, could drive disputes. The
unique physical geography of Kenya, shaped by high volcanic mountain ranges acting as water towers for downstream
agriculture (often on steep slopes) and rangelands in the valley and lowlands, means that land degradation (deforestation,
soil erosion, overgrazing) has a direct negative impact on rural livelihoods. Kenya’s Land Assessment Report4 highlights
that high levels of land degradation are likely to occur on approximately 88.6 percent of Kenya’s total land area. The
degradation of approximately 38.8 million hectares (ha) of Kenya’s land is driven by a combination of deforestation,
overgrazing, soil erosion, poor agricultural practices, and population pressure. The high level of land degradation is a
leading cause of declining agricultural productivity, loss of biodiversity, livelihood disruptions, and disputes, particularly
over grazing land. Degradation has reduced ecological functionality and caused productivity and socioeconomic and



1
  WDI, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2025 (KNBS); World Bank. 2024. Jobs for All - Unlocking Inclusive Growth in Kenya: Kenya Jobs
Diagnostic Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
2 Kenya Continuous Household Survey, 2021
3
  Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife (2018) National Wildlife Strategy 2030
4 MENR (Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources). 2016. Land Degradation Assessment in Kenya. Nairobi: Republic of Kenya, MENR.



                                                                                                                                            1
          The World Bank
          Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ecological losses estimated at US$1.3 billion annually.5 Over the last two decades, Kenya’s gazetted forests have
undergone considerable deforestation and forest degradation because of illegal encroachment for agricultural expansion,
infrastructure extension, and mining,6 unsustainable fuelwood and charcoal production, uncontrolled livestock grazing,
and forest fires. This has reduced Kenya’s ability to use this aspect of its natural capital to contribute to the country’s
economic development and realization of global forestry obligations on climate, biodiversity conservation, and land
restoration. Specifically, the degradation of water catchment areas has reduced water retention of upper catchments,
exacerbating the effects of both droughts and floods, thereby reducing the availability of water for agricultural, industrial,
and domestic uses. Climate change exacerbates these effects, particularly in arid and semi-arid regions, where droughts
and extreme weather worsen land degradation. Insecure land tenure, poor agricultural practices, and invasive species
further degrade land quality. Rapid urbanization, infrastructure development, and pollution add to the complexity. The
major barriers to conservation and sustainable forest management include inadequate forest sector governance, weak
national and county institutions, unsustainable utilization of wood and other forest products, inadequate financing, and
lack of incentives for private sector investments. Governance and management challenges have limited the sector’s
capacity to contribute to social and economic development.

5.      Environmental sustainability and conservation, climate resilience, and climate change mitigation are reflected
in policy frameworks and international commitments. Kenya’s commitment is articulated in various policy documents,
including Article 69 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 and Kenya’s Vision 2030 development blueprint, which “aims to
transform Kenya into a newly industrializing, middle-income country providing a high quality of life to all its citizens in a
clean and secure environment.” Vision 2030 is implemented through a series of Medium-Term Plans (MTPs), each covering
a five-year period. MTP IV (2023–2027) draws inspiration from the Government of Kenya’s Kenya Kwanza Bottom-Up
Economic Transformation Agenda, which focuses on Environment and Natural Resources Sector as one of the core pillars.
Kenya has established a robust policy and legal framework to support environmental conservation and watershed
management. Key policies and laws include the Environmental Management and Coordination CAP 387 revised, the
National Forest Policy, the Forest Conservation and Management Act (FCMA) CAP 385, the Wildlife Conservation and
Management Act CAP 376, the Irrigation Act CAP 347, and the Water Act CAP 372.

6.       The National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) 2023–2027 outlines Kenya's strategies for achieving low-
carbon, climate-resilient development. The plan emphasizes the importance of restoring degraded landscapes and
improving watershed services as key climate adaptation and mitigation strategies. The National Water Master Plan 2030
also sets out strategies for sustainably managing Kenya’s water resources. It highlights the need for watershed
management and rehabilitation to ensure water security for the country's growing population and economy. An updated
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Climate Agreement committed Kenya to reduce greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions by 32 percent by 2030. It also seeks to restore degraded landscapes and improve watershed
management, which aligns with Kenya’s broader goals of achieving sustainable development and enhancing climate
resilience.

7.      The Government of Kenya (GoK) has developed the National Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration Strategy
(NLERS) 2023–2032, which aims to restore and conserve 10.6 million ha of degraded landscapes and ecosystems by
2032 through the 15 billion trees growing initiative. The strategy lays out a national program to restore, sustain, enhance,
protect, and increase the productivity of Kenya’s landscapes and ecosystem services. These results, in turn, are expected
to enhance biodiversity conservation, environmental sustainability, sustainable livelihoods, climate resilience, and
socioeconomic development. The NLERS framework encourages the mainstreaming of actions by providing a roadmap for
cross-sectoral coordination within the context of devolution and local development objectives in an inclusive manner.

5
    The National Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration Strategy 2023–2032 (NLERS)
6
    Indufor (2023) Kenya – Roadmap for Sustainable Land Management

                                                                                                                       Page 2
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Through a whole-of-government approach, NLERS aims to harness analysis, planning, and public investment along with
institutional readiness to promote institutional collaboration across ministries and subnational entities. The project,
therefore, aims to support Kenya’s efforts to better align institutional structures and incentives; economic, social, and
environmental goals; priority-setting modalities; and financing levels. These efforts will be supported through activities
that facilitate information sharing and coordination across different levels of government.

8.       Kenya has also ratified the Convention on Biological Diversity in relation to the Biodiversity and Nagoya Protocol
on access to genetic resources and benefit sharing. Most of these resources in Kenya occur in forests. As a member of
the High Ambition Coalition for Nature and People, Kenya commits to restoring its degraded terrestrial and marine
ecosystems in line with the global 30×30 conservation targets. This commitment enhances Kenya’s national land
degradation neutrality (LDN) targets, which aim to achieve a balance between anticipated land degradation (losses) and
planned positive actions (gains) to achieve, at least, a position of no net loss of healthy and productive land by 2030. This
will be done by sustaining the productivity of land resources and supporting ecosystem functions and services.

9.       The Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (KEWASIP) responds to the critical need to restore
degraded landscapes, strengthen the management of Kenya’s natural resources, and enhance ecosystem services to
improve climate resilience and provide access to diversified livelihoods in Kenya. The National Forestry Policy 2023 and
NLERS have proposed a multi-pronged approach to their implementation, including enhanced sustainable forest
management practices, rehabilitation of degraded forest areas, strengthened governance and coordination, and increased
financing from both public and private sources. The FCMA, as an instrument for policy and strategy implementation, does
not adequately provide for devolution of forestry functions, participatory forest management, transparency,
accountability, equity, and incentives for community and private sector engagement and investments. The FCMA is
currently under review, together with several regulations to anchor interventions that deliver long-term benefits for
sustainable development. Through the restoration and enhancement of ecosystem services, the project will help weaken
the link between climate shocks and debt. Furthermore, the project will provide a framework for maximizing finance for
development in the landscape restoration sector by (a) providing co-financing and parallel financing opportunities for
Kenya’s development partners, (b) facilitating private capital mobilization (PCM) in land restoration on private and public
lands, and (c) enabling private investment in community lands.

10.      The project aligns with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Kenya (FY23–28)
(Report No.172255-KE) and the NLERS. KEWASIP will contribute directly to the CPF’s Higher Level Outcome 3, which aims
at greater resilience and sustainability of Kenya’s natural capital. In so doing, the project will also support efforts to
increase household resilience to, and national preparedness for, shocks and reduce Kenya’s extreme water insecurity in
the face of climate change. Finally, KEWASIP’s proposed activities aim to enhance Kenya’s ability to monitor, report, and
verify results relevant to the SLB’s key performance indicator regarding deforestation and the measurement, reporting,
and verification framework.

11.    The project is aligned with the World Bank Gender Strategy (2024–2030) and seeks to empower women by
addressing barriers, particularly in sustainable land and natural resource management, and environmental
conservation and restoration efforts. Women’s empowerment has been linked with improved agricultural productivity
and natural resource conservation.7 Women are also the primary harvesters and managers of natural resources, such as
water and biofuels, in rural households, putting them at the frontline of sustainable natural resource management.


7
  Brisebois, A., Eriksen, S. H., & Crane, T. A. (2022). The politics of governing resilience: Gendered dimensions of climate-smart agriculture in Kenya.
Frontiers in Climate, 4, 864292. https://doi.org/10.3389/fclim.2022.864292; Diiro, G. M., Seymour, G., Kassie, M., Muricho, G., & Muriithi, B. W.
(2018). Women’s empowerment in agriculture and agricultural productivity: Evidence from rural maize farmer households in western Kenya. PloS
one, 13(5), e0197995. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0197995

                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


However, women’s potential to support improved sustainable agricultural production, landscape restoration, and natural
resource management is curtailed by social norms, which consign them to subsistence production, domestic labor, and
caregiving tasks as well as limited access to land, finance, information, and skills development opportunities.8 For example,
6 percent of women lack access to formal financial services, and only 25 percent own agricultural land, compared to 4
percent and 31 percent of men, respectively. Consequently, women face greater constraints in making climate-smart
investments, with only 15 percent investing in tree planting and 6 percent investing in water conservation, compared to
23 percent and 8 percent of men, respectively.9 Further, women's voices are often neglected in the design and delivery of
agricultural extension, land and natural resources management, and community-based environmental conservation and
restoration interventions.10 In Kenya, women hold 23.3 percent of national parliament seats and 6 percent of county
assembly seats and represent 49.6 percent of those employed in senior and middle management. Despite the lack of
nationally representative data, women’s representation in natural resource management bodies at the community level
is expected to be lower than the minimum requirement of 33 percent,11 established in the Constitution, which mandates
that all elective and decision-making bodies across the country should not comprise more than two-thirds of the same
gender.12 Furthermore, 13.2 percent of firms are majority owned by women while 18.1 percent have women in top
management positions. Additionally, the average percentage of women in permanent full-time jobs is 31.6.13 To address
gaps related to natural resource management and environmental conservation, KEWASIP will promote women’s
participation in sustainable land and water management (SLWM) and the inclusion of women in income-generating
activities related to landscape restoration.

12.      The project will establish quotas for women's representation in Common Interest Groups (CIGs). Training for
women will be provided to strengthen decision-making, enhance technical capabilities, and promote participation in
SLWM activities. Indicators in the Results Framework (RF) will be used to measure the ‘Share of women representation in
local natural resource management bodies (target 30 percent)’. Under the project, 30 percent of the financial grants for
nature-based enterprises will be reserved for women-led or women-owned nature-based enterprises, and dedicated
communications and direct technical support will be provided to these enterprises to ensure effective disbursement of
funds. Training programs will also be implemented to boost income-generating activities related to alternative livelihood
and climate-smart agriculture practices. An indicator in the RF will measure ‘Share of women-led or -owned nature-based
enterprises receiving financial support’ (target 30 percent) as well as ‘Female share of beneficiaries directly benefiting
from Payment for Ecosystem Services contracts’ (target: 30 percent). Additionally, KEWASIP will provide training in
sustainable practices and alternative livelihoods, targeting female-headed and labor-constrained households. This training
will be designed to accommodate all varieties of family units and encourage the participation of women with the provision
of childcare and transportation support. Services will be delivered by both male and female trainers to ensure inclusive




8
  James R, Gibbs B, Whitford L, Leisher C, Konia R, Butt N. Conservation and natural resource management: where are all the women? Oryx.
2021;55(6):860-867. doi:10.1017/S0030605320001349
9
  KNBS and ICF. 2023. Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2022. Key Indicators Report. Nairobi, Kenya, and Rockville, Maryland, USA; Kenya
FInAccess Survey 2024 https://finaccess.knbs.or.ke/gender-gap
10
   Nijbroek and Wangui 2018 https://www.globallandscapesforum.org/wp-content/uploads/brief-series/GLF-Brief-7.pdf
11 Representation of women in a sizable share of water governance bodies (estimated at 31 percent across the Mt. Kenya region) has not yet

reached this threshold, despite the existence of sectoral legislation (such as the Water Act and the Water Resources Management Rules)
establishing a 33 percent quota for women even before the Constitution (Hannah et al. 2020. Has the vision of a gender quota rule been realized
for community-based water management committees in Kenya?, World Development, Volume 137, 2021, 105154)
12
   National Gender and Equality Commission (2016). Status of Equality and Inclusion in Kenya. Nairobi, Kenya.
https://www.ngeckenya.org/Downloads/Status%20of%20Equality%20and%20Inclusion%20in%20Kenya.pdf; WBG (2024) Kenya Gender data
https://genderdata.worldbank.org/en/economies/kenya
13
   WBG (2019) World Bank Enterprise Surveys (WBES) https://www.enterprisesurveys.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/2018/kenya#gender

                                                                                                                                           Page 4
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


support. A gender and social assessment will be undertaken to identify and clarify gender-based violence (GBV) issues and
gender-based constraints and to inform adjustments in targeting and training practices.

13.      The project’s design reflects the importance of the participatory process in the planning and managing of
natural resources, including SLWM trade-offs. Many communities, especially those in arid and semi-arid land regions,
have traditional knowledge and practices that can contribute to effective natural resource management. KEWASIP aims
to empower communities through capacity-building initiatives and access to diversified livelihoods to incentivize
landscape restoration and sustain landscape management practices. Endeavors that integrate local communities’
perspectives on “access to, and reliance on, the benefits of ecosystem services as well as competing priorities” are likely
to foster more effective tradeoff management.14 To support the integration of local communities in the governance,
prioritization, and implementation process, KEWASIP will improve information collection and sharing as well as financing
resources at the local level to support implementation of SLWM activities.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 A. Project Development Objective

14.   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable land and watershed
management and to improve livelihoods of communities in the project areas.




14 Gusenbauer, D, and P. Franks. 2019. Agriculture, Nature Conservation or Both? Managing Trade-Offs and Synergies in Sub-Saharan Africa.

London: IIED.

                                                                                                                                            Page 5
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
                                                    Figure 1. Theory of Change




      Note: MoECCF = Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, and Forestry.


15.       Key expected results in the project are as follows:

          Outcome: Improved Watershed Management
          •    PDO1: Hectares of terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management)
               o     PDO1a: Private and community lands with SLWM applied and under enhanced management
               o     PDO 1b: Rehabilitation of degraded public lands
          •    PDO 2: Net reduction of GHG emissions per year
          Outcome: Improved Livelihoods
          •    PDO 3: Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (of which female)
               o     PDO 3a: Beneficiaries adopting at least one additional SLWM practice (of which female, youth)
               o     PDO 3b: Beneficiaries participating in livelihood diversification and income-generating activities (of
                     which female, youth).


                                                                                                                        Page 6
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 C. Project Beneficiaries
16.      The targeted project area is home to approximately 1.5 million people across 250,000 households, with
approximately 50 percent of which are expected to directly benefit from the project. Project beneficiaries include all
individuals located within the project areas, as well as members of households who are located outside but derive
livelihood benefits from within the project area (that is, inside or adjacent to project areas) and how they are affected by
project interventions and activities (for example, training, reduced risks, livelihoods, and spillover effects). Beneficiaries
will be further classified with the aim of measuring the project’s gender and vulnerable marginalized group (VMG)
inclusion results. The project will use the watershed approach as the unit for integrated planning and management of
ecosystems within the project-selected areas. The overarching factors used to identify the project area are the gazetted
water towers and the major rivers originating from water towers and the downstream flows of these rivers. To ensure
that the project area reflects the potential amount of financing proceeds and effective consolidation of interventions
within the watersheds, additional information on land degradation and SLWM cost-benefit considerations were used to
identify 90 watersheds to ensure that the limited resources can generate measurable outcomes. The final list of selected
watersheds, out of the 90, will be determined after a baseline assessment has been undertaken and an Investment
Prioritization Tool (IPT) is applied, in combination with practical, on-the-ground considerations and subject to the available
financing.

 D. Project Components
Component 1. Roots of Resilience: Policy, Legal, and Regulatory Framework (IDA US$25 million)

17.      The objective of this component is to establish the foundation for programmatic and sustained investments in
SLWM by enhancing the capabilities of institutions and fortifying natural resources management governance structures
in Kenya. The component focuses on enhancing coordination mechanisms and informed decision-making by building an
integrated monitoring system that ensures compatibility across existing systems, creating incentives for efficient
management of ecosystem services to promote climate-resilient landscapes, benefit sharing, and diversified rural
livelihoods in Kenya. It has three subcomponents.

Subcomponent 1a. Strengthening Watershed Management Institutions, Water Resources, and Watershed governance
(US$8 million)

18.      Subcomponent 1a activities will strengthen policy, regulatory, and institutional frameworks to support
conservation, protection, and sustainable management of landscapes and ecosystems. The subcomponent will support
efforts to (a) implement NLERS across all levels of government as well as institutional assessments at the national and
county levels to deliver NLERS; (b) develop an integrated landscape and ecosystem management plan; (c) build the
capacity of County Environment Committees (CECs) to deliver their expanded mandate for landscape restoration; (d)
develop comprehensive guidelines of best practices for SLWM implementation, with a strong emphasis on effective
strategies for community engagement, participation, and ownership; (e) develop tools for identifying intervention
watersheds and prioritizing SLWM investments to support the identification of priority watersheds for KEWASIP
interventions, ensuring that SLWM investments are strategically targeted for maximum impact; and (f) develop, review,
and finalize national policies, legislation, strategies, and regulations including the FCMA, Rules and Regulations on
Charcoal, Gums and Resins Rules, and Private Forest Registration, benefit sharing, forest concessions, grading and
valuation of timber and other forest products, grading and valuation of timber and other forest products, participatory
sustainable forest management and Forest products exports and imports (at the time of credit effectiveness, these
regulations are likely to have been approved), Riparian Reserve Management Regulation (which is likely to have been
approved by the time of credit effectiveness), and County Forest and Tree Growing Policy and Bill. Furthermore,
Subcomponent 1a activities will promote the adoption of the amended FCMA (which has a clear commitment toward
                                                                                                                       Page 7
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


prioritizing climate mitigation measures) and provide support needed to achieve objectives presented in NCCAP III 2023–
2027 and Kenya’s NDC under the Paris Agreement of reducing GHG emissions by 32 percent by 2030, relative to the
business-as-usual scenario of 143 MtCO2eq.15 This will help internalize externalities in the watershed, connecting upstream
and downstream users. Specifically, the degradation of water catchment areas has reduced water retention of upper
catchments, exacerbating the effects of both droughts and floods and reducing the availability of water for agricultural,
industrial, and domestic uses. Subcomponent 1a activities will entail the development of integrated management plans
for the targeted watersheds, crosscutting several counties, based on already prepared sub-watershed management plans
(participatory forest management plans [PFMPs], sub-catchment management plans [SCMPs], conservancies plans) and
respective County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs). Sub-watershed management plans will be reviewed and
updated and, where needed, additional ones will be prepared. These integrated watershed management plans will guide
county-level planning and implementation under Component 2. A Community Grants Manual for community-level grants
will be developed (with the provision of US$5 million grants for the minority and marginalized groups). The activities
provided under this subcomponent will also underpin the various Component 2 SLWM activities in support of agricultural
and landscape management practices that reduce GHG emissions or increase GHG sequestration.

Subcomponent 1b. Development and Implementation of Integrated Watershed and Landscape Restoration Monitoring
System (IDA US$8 million)

19.     Subcomponent 1b aims to enhance decision-making for resilient landscapes and diversified rural livelihoods in
the project area during and after the project. Activities include developing an integrated monitoring and data-sharing
framework and developing and rolling out an integrated watershed monitoring system. Subcomponent 1b will also
support information and communication technology (ICT) and monitoring infrastructure improvement through the
procurement of ICT equipment, lab equipment, and software to support data collection, analysis, and reporting at the
county and national levels, as well as the procurement of field equipment for monitoring biophysical parameters such as
water quality sampling and hydromet stations. The third aspect of Subcomponent 1b focuses on knowledge management
and capacity building. Activities include strengthening institutional and technical capacity for project implementation at
the national, county, and community levels by assessing the capacity needs of implementation partners, training staff and
focal points, enhancing the technical skills of CIGs, training farmer field school facilitators in the project area, disseminating
project and scientific information, monitoring the watershed at the county and national levels, establishing knowledge
hubs, and linking with the Maarifa Center.

Subcomponent 1c. Sustainable Financing Mechanisms and Investments for Watersheds and Landscapes Management (IDA
US$9 Million)

20.     Subcomponent 1c will promote the establishment of sustainable finance mechanisms for community-based
restoration activities. These will include payment for ecosystem services (PES) schemes, and benefit-sharing schemes.
This subcomponent will also support the development of a national PES framework and will support identifying and
designing selected financing mechanism schemes. Key activities that will be supported include the identification of
ecosystem services and the design and adoption of PES schemes for priority watersheds. A second aspect of
Subcomponent 1c is the development and establishment of incentives and award schemes to incentivize actors engaged
in conservation, recognize identified best practices, and guide the operationalization of incentive schemes supported
under Component 2.




15 Kenya’s National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) III - 2023–2027. Towards Low Carbon Climate Resilient Development.


                                                                                                                            Page 8
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Component 2. Green Horizons: Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management (IDA US$155 million)

21.      This component will support the restoration and management of degraded landscapes through investment in
selected hydrosheds and help build resilient livelihoods for the communities in the project area. This component will
adopt a participatory approach for planning and implementation of SLWM investments and use the watershed as a
management unit. Guided by the integrated watershed management plans prepared under Subcomponent 1a, the County
Project Coordination Units (CPCUs) will prepare their county-level plans for the targeted watersheds. The supported
activities will begin with activities at a smaller scale (for example, participatory forest management planning and sub-
catchment management planning) appropriate for integrating communities into a participatory process. By implementing
SLWM practices, the project aims to enhance water retention, reduce surface runoff, and improve soil moisture, thereby
mitigating the impacts of climate variability and extreme weather events and increasing community resilience to climate
change. SLWM practices promote improved water management by promoting water retention in the landscape and
reducing peak flow and thus the risk of flooding in flood-prone areas during high rainfall events. Similarly, during drought
events, the increased water retention due to SLWM interventions and the adoption of complementary practices to reduce
the negative impacts of prolonged periods of low or no rainfall increases individual as well as community resilience during
drought periods. SLWM practices (for example, terracing, the use of cover crops, or adoption of more climate-resilient
crops) improve soil health, prevent erosion, and enhance water retention. The project is estimated to achieve annual GHG
emission reductions and removals of approximately 520,000 tons of CO2 equivalent through interventions across public,
private, and community lands, encompassing improved agricultural land management, grazing practices, and
reforestation activities. It has two subcomponents.

22.       The project will also support targeted households and communities in the project area transition to sustainable
livelihood development and diversification. Priority will be given to livelihoods affected and restricted by project activities
with a focus on vulnerable communities, including distinct social and cultural groups that have collective attachment to
geographically distinct habitats, ancestral territories, and natural resources in these areas. Benefits will be identified
through the participatory preparation of local Community Development Plans that will elaborate differentiated measures
for livelihoods diversification interventions. The focus will be on the sustainable restoration of communally owned assets,
alternative production systems, and support toward diverse livelihoods. A detailed list of eligible activities, including a
negative list, will be included in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) along with the approach for how groups will
access livelihood development support.

23.     Initial screening to identify focal regions from which to select KEWASIP community watersheds involved a
government-led, multi-faceted process where priority was given to catchments experiencing significant land
degradation, deforestation, soil erosion, and flood risk, affecting local populations and livelihoods and areas at risk of
climate change. These GIS datasets were combined using weights to derive a representative score for each potential
project site. The selection process was anchored on the importance of water towers as key intervention areas and the
desire to intervene across connected catchments with a range of ecosystem types, including forests, agricultural
landscapes, and rangelands. The five focal areas are Marsabit, Marmanet, Nyambene, Chyulu Hills, and Shimba Hills which
intersect 12 counties namely Marsabit, Samburu, Garissa, Isiolo, Baringo. Meru, Tharaka Nithi, Tana River, Laikipia, Kitui,
Makueni, Kwale and 13 watersheds16.

24.    To ensure that KEWASIP interventions are strategically focused, an Investment Prioritization Tool (IPT) will be
adapted to Kenya to guide investment prioritization in the project area.17 This tool facilitates a data-driven process,

16
   The selected watersheds as defined The Water Act - Designation of Basin Areas NO. 235 OF 2021 are: 3FA, 3FB, 3G, 3K, 3MB, 4FB, 4GA, 4GB,
5AA, 5AB, 5AC, 5AD, 5J
17 The adoption of the IPT tool for Kenya to prioritize investments is supported by the Global Program for Sustainability


                                                                                                                                         Page 9
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


ensuring that resources are directed toward areas where they will have the greatest impact. The IPT integrates various
datasets relevant to the Kenyan context, including information on land degradation, water resources, biodiversity,
socioeconomic factors, and climate risks and vulnerability. It will also incorporate outputs from models like INVEST18,
which map and value ecosystem services to identify areas critical for providing benefits such as clean water and erosion
control. By employing advanced geospatial analysis and modeling techniques, the IPT will assess the potential benefits of
different SLWM interventions in each watershed, considering factors like improved water availability, reduced erosion,
enhanced carbon sequestration, and increased community resilience. To ensure manageable and ecologically relevant
units for intervention, watersheds similar in size to the World Wide Fund for Nature’s (WWF) hydroshed level 12 were
adopted, though the exact size of each vary depending on local topography. Importantly, the data generated by KEWASIP
will make the tools more effective and will be used to inform the design of future projects and programs that aim to scale
up activities geographically and across ecosystems.

Subcomponent 2a. Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management in Private and Community Lands (IDA US$55
million)

25.      Subcomponent 2a activities will focus on private and communal lands. This subcomponent will implement land
rehabilitation measures and establish green infrastructure through biophysical land and water conservation measures.
One key objective of this subcomponent will be to create benefit streams for the communities in the targeted micro
watersheds from increased ecological services and land productivity, mainly through the productive use and management
of landscape resources. This subcomponent will also support the establishment of green corridors, which will further
reduce erosion, enhance watershed restoration, and increase ecological connectivity. Green corridors are established by
planting suitable, preferably native, tree species, connecting forest patches in the watersheds. These corridors facilitate
wildlife movement between habitat patches, promoting gene exchange and maintaining biodiversity. This helps sustain
ecosystem health and enhances the climate resilience of the ecosystem. Climate change poses significant threats to
biodiversity, leading to habitat loss, altered species distributions, and increased risk of spreading invasive species. By
controlling invasive species such as Prosopis juliflora, and Lantana camara and Opuntia stricta, and promoting native
species, the project aims to restore ecological balance and improve the resilience of ecosystems to climate change
impacts. The objective of the subcomponent will be achieved through biological and physical conservation measures that
ensure reduced surface runoff and soil erosion, as well as improved land productivity, resulting in enhanced crop and
livestock production. The subcomponent will support the following activities:

         •      Soil and water conservation measures on community and privately cultivated lands. Biological and physical
                soil and water conservation measures/practices such as construction of terracing, check dams, reseeding,
                and re-vegetating.
         •      Water harvesting, limited to small-scale methods such as water pans and rooftop rainwater collection. The
                water harvesting structures will be used for micro-irrigation at the household level and to support other
                livelihood options including livestock and wildlife.
         •      Gully rehabilitation. Cost-efficient biophysical gully restoration techniques such as sandbag check dams,
                sediment storage dams, and gabion-check dams will be applied. Productive use and management of the
                rehabilitated gullies will be supported, such as forage, fruit, and fuel wood production.
         •      Restoration of green corridors. Planting suitable, preferably native, tree species along rivers/streams and
                all-weather roads connecting forest patches in the watersheds. Post-plantation management support



18 Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem Services and Tradeoffs.


                                                                                                                   Page 10
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


             including tending, hoeing, and soil moisture conservation will be carried out. Green corridors will also be
             established along gully offsets to ensure stability and productive use of the land.
        •    Area closure management and use. Assisted natural regeneration through restrictions on free grazing,
             enrichment planting, soil fertility improvement, and moisture retention will be implemented in community
             areas and/or privately managed degraded bush and woodlands. Cost-efficient management practices of
             enclosures will include supporting local communities in the preparation and execution of participatory use
             and management plans of enclosed areas, including forage cut-and-carry arrangements.
        •    Establishment of woodlots. Reforestation and afforestation of degraded land and shrub/bush lands with a
             diverse range of tree and shrub species that can be used as a source of food, feed, and energy, and enhance
             soil fertility. Planting of appropriate tree seedlings including economically valuable species and post-
             plantation management practices such as tending and watering in moisture-stressed areas, hoeing, and
             weeding during early stages will be carried out to ensure the survival of the planted seedlings.
        •    Agroforestry in productive landscapes. This will include the promotion of high-value tree crops, value
             addition, and establishment of market links; value chains including Melia, Mango, Citrus (Oranges/Pixies),
             Avocado, Aloe, Cashew nuts, Acacia, and Commiphora (gums and resins) will be promoted.
        •    Enrichment of degraded pasture and rangeland. Planting and reseeding of appropriate forage species
             including fodder crops in degraded pasture and rangelands to increase productivity and improve the value
             of feed for grazing animals.
        •    Control and management of invasive species (such as Prosopis juliflora, Lantana camara, and Opuntia
             stricta).
        •    Support a program of activities through Minority and Marginalized Group Grants. These grants are for
             restoring natural resources and assets that constitute the livelihood base of Minority and Marginalized
             Groups including through enterprise development activities for livelihood enhancement and diversification.
Subcomponent 2b. Restoration of Gazetted Forests (IDA US$100 million)

26.     Subcomponent 2b activities will be undertaken in selected gazetted forests. Activities will enhance the forest
restoration capacity of the Kenya Forest Service (KFS) and Kenya Forestry Research Institute (KEFRI). Key activities will
include (a) enhancing the collection, testing, and distribution of quality tree seeds and seedlings for the restoration of
degraded landscapes; (b) expanding the production capacity of tree nurseries, planting, and management of seedlings for
reforestation and natural regeneration; (c) developing systems and procuring equipment for the control and management
of tree pests and diseases; (d) developing systems for enhanced fire surveillance, preparedness, and response
mechanisms; (e) controlling and managing invasive species; and (f) providing awareness creation on private sector
engagement; (vii) map investment opportunities in the 5 project sites; and (viii) pilot private sector engagement in selected
forest blocks. The tree seeds and seedlings for the restoration of degraded landscapes will be selected for their drought
tolerance and resilience to changing climate, ensuring that the restored areas can withstand the impacts of climate change
and continue to provide ecosystem services.

Component 3: Project Management, Training, and Capacity Building (IDA US$20 million)

27.      Component 3 will aim to ensure the efficient consolidation of planning and budgeting processes, alongside the
diligent implementation and reporting of project activities in line with World Bank standards. The project will fund the
operational expenses of the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) within the State Department for Forestry (SDF) of
the MoECCF. The NPCU will oversee all fiduciary aspects of project implementation, including financial management,

                                                                                                                     Page 11
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                  PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


procurement, environmental and social standards (ESS), and monitoring, evaluation, and reporting. Reporting at the
national, county, and community levels will be designed to facilitate accurate and comprehensive tracking of project
progress. Key activities to be undertaken under this component will include (a) the establishment and operationalizing of
all project governance structures or organs; (b) project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E); (c) institutional support
including procurement of vehicles and requisite equipment (computers, printers, and so on); and (d) capacity building of
project staff on aspects of procurement, budgeting, reporting, and monitoring of activities.

 E. Role of Partners
28.     Development partners, such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF), Climate Investment Funds (CIF), the
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and other bilateral
and multilateral organizations, play a crucial role by providing complementary support through financing, capacity
building, and policy alignment. This collaborative effort ensures that KEWASIP addresses national environmental
challenges and contributes to global and regional commitments, including the Bonn Challenge, AFR100, and other
multilateral environmental agreements aimed at restoring ecosystems and building climate resilience. Table 1 presents a
summary of the partner interventions that support Kenya’s efforts to achieve global and regional commitments, including
its NDCs. KEWASIP aims to drive transformation at scale by building on these interventions and support Kenya’s capacity
to mobilize the additional financing needed to achieve the objectives set out in its ambitious landscape and ecosystems
restoration strategy. Like the mentioned development partner interventions, water towers are considered key
intervention areas under KEWASIP, which aims to complement development partner activities. KEWASIP interventions
will support activities that connect catchments through a range of ecosystem types from forests to agricultural landscapes
to rangelands in the five focal project sites.

                                               Table 1. Partners and Interventions
Development      Partner Interventions           Geographic Area                          Complementarity
  Partner
GEF         Integrated landscape               Mt. Elgon             • Enhances valuation of ecosystem services
            management                                               • Links livelihoods, SLWM, and climate resilience
                                                                     • Fosters entry points for the private sector in terms of
                                                                       Technical Assistance (TA), logistics development, and
                                                                       financing
FAO           Climate resilient, low carbon,   Lake Region           • Supports the devolution process by enhancing
              sustainable agricultural value   Economic Bloc           institutional capacity to address climate change
              chains                                                 • Addresses land degradation, water management,
                                                                       deforestation, and land use together with encroachment
                                                                       of forests and wetlands
IFAD          Integrated natural resources     Cherangany Hills      • Addresses natural resource management constraints
              management                       and Mau West          • Use livelihoods to incentivize natural resource
                                               water towers            management.
                                                                     • Fosters a participatory and inclusive approach to natural
                                                                       resource management
              Upper Tana catchment natural     Six counties in the   • Empowers communities to sustainably manage natural
              resource management              Upper Tana basin        resources
                                                                     • Supports livelihoods as a means to support natural
                                                                       resource management
                                                                     • Promotes SLWM
                                                                     • Promotes a focused geographic approach



                                                                                                                          Page 12
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 Development        Partner Interventions       Geographic Area                         Complementarity
    Partner
 KfW,          Parallel financing of Financing National           • Supports capacity building at the county and local levels
 DANIDA, SIDA Locally-Led Climate Action                             to enhance resilience and policy implementation
               Program (FLLoCA)
Note: DANIDA = Danish International Development Agency; KfW = Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau , SIDA = Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency.
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

29.      KEWASIP’s design is informed by experiences in Kenya, Ethiopia, and other countries. Over the last 13 years, the
World Bank has supported efforts to address drivers of natural resource degradation and build institutional capacity
through the Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784, KCSAP), FLLoCA (P173065), the Kenya Agricultural
Productivity and Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P088600), the Kenya Water Security and Climate Resilience
Project (P117635), the Kenya Natural Resource Management Project (P095050, NRMP), and relevant experience in other
countries including the US$500 million Ethiopia Climate Action through Landscape Management PforR (P170384, CALM).

30.     KEWASIP provides an important opportunity to complement ongoing World Bank projects in Kenya by building
on lessons learned; bridging gaps in policy frameworks; and fostering support for institutional capacity that supports
cross-sectoral integrated planning, implementation, and monitoring. For instance, FLLoCA has provided incentives to
create County Climate Change Funds, County Climate Change Units, multi-sectoral County Climate Change Planning
Committees, and community-level Ward Climate Change Planning Committees (WCCPCs). These groups will help articulate
KEWASIP support at the county and local levels. Information submitted by counties shows that 29,705 people contributed
to Participatory Climate Risk Assessment (PCRA) formulation while 1,335 WCCPCs comprising 12,614 members were
established. KEWASIP aims to leverage lessons derived during FLLoCA’s implementation and build on FLLoCA’s planning
and implementation alignment focus.

31.      KEWASIP also benefits from lessons learned and experiences garnered over the past 15 years in Ethiopia.
International Development Association (IDA) support through SLMP-I, SLMP-II, RLLP, RLLP-2, OFLP, and CALM has driven
one of the world’s largest landscape restoration programs. Nearly 250 major watersheds have been restored, and over
5,000 community watersheds are being restored in Ethiopia’s highlands. Interventions include forest protection, climate-
smart agriculture, biophysical soil and water conservation, and tree planting across some 80,000 ha. Increased vegetation
cover by 9 percent in treated areas is one result. Recent lessons include the role that community-led watershed planning
and livelihood diversification have as mechanisms to support continued management of restored landscapes after project
support has concluded.

32.     Lessons reflected in KEWASIP design include the following:

        •     Collaborative links in support of a locally driven participatory approach. Collaboration among the national
              government, county governments, communities, development partners, and the private sector can provide
              unique expertise and insights needed to steward natural resources and improve resilience.
        •     PES and sustainable financing. A PROFOR-sponsored impact evaluation of Mexico’s National Forestry
              Commission’s (CONAFOR) Payment for Hydrological Services Program was undertaken to ascertain how or if
              households and communities respond to financial incentives. Findings indicate that participants undertook
              more forest management activities compared to the control group. Furthermore, forest coverage change
              analysis indicates that the program “had the greatest impacts where the risk of deforestation was high.” For
              PES to be sustainable and effective, a supportive policy framework must be in place and awareness-building

                                                                                                                        Page 13
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


             programs established. Additionally, PES should consider external factors that might affect potential schemes
             either positively or negatively. The Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund (UTNWF) provides lessons on the design
             and implementation of a PES scheme in Kenya. The UTNWF demonstrates the value of an enabling
             environment—resources, policies, institutions, and mechanisms used to make a PES scheme effective must
             be aligned. Furthermore, the scheme must be understood by stakeholders, its objectives broadly shared and
             agreed, and clear guidance on its operation provided. The UTNWF also shows that to overcome design and
             implementation challenges, it is important to develop a clear definition of the ecosystem service to be
             targeted and the management activities to be undertaken, and benefits must be clearly linked to
             management activities.
        •    Project intervention area. To drive impact, the geographic scope of the KEWASIP implementation area will
             be limited to a few counties through a site prioritization analysis that considers ongoing interventions and
             upstream and downstream interactions of ecosystems. The lessons and results derived from the project
             supported activities will inform the planning of future initiatives and facilitate scaling up interventions in
             accordance with Kenya’s landscape and ecosystems restoration strategy.
        •    County-level capacity. The use of existing systems and institutions should enhance Kenya’s potential to
             improve development impact. Therefore, KEWASIP’s design integrates existing systems and institutions to
             support local participation and enhance local ownership, drive evidence-based budget allocations, and
             reduce duplication of effort. To this end, KEWASIP will complement other initiatives and development
             partners that focus on government financial management systems, public participation, climate awareness,
             demand-driven capacity building, and M&E systems.
        •     Scaling interventions. The multi-disciplinary nature and the spatial scale of natural resource degradation in
             Kenya pose significant challenges to achieving the objectives set out in NLERS. Achievements in Ethiopia
             indicate that piloting approaches and providing TA through IPF-supported interventions have the potential
             to establish a base for larger-scale interventions, including PforRs.
        •    Coordination among the different levels of government. The development of annual work plans, budgets,
             procurement plans, and progress reports must be coordinated with expected results agreed and frequently
             measured. The flow of funds from the national government to county governments must be timely and
             predictable and support implementation arrangements.
33.      VMGs and Indigenous Peoples (IPs). Efforts to ensure effective participation and delivery of benefits should be
guided by best practices. To foster ongoing involvement, consultation processes need to be adaptive, continuous, and
transparent. Lastly, capacity-building activities designed to improve planning and management abilities increase the
likelihood that KEWASIP will achieve its objectives and SLWM activities will continue beyond KEWASIP’s implementation
period.

34.     The project aims to facilitate PCM through ecotourism, Nature Based Enterprises (NBEs) and adoption of new
technologies/ innovations forest management partnerships on public lands, agroforestry investments on private lands,
and facilitating community land registration under the Community Lands Act to foster private sector participation (to
be done by counties). By supporting policy and regulatory reforms, the project will create an enabling environment for
private sector participation. These efforts align with the World Bank Group's Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD)
approach, ensuring sustainable and scalable private sector solutions to development challenges. In Kenya, there are three
primary types of land, each with distinct characteristics and management practices:

        •    Public land. The approach to public lands will focus on attracting private investments through ecotourism
             and forest management partnerships that support sustainable conservation practices while generating

                                                                                                                   Page 14
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                         PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                revenue (PCM).
         •      Private land. On private lands, the MFD approach will facilitate agroforestry investments, combining private
                and public resources to boost agricultural productivity and sustainability (PCM).
         •      Community land. For community lands, the MFD approach will support the formal registration process under
                the Community Lands Act, enabling communities to enter into legal agreements with private investors, thus
                fostering sustainable development and investment opportunities (PCM).

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

35.      KEWASIP will adopt a three-tiered implementation arrangement involving national, county, and community
levels. Due to the multisectoral nature of the project, at the national level, a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC)
made up of participating ministries will provide overall project oversight and policy guidance, while a National Project
Technical Advisory Committee (NTAC) will offer technical support to ensure environmental, social, and economic
objectives are met. The project will have an NPCU established under SDF staffed by government officers. The main role of
the NPCU is the day-to-day coordination and management of project activities; implementation of activities at the national
level; and monitoring, reporting, and verification of project outputs and outcomes.

36.      At the county level, a County Project Steering Committee (CPSC), County Project Technical and Advisory
Committee (CPTAC) and CPCUs will be established in participating counties. The CPSC will provide overall project
oversight and policy guidance at the county level and comprise both national and county staff. In addition, the CPTAC will
provide technical advice to the CPCU which is responsible for day-to-day execution and will be composed of technical
officers from KFS, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Water Resources Authority (WRA), KEFRI, Kenya
Wildlife Service (KWS), and county officers. The NPCU will coordinate with the CPTAC and the various CPCUs to ensure
that participatory plans from the participating counties are integrated and activities proposed complement each other.
Over the lifetime of the project, the capacity of the CECs and County Forestry Departments will be strengthened to ensure
sustainability.19 The NPCU under SDF will monitor, review, and recommend the CPCUs work plans for approval. The CPCUs,
staffed mainly by county government officers, will oversee project implementation, consolidate plans, and monitor
activities at the county level.

37.      At the community level, the project will support and foster the participation of CIGs including Community-Based
Organization and others, which will represent beneficiary communities at the grassroots and ensure participatory
identification, preparation, and implementation of restoration and livelihood sub-projects. These CIGs will prioritize the
inclusion of VMGs to enhance social and economic participation in targeted rural areas. The project activities will be
informed by the project integrated Sustainable Landscape Management Plans, the hydroshed plans, and the micro-
catchment action plans, which will be aligned with the CIDPs, County Spatial Plans, PCRAs, and other plans such as PFMPs,
SCMPs, and Climate Risk Management Action Plans, ensuring that local climate vulnerabilities are incorporated into
planning and implementation. The project also links closely with existing entities like local community groups, Community
Forest Associations (CFAs), Water Resource Users Associations (WRUAs), and Conservancies, ensuring collaborative
implementation at the grassroots level. The project will be implemented in coordination with technical agencies such as
SDF, the State Department for Environment and Climate Change, State Department for Irrigation, State Department for


19 Though the CECs were established under the Environmental Management and Coordination Act (revised 2012), they are not operational and

need capacity building to become effective.

                                                                                                                                    Page 15
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Wildlife, WRA, KFS, KEFRI, KWS, NEMA, National Environment Trust Fund, Directorate of Remote Surveys and Resource
Sensing, Council of Governors (CoG), and project participating county governments.

 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning

38.       KEWASIP will prioritize the operationalization of a robust and integrated watershed and landscape monitoring
system to track progress, measure impact, and ensure accountability. The system will align with national M&E systems,
utilizing relevant indicators and data collection methods to promote harmonization and avoid duplication. The system will
monitor biophysical indicators and program-specific progress toward achieving project objectives. To enhance M&E
capacity, the project will (a) establish comprehensive frameworks for monitoring, data sharing, and data/system
protection standards; (b) procure necessary ICT and other equipment and software for data collection, analysis, and
reporting; (c) improve existing tools, develop a geoportal with spatial data analytics and reporting dashboard, and create
a central data repository; and (d) promote transparency and accountability with broad access to information, including
project progress, other supporting relevant data, and key project documents, while also fostering a collaborative
environment for the exchange of ideas and feedback.

39.   The system platform will be established at the MoECCF with the NPCU to lead the overall M&E efforts. The
NPCU and CPCUs will be staffed with dedicated M&E officers who will be responsible for data collection and reporting on
implementation progress and results in the project’s quarterly progress reports.

C. Disbursement Arrangements

40.      Funds flow arrangements. The IDA funds shall flow into two Designated Accounts (DAs) namely, DA- 1 for national
activities and DA-2 for county activities opened by the National Treasury (NT). DA-1 will have a corresponding project bank
account opened by SDF in the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) in local currency (Kenya shillings) from which payments for all
national project activities will be made. Each county implementing project activities will be required to open a County
Special Purpose Account (SPA) at CBK to receive funds for county-level activities. Resources from DA-2 will move to the
ministry development account and then to the SPA through the County Revenue Fund (CRF). CIG organizations and other
eligible entities as described in the PIM will open project accounts for receiving funds from the SPA. Disbursements will
follow the transactions-based Statement of Expenditure method. However, the project may also use direct payments,
advances to the Designated Account, reimbursement, and special commitments depending on the case upon approval by
the NPSC. Provisions are documented in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

 A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis

41.     The project was assessed as technically sound. The technical design of project is primarily based on the successful
experiences of watershed management and landscape restoration initiatives in Kenya, including the FLOCCA (P173065)
and KCSAP (P154784). The design of the watershed component draws on the lessons learned from these projects,
incorporating a comprehensive intervention strategy that uses the hydroshed as the primary planning and implementation
unit. This approach promotes a set of technically proven, demand-driven investments that address environmental
challenges and opportunities while integrating a holistic landscape approach that includes productive and livelihood
dimensions for beneficiary households. Investments in catchment and forest restoration will be based on technology and
methods that are proven successful in Kenya and elsewhere, such as constructing contour bank terraces; planting
hedgerows; and establishing native vegetation as buffers along rivers, streams, and gullies.


                                                                                                                   Page 16
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


42.     KEWASIP is consistent with the goals of the Paris Agreement and Kenya’s latest NDC. The project supports the
mitigation commitments outlined in the NDC, including enhancing tree cover through afforestation and reforestation,
achieving LDN, scaling up nature-based solutions and reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
(REDD+) activities, and strengthening agroforestry/climate-smart agriculture. The project supports the adaptation
commitments, including enhancing adaptive capacity and climate resilience across sectors and at the two levels of
government (national and county governments), integrating nature-based solutions and land restoration to enhance
ecosystem services for climate adaptation (such as water regulation and soil fertility), and enhancing livelihood strategies
to strengthen the climate resilience of local communities, including livelihood diversification, water management
improvement, and empowerment of marginalized groups. Furthermore, these NDC commitments on mitigation and
adaptation are in line with the national climate plans and strategies and are consistent with the findings of the Kenya
Country Climate and Development Report.

43.     The assessment and reduction of both mitigation and adaptation risks involve a comprehensive evaluation of
the project's exposure to current and future climate and geophysical hazards, such as extreme temperatures,
precipitation, flooding, and drought. This assessment for Paris Alignment using the Climate and Disaster Risk Screening
Tool considered the impacts on the project's physical components, including land use, watershed management, and water
supply, as well as the adaptive capacity provided by the project's non-physical components and broader development
context. To mitigate these risks, the project will strengthen institutional and governance frameworks, enhance integrated
monitoring systems, and promote community participation in planning and implementation processes. Sustainable
financing mechanisms, such as PES, are also implemented to support livelihoods and landscape restoration initiatives.
These strategies are aligned with the project's components and RF.

44.      A cost-benefit analysis was carried out to assess the economic viability of the project based on the priority areas
identified for protection, restoration, and improved management of both natural and agricultural landscapes
(Component 2). The cost-benefits were drawn from a national assessment of all 208 sub-catchments prepared for the
nature, people, and climate investment options report for Kenya financed by the CIF. The sub-catchments selected20 for
KEWASIP were based on a multi-criteria analysis which included biophysical factors (land degradation levels, water
security, climate change vulnerability); socioeconomic factors (poverty headcount, food insecurity); upstream-
downstream interactions; and past and ongoing interventions by the GoK and other donors. The cost-benefit analysis was
then applied to these selected sub-catchments not just on their level of degradation but on what can change with
interventions relative to what appropriate interventions would cost. Based on these sub-catchments, the gain in
ecosystem services before and after restoration interventions was calculated.

45.      The interventions considered and costed were (a) re/afforestation of former natural forest areas, (b)
rehabilitation of degraded natural forests, (c) agroforestry on cropland (10–20 percent tree cover), (d) commercial tree
plantations in unstocked areas and marginal lands, (e) rangeland restoration, (f) community rangeland and wildlife
conservancy formation, and (g) riparian buffers. The benefits of these interventions were calculated by sub-catchment
based on the net gains of (a) carbon sequestration at voluntary carbon market rate (U$8/tCO2e), (b) flood attenuation
(avoided damages), (c) increased groundwater recharge, (d) avoided sediment exports to dams, (e) baseflow contribution,
(f) increased production from agroforestry and conservation agriculture, (g) increased livestock productivity, and (h)
increased income from wildlife tourism.

46.     Based on these costs and benefits, the project’s economic internal rate of return is estimated at 9 percent, with
a net present value (NPV) of US$141 million. Furthermore, if the net GHG emission reductions are included (estimated at


20 Out of 208 level-3 sub-catchments in Kenya, 13 were selected: 3FA, 3FB, 3G, 3K, 3MB, 4FB, 4GA, 5AA, 5AB, 5AC, 5AD, 5J.


                                                                                                                              Page 17
          The World Bank
          Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


377,000 tCO2eq/yr over the next 25 years)21 the NPV increases to between US$401 million and US$552 million based on
a low and high estimates for the shadow price of carbon.22

47.     As some of these economic returns will accrue to owners of private and community land, there are
opportunities to leverage private investment. This is particularly the case for agroforestry and conservation agriculture
on private lands, but there are also opportunities to improve livestock productivity and tourism revenues on communal
lands, and forestry and tourism revenues from public lands.

 B. Fiduciary
48.      A financial management (FM) assessment was carried out for the project in accordance with the World Bank
policy and directives on IPF. The assessment was conducted on the MoECCF - SDF where the NPCU will be anchored. The
assessment also considered experiences with ongoing and recently closed World Bank-funded projects implemented
through counties. The assessment covered the six FM elements of budgeting, funds flows, accounting, internal controls
(including internal auditing), financial reporting, and external auditing arrangements. A detailed assessment and agreed
action plan to mitigate identified risks are prepared and filed separately.

49.     The FM arrangements will be based on the GoK’s Public Finance Management (PFM) Act CAP 412A and
attendant regulations, and World Bank requirements. The PFM system is anchored in Kenya’s legal frameworks in
relation to budgeting and planning, expenditure authorization, internal audit function, external audit, and financial
reporting.

50.     Planning and budgeting. KEWASIP shall follow the GoK planning and budgeting procedures. The annual work plan
and budget shall be prepared and consolidated at the national level with input from the agencies and counties. The
consolidated work plan shall be approved by the NPSC and provided with ‘no-objection’ by the World Bank. The project
budget shall also be included in the overall budget of the ministry under SDF and as part of the County Government
Additional Allocation Bill (CGAAB).

51.      Internal controls, financial reporting, and external audit. The project shall use the existing internal controls as
defined in the PFM Act and Public Audit Act CAP 412B, PFM regulations and guidelines, and in line with the FM Manual,
which shall be developed as part of the PIM. The NPCU shall be required to consolidate an unaudited interim financial
report with inputs from the agencies and counties and submit it to the World Bank within 45 days after the quarter. This
shall include all the statements of expenditure from each of the participating counties. The NPCU shall be required to
prepare an annual project financial statement for the project, which shall be submitted for audit by the Office of the
Auditor General within two months after the end of the financial year. The external audit report and management letters
will be submitted to the World Bank within six months after the end of the financial year.

52.     The overall FM risk is assessed as High. The rating is due to regular cuts in the budget’s provisions approved in
Parliament, delaying implementation of activities; delays in the approval of the County Governments Additional Allocation
Act framework23 which have adversely affected the implementation of project activities at the county level constituting
28 percent of project allocation; notable delays in the transfer of funds from the CRF to the County Project Operational
Account in select counties; delays in undertaking internal audit reviews at both the national and county levels; use of
manual systems for financial reporting at both the national and county levels; and FM weaknesses at the county level,
including frequent transfers of staff without adequate handover, leading to disruptions of financial reporting and errors

21 Using the EX-Ante Carbon-balance Tool http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-home/en/
22 World Bank (2017) Shadow price of carbon in economic analysis
23
     CGAAB framework for 2023/2024 delayed by nine months and 2024/2025 by ten months.

                                                                                                                    Page 18
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


in financial reports. Furthermore, project design involves payments of community grants with inherent FM risks and
includes the establishment of sustainable finance mechanisms for community-based restoration activities. The details of
these mechanisms will be determined through feasibility studies conducted during project implementation.

53.      The following measures will be taken to mitigate these risks. (a) the project will be implemented through an
NPCU at the national level and CPCUs at the participating counties, which will be staffed with fiduciary staff who are well
qualified and have adequate experience in handling World Bank-funded projects or other projects of a similar nature; (b)
while the budget and funds flow risks are largely related to the portfolio level and specific to the country PFM system and
are being addressed as part of the policy reform dialogue between the GoK and the World Bank, within the SDF, the Chief
Finance Officer will be tasked with liaising with the National Project Coordinator and other component leads to ensure
that an adequate budget is provided; (c) a separate dedicated project bank account shall be opened by SDF and a county
Special Purpose Account by counties; (d) all participating counties will be required to sign inter-governmental participation
agreements clearly highlighting the key financial management requirements; (e) the PIM will be prepared with a detailed
FM section to address FM aspects of the project, and capacity-building training will be conducted where all staff will be
sensitized on World Bank FM requirements and lessons learned from other projects; and (f) sustainable financing
mechanisms, including PES, will be guided by the feasibility studies to be carried out during implementation. A Community
Grants Manual for funds to the community level to support livelihoods and landscape restoration initiatives will be
developed during implementation. Funds for these services will only be disbursed once an acceptable operationalization
document has been developed and approved by the World Bank.

54.      The assessment concludes that with the implementation of these measures and the FM arrangements of the
project there is reasonable assurance that the project resources will be used for the intended purposes. The risk will be
regularly monitored during implementation. Project management will ensure that all anti-fraud and anti-corruption
policies are in place and the project is implemented per the provisions of the World Bank’s anti-corruption guidelines.

55.     Procurement regulations. The procurement activities under the project will be carried out in accordance with ‘the
World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers, first published July 2016 and revised Sixth Edition February 2025;
the World Bank’s ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and
IDA Credits and Grants’ (revised as of July 1, 2016); and other provisions to be stipulated in the project’s Legal Agreement
with the borrower.

56.      A Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) has been prepared by the borrower to support the
implementation and achievement of the development objectives of the project and deliver value for money. The PPSD
will form the basis for the preparation of the Procurement Plan (PP), justifying the procurement decisions, including the
selection methods and market approaches in the PP. The PP has been prepared for the first 18 months of project
implementation and will be updated at least annually, or as required, to reflect the actual project implementation needs.

57.     Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). The project will use STEP, the World Bank’s online
procurement planning and tracking tool, to record all procurement actions, including planning, updating, clearing PP, and
seeking and receiving the World Bank’s review and ‘no-objection’ to procurement actions as needed. It will also establish
benchmarks, monitor delays, and measure procurement performance.

58.      Profile of procurement activities. The key procurements of the project comprise (a) goods: office equipment and
furniture, vehicles, ICT equipment and software, laboratory and field equipment, forest firefighting equipment; (b) works:
desilting/excavation and rehabilitation of water pans, rehabilitation of forest access roads, constructing fire watch towers;
(c) non-consulting services: watershed monitoring system; and (d) consulting services: development of guidelines,


                                                                                                                     Page 19
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                            PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


standards and strategies, development of regulations, capacity assessments, institutional development, knowledge
management and capacity building, baseline assessment, impact evaluation, and studies.

59.      National procurement procedures. The country’s own procurement procedures may be used when approaching
the national market as agreed in the PP. When the borrower uses its own national open competitive procurement
procedures as set forth in the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act 2015 (Revised Edition 2022) and the attendant
Regulations 2020, such arrangements shall be subject to the provisions of paragraphs 5.3-5.6 of the Procurement
Regulations. The other national procurement arrangements (other than national open competitive procurement) that
may be applied by the borrower shall be required to be consistent with the requirements set out in paragraphs 5.3 and
5.4 d. as appropriate of the Procurement Regulations.

60.     Institutional arrangements for procurement. SDF under the MoECCF and the participating 12 counties will be
implementing agencies responsible for procurement activities under the project. The procurement decision-making
process will utilize the internal institutional structure at the agencies.

61.      Procurement capacity assessment. SDF’s and the participating counties’ procurement capacities to implement
the project have been assessed and confirmed at the project appraisal stage to be reasonably adequate to implement the
envisaged project procurements. SDF has no institutional experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects but
has staff with adequate qualifications and experience in World Bank-financed projects. The 12 participating counties have
institutional experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects. These counties have been implementing the
World Bank-financed IPF projects, including Transforming Health Systems for Universal Care Project (THS-UC, P152394),
NARIG (P153349), KCSAP (P154784), ELRP Phase 1 (P173702), KEMFSED (P163980), KISIP2 (P167814) and NAVCDP
(P176758), since 2016 using Guidelines and later using Procurement Regulations. The implementation of these World
Bank-financed projects and familiarity with the World Bank’s Procurement Framework have enhanced and continue to
strengthen these agencies’ institutional procurement capacities in implementing World Bank-financed projects. SDF and
counties have qualified procurement staff who have experience in the application of the World Bank’s Procurement
Regulations. Subject to addressing the key risks identified in the assessment, SDF and counties are assessed to have
reasonably adequate capacity to execute the envisaged profile of procurements under the project.

62.      Procurement risk assessment and management. Based on the current assessment conducted for this project and
SDF and counties as the implementing agencies, the overall residual procurement risk rating is ’Substantial’. The three
closed projects, THS-UC, NARIG, and KCSAP implemented by counties, had procurement risk ratings of ‘Substantial’. The
procurement risk rating for the four projects, ELRP Phase 1, KEMFSED, KISIP2, and NAVCDP, currently under
implementation by counties is ‘Substantial’. The risk ratings have been reviewed and confirmed at the project appraisal
stage. The assessment applied the five risk factors of the P-RAMS Risk Framework that may affect the overall project
implementation. The key risks identified include the frequent transfers of procurement staff; inadequate number of
experienced procurement staff assigned to the project procurement activities; inadequate capacities and inordinate
delays in preparation of project procurement requirements, specifications, procurement documents, and readiness
activities; lengthy administrative processes in evaluation of proposals/bids and contract awards; inappropriate drafting
and application of evaluation criteria; insufficient preparation of procurement records and delayed upload of records in
STEP; inadequate inspection, testing, and acceptance procedures; and limited contract management capacity. To mitigate
the identified risks, SDF and counties will assign or deploy additional qualified and experienced procurement and relevant
technical staff in adequate numbers to enhance their procurement and contract management capacity, provide focused
training on procurement and contract management on project effectiveness, and streamline their internal procurement
processes to minimize procurement delays. The World Bank will provide regular and targeted capacity building on
procurement and contract management to SDF, participating counties, and other implementing agencies and monitor the
performance of fiduciary systems for smooth project implementation.

                                                                                                                  Page 20
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


63.     Record keeping and asset management. All records on the procurement and contract management activities,
including contract monitoring and payment records and contract completion, will be retained by the implementing agency
in procurement files for each procurable activity following the requirements of the Financing Agreement and uploaded in
the STEP system on time. All implementing and beneficiary agencies will ensure that all inventory, stores, and assets
procured are taken on charge and used for intended purposes. A minimum of two implementation support missions,
including for procurement support, of the proposed project are envisaged per year.

 C. Environmental, Social, and Legal Operational Policies

64.       Implementation of KEWASIP is expected to generate significant benefits through the restoration of ecological
functions of the targeted watersheds and improved livelihoods for surrounding communities. The project’s overall
Environmental and Social Risk Classification is ‘High’. The environmental risk rating is ‘Substantial’, while the social risk
rating is ‘High’. The project is anticipated to pose substantial environmental risks, including, but not limited to, short-term
reduction in water flow and availability in some areas, particularly in water-scarce regions from restoration activities;
short-term increase in soil erosion, leading to sedimentation in water bodies and affecting aquatic ecosystems; disruption
of wildlife habitats and plant community dynamics from afforestation and reforestation activities; recolonization and
spread of invasive species such as Prosopis juliflora and Lantana camara on disturbed areas; exposure of community
workers involved in restoration activities to health and safety risks; and exacerbation of land tenure disputes from the
creation of green corridors, hindering restoration efforts. Land preparation for proposed interventions could also lead to
a short-term increase in GHG emissions. Climate change-induced extreme weather events could undermine restoration
efforts and exacerbate land degradation.

65.     The management of environmental risks will require careful planning, rigorous monitoring, and adaptive
management through employing evidence-based practices and consulting with experts to ensure the sustainability of
restoration activities; developing effective strategies for controlling and eradicating invasive species; incorporating
climate change considerations into project design and implementation; involving local communities in decision-making
and implementation to foster ownership and address potential social and economic impacts; and tracking progress and
making necessary adjustments to ensure the project's long-term success. Comprehensive environmental and social (E&S)
assessments have been conducted for all proposed interventions, and the necessary instruments have been developed in
accordance with the Environment and Social Framework (ESF). Ongoing monitoring of these instruments’ implementation
will ensure that mitigation measures remain responsive and achieve the desired outcomes.

66.      The social risks are anticipated to be high due to the sensitivity of the targeted project areas with the presence
of minorities and marginalized groups and concerns of social conflict with the potential use of enforcement and
compliance officers by KFS and KWS. Also, the track record of implementing entities in undertaking limited stakeholder
engagement, including with minorities and marginalized groups raises concerns. Even so, KEWASIP is anticipated to yield
social benefits. There are potential risks related to (a) restrictions on land use or access to land and natural resources; (b)
social conflicts or exacerbation of existing conflicts resulting from challenges in establishing equitable benefit-sharing
mechanisms for investments on community land as well as access to grants; (c) physical and economic displacement of
communities with impacts on both their economic status and social cohesion; (d) adverse impacts on livelihoods from
failed or unsuitable livelihood restoration activities; (e) exclusion from project benefits, especially minorities and
marginalized groups ; (f) gaps in stakeholder engagement, information disclosure, and grievance redress, particularly on
free, prior, and informed consent (FPIC) for minorities and marginalized groups emanating from capacity implementation
gaps; and (g) child labor, particularly in initiatives requiring communal labor. Risks of sexual exploitation and abuse and
sexual harassment (SEA/SH) could be caused or exacerbated by social and intercommunal conflicts emanating from
project interventions under Subcomponent 2a and Subcomponent 2b enforcement-related activities, the interaction


                                                                                                                       Page 21
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


among project workers and between project workers and communities, as well as the differentiated power dynamics
associated with access and distribution of project benefits.

67.     The indirect/downstream social risks and potential negative impacts emanating from the project activities,
including capacity-building activities, mainly relate to exclusions of minorities and marginalized groups, SEA/SH, and
labor management. The MoECCF will ensure the planning process for all project activities includes adequate E&S
assessments, ensuring consistency with the World Bank’s ESF with actions mainstreamed in the project activities,
addressing implications consistent with the ESF. Targeted E&S capacity building and training will be undertaken
throughout project implementation at the national, county, and community levels to enhance E&S risks and impacts
management and sustainability.

68.      Mitigation measures entail developing, implementing, and monitoring material actions to regularly assess and
manage these risks and impacts. A Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) to analyze, map, and facilitate culturally
appropriate meaningful engagements with communities and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) to
document material measures and obligations for the SDF have been prepared and were disclosed on MoECCF’s website
on March 20, 2025 and on the World Bank external website on March 21, 2025. Following the outcomes of the E&S
assessment, appropriate E&S instruments have been prepared and will be operationalized throughout the project
implementation. These include (a) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that sets out the
principles, rules, guidelines, and procedures to assess the E&S risks and impacts once the sites and sub-projects have been
identified; (b) a Social and Conflict Analysis to assess the degree to which the project interventions, particularly under
Subcomponent 2a, may exacerbate existing tensions and inequality within communities (both beneficiary and non-
beneficiary); (c) Labor Management Procedures to outline measures by which the different categories of workers will be
managed in accordance with the requirements of national law and ESS 2 (including relevant aspects to respond to SEA-
SH); and (d) a process framework to assess restrictions in access to natural resources in gazetted forests. The process
framework will include principles and guidelines for the development of (a) Resettlement Plans, (b) Livelihood Restoration
Plans, (c) Indigenous Peoples Plans, and (d) benefit-sharing plans/agreements as required.

69.     There are social risks related to restrictions on land use or access to land and natural resources, challenges in
establishing equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms for investments in community land, and the displacement of
communities, which could affect their economic status and social cohesion. Additional risks include the potential for
adverse impacts on livelihoods from livelihood restoration activities, the exclusion of minorities and marginalized groups
from project benefits, ineffective grievance management, and inadequate monitoring of the effectiveness of livelihood
restoration or improvement measures during implementation. The project will benefit areas that include minorities and
marginalized groups, creating potential risks in non-adherence to culturally appropriate meaningful consultation,
obtaining FPIC, respect for their human rights and natural resource-based livelihoods, recognizing, respecting, and
preserving the culture, knowledge, and practices in their unique relationship with land and natural resources. In addition,
there are potential gaps in social inclusion, gender considerations, and risks of SEA/SH

70.      To inform project implementation, the MoECCF is undertaking an E&S assessment that includes (a) a
comprehensive Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment to examine E&S risks and impacts associated with policies
and regulatory frameworks under Component 1 of the project; (b) developing a process framework to address E&S risks
and impacts related to restrictions on access to natural resources in legally designated parks and gazetted forests, which
will inform the development of appropriate management plans, including a Resettlement Plan, Livelihood Restoration
Plan, Indigenous Peoples Plan, and/or Benefit-Sharing Plan/Agreement; (c) evaluating the institutional frameworks for KFS
for recommendations on strengthening the codes of conduct, aligned with Good Practice Notes on the use of armed
security and other internationally accepted practices; (d) conducting a social conflict analysis to assess the extent to which
project activities might exacerbate existing tensions and inequalities or be affected by ongoing conflicts; (e) assessing the

                                                                                                                      Page 22
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


E&S technical capacities and systems of implementing entities to enhance management and sustainability measures; and
(f) reviewing the existing grievance redress mechanism (GRM) of implementing entities, including integration of existing
country and county GRM systems and incorporating experiences from programs such as FLLoCA. Additionally, the World
Bank has undertaken its own due diligence to evaluate the capacity of the implementing agencies to manage E&S risks,
focusing on their ability to identify, mitigate, manage, and monitor these risks in accordance with the World Bank’s ESF,
specifically on institutional structure and governance capacity, human resource capacity, E&S risk management systems,
monitoring and reporting capacity, technical and financial resources, stakeholder engagement and community interaction,
project experience and track record, and coordination between the MoECCF and other agencies. The outcome of the E&S
assessments informed the development of specific E&S instruments for the KEWASIP, in line with the ESF. The project has
prepared an SEP to ensure stakeholder input is integrated into the project design, mitigation strategies, and the active
involvement of stakeholders in decision-making processes during implementation.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



71.     Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50). The project’s interventions are confined entirely within Kenya’s
borders and focus on selected key water towers, including Chyulu Hills and Shimba Hills Water Towers in the Athi-Galana
Basin, Mt. Marsabit and Marmanet Forest Water Towers within the Ewaso Ngiro North (ENN) Drainage Basin, and the
Nyambene Hills Water Tower which falls within both the Tana and Ewaso Nyiro drainage basins. The Athi-Galana and Tana
drainage basins empty into the Indian Ocean within Kenya’s territorial waters. Although the Umba and Lumi Rivers, located
southwest of the Athi-Galana drainage basin, are shared between Kenya and Tanzania, no project activities are planned
within their catchments. The Umba River originates from Tanzania’s Usambara mountains and flows into the Indian Ocean
within Kenya, while the Lumi River originates on the eastern side of Mt. Kilimanjaro and runs along the Kenya-Tanzania
border into Tanzania. The ENN Basin borders Ethiopia to the north and Somalia to the east. Its main river, the Ewaso Nyiro,
empties into the Lorian swamp and is one of the recharge sources for the Merti aquifer that straddles Kenya and Somalia.
KEWASIP will not involve any abstraction of water or contribute to any discharge into the Ewaso Nyiro River that could
potentially affect the Merti aquifer.

Grievance Redress Services:
72.      Grievance redress. A Project GRM will be developed for all affected persons/communities to raise concerns or
grievances. The GRM will be transparent, culturally appropriate, and accessible to all, including IPs and VMGs. It will also
incorporate considerations for Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Harassment (SEA/SH) and Gender-Based Violence (GBV)
referral pathways. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project supported by
the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance Redress
Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related
concerns. Project-affected communities and individuals may submit their complaints to the Bank’s independent
Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could
occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which
provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints
may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management
and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the

                                                                                                                    Page 23
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 V. KEY RISKS

73.      The overall project risk rating is Substantial. The categories of risk identified as Substantial include institutional
capacity for implementation and sustainability, technical design, fiduciary, and environmental. Social risks are identified
as High.

74.     Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are rated Substantial. KEWASIP will support a
broad national restoration program with county governments playing a key implementation role through existing
devolution frameworks. Capacity at the county level to implement multisectoral programs has been enhanced with
support from programs such as FLLoCA. However, cross-sectoral integrated planning, implementation, and monitoring
capacity remain a challenge at the county level. Regarding sustainability, there is a risk that budget outlays in support of
NLERS may be reduced because of expenditure rationalization. This may, in turn, affect the project implementation.
Strengthening the institutional and coordination capacities at the national and the county level is crucial. This can be
achieved through targeted capacity-building activities designed to improve planning and management abilities, ensuring
that KEWASIP achieves its objectives and that SLWM activities continue beyond the project's implementation period. The
comprehensive and strategic upstream engagement and capacity strengthening activities integrated into the project
design is anticipated to effectively address and reduce potential challenges during the project's implementation phase.

75.      Technical design of the project is rated Substantial. The project builds on the experience of programs like FLLoCA,
but the integration of multiple sectors pose challenges in planning, implementation, and resource allocation at the county
level and coordination with the national government. This complexity can lead to inefficiencies and difficulties in
coordinating activities across different sectors. To mitigate this risk, a Project Steering Committee will be established to
serve as a platform for regular coordination and joint decision-making among the participating agencies. Customized
capacity-building support will be provided to communities both prior to and throughout project implementation. In
collaboration with the relevant implementing institutions, community-level coordination platforms will also be set up to
foster local ownership and ensure long-term sustainability.

76.     Fiduciary risk is rated High. Despite significant improvements in transparency, accountability, and participation,
challenges of corruption persist. The current budget process for the government, particularly for counties, is inefficient,
creating significant delays in implementation. The World Bank has improved its GRM on handling fiduciary issues as well
as the application of its Fraud and Corruption policy. Nonetheless, weak FM and procurement capacities persist both
nationally and locally, which need to be addressed and strengthened. Mitigating measures of early engagement in the
budget process, escalating the portfolio wide issue to higher management, close internal audit review and deployment of
qualified fiduciary staff have been agreed.

77.     The overall consolidated Environment and Social risk is rated High. The environmental risk rating is ‘Substantial’.
The project involves large-scale restoration of ecosystems, rehabilitation of degraded lands, and management of
biodiversity. While these activities are beneficial in the long run, they can lead to significant short-term disturbances to
natural habitats, water resources, and biodiversity if not properly managed. Afforestation efforts, if not well planned,
could inadvertently disturb wildlife habitats, especially in areas where species have adapted to the degraded state of the
land. Introducing tree species unsuitable for the local ecosystem (for example, nonnative species) could also result in
reduced biodiversity. Restoration within gazetted forests carries risks of over-intervention, especially in sensitive
ecosystems. Water resources are scarce in many areas targeted by KEWASIP, and improper management could worsen

                                                                                                                       Page 24
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


the situation, leading to reduced access to water for downstream users. Additionally, the capacity of county governments
to manage environmental, social, health, and safety risks is inadequate. The social risks are anticipated to be ‘High’ due
to the sensitivity of the project areas with the presence of minorities and marginalized groups, potential social conflict
from enforcement by KFS and KWS, potential land use changes, community displacements, and inadequate stakeholder
engagement. In addition, there are risks of exclusions from project benefiting for the most deserving, disregard for cultural
& human rights, livelihood loss, SEA/SH, ineffective grievance mechanisms, and failure to obtain FPIC. Mitigation will rely
on implementation of the E&S instruments including undertaking culturally appropriate stakeholder engagement, tailoring
county & community level capacity building, enhanced monitoring and an effective grievance redress system.




                                                                                                                     Page 25
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



                                                                  ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                  Closing Period
   PDO1: Hectares of terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management
   PDO 1a: Private and Community lands with SLWM applied and under enhanced management (Hectare(Ha))
   Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2030
   0                                                                                         150,000
   PDO 1b: Rehabilitation of degraded Public lands (Hectare(Ha))
   Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2030
   0                                                                                         50,000
   PDO2: Net reduction of GHG emissions per year
   Net GHG emissions per year (tCO2eq/year)
   Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2030
   0                                                                                         -377,000
   PDO3: Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (of which female and youth)
   PDO 3. Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (of which female and youth) (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2030
   0                                                                                         750,000
     ➢Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (of which female) (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2030
   0                                                                                         375,000
     ➢Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (of which youth) (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2030
   0                                                                                         150,000
   3a: Beneficiaries adopting at least one additional SLWM practice (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2030




                                                                                                                                        Page 26
        The World Bank
        Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


   0                                                                                             100,000
     ➢3a: Beneficiaries adopting SLWM - Female (Number of people) (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                                      Dec/2030
   0                                                                                             50,000
     ➢3a: Beneficiaries adopting SLWM - Youth (Number of people) (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                                      Dec/2030
   0                                                                                             10,000
   3b. Beneficiaries participating in livelihood diversification and income generating activities (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                                                                                      Dec/2030
   0                                                                                             25,000
     ➢3b. Beneficiaries participating in livelihood diversification and income generating activities - Female (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                                                                                      Dec/2030
   0                                                                                             12,500
     ➢3b. Beneficiaries participating in livelihood diversification and income generating activities - Youth (Number of people)
   Dec/2025                                                                                      Dec/2030
   0                                                                                             12,500


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                              Closing Period
   Roots of Resilience: Policy, Legal, and Regulatory Framework
   Local-level guidelines for participatory watershed and sustainable landscape management developed (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                              Dec/2030
   0                                                                                     1
   Integrated Sustainable Landscape Management Plans Developed (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                              Dec/2030
   0                                                                                     5
   National Payments for Ecosystems Services (PES) framework developed (Yes/No)
   Dec/2025                                                                              Dec/2030
   No                                                                                    Yes
   Green Horizons: Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management
   Hydroshed management and restoration plans developed and approved (Number)




                                                                                                                                                         Page 27
    The World Bank
    Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      40
Degraded Land Successfully Restored to Ecological Functionality (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      20,000
  ➢Degraded land restored on private and community lands (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      17,000
  ➢Degraded land restored on publicly managed lands (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      3,000
Area of wetlands restored (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      500
Area of land with invasive species cleared and restored (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      500
Number of community members trained on restoration best practices (of which female) (Number of people)
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      25,000
  ➢Number of community members trained on restoration best practices (of which female) - Female (Number of people) (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      12,500
  ➢Number of community members trained on restoration best practices (of which female) - Youth (Number of people)
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      6,250
Share of women-led (or owned) nature-based enterprises receiving financial support (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      30
Number of green jobs created (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
0                                                                                      25,000
  ➢Female share of new jobs created (Percentage)




                                                                                                                                                    Page 28
    The World Bank
    Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2025
0                                                                                           40
  ➢Youth share of new jobs created (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           30
Number of private sector agreements between private investors and public, private, or community landholders facilitated through project initiatives (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           5
Project Management, Training & Capacity Building
Share of beneficiaries satisfied with the participatory process and level of engagement in the project (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           85
  ➢Female share of beneficiaries satisfied with the participatory process and level of engagement in the project (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           85
  ➢Youth share of beneficiaries satisfied with the participatory process and level of engagement in the project (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2025
0                                                                                           85
Integrated Watershed Monitoring system established and in use in Component 1 (Yes/No) (Yes/No)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
No                                                                                          Yes
Percentage of grievances registered in the project's grievance redress system addressed (Percentage) (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           90
  ➢Percentage of grievances registered by females in the project's grievance redress system addressed (Percentage) (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           90
  ➢Percentage of grievances registered by youth in the project's grievance redress system addressed (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           90
Micro-catchments where communities are engaged in collecting biophysical data (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           120




                                                                                                                                                                Page 29
    The World Bank
    Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


  ➢Micro-catchments where a woman leads community-based monitoring efforts and reporting (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        20
Number of payments for ecosystem services (PES) agreements reached (Number) (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        3
  ➢Female share of beneficiaries directly benefiting from Payments for Ecosystem Services contracts (Percentage) (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        50
Share of women's representation in natural resource management bodies (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
20                                                                                       30




                                                                                                                                                      Page 30
          The World Bank
          Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



PDO-level indicators



 PDO 1: Hectares of terrestrial and aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management
    o PDO1a: Private and community lands with SLWM applied and under enhanced management
    o PDO 1b: Rehabilitation of degraded and enhanced management of public lands
                             The indicator measures the terrestrial and inland/marine aquatic areas under enhanced protection, conservation,
                             restoration, and/or sustainable management through activities supported by the project. This covers results of
                             work on diverse landscapes (for example, forests, grass/shrub lands, woodlands, wetlands, water bodies,
                             watersheds, oases, and urban green and blue spaces) that have been improved from a nature perspective. These
                             are expected to improve the extent or condition of these areas relating to biodiversity or other ecosystem services
                             and address drivers of nature loss, including climate change. Relevant activities may reduce and reverse natural
                             resource degradation, protect and enhance natural habitats and their ecosystem services, and thus provide nature
                             benefits to dependent communities.

                             The targeted community watersheds will have adopted a micro-catchment management plan, an integrated SLWM
                             plan covering lands under public as well as private/communal jurisdiction. The total area covered by a micro-
                             catchment management plan will contribute toward this indicator target once the integrated SLWM plan has been
                             substantively completed and implemented. It is important to note that partial progress within a given watershed
                             can also be reported, specifically where SLWM investments have been made, and the area is being managed
                             sustainably in accordance with the plan. This allows for a nuanced reflection of project achievements even when
                             full-scale implementation is ongoing.

                             Micro-catchment watershed boundaries will be determined by natural landscape features, such as ridges and
                             valleys, that define the flow of water, rather than by artificial administrative borders. This ensures that the planning
                             area encompasses a cohesive hydrological unit for effective management. While the selection of a watershed
 Description
                             outlet involves some degree of subjective judgment, each community watershed is expected to cover roughly 10–
                             15,000 ha or be comparable with other established watershed delineation classifications (that is, WWF level 12
                             hydrosheds).

                             Enhanced management may be assessed through various metrics including the following:
                                (a) Management effectiveness assessments: These assessments evaluate the management practices, resources,
                                and governance structures in place to protect the area.
                                (b) Monitoring of key biodiversity indicators: This involves tracking the populations of key species, habitat
                                health, and other ecological indicators to determine if conservation objectives are being met.
                                (c) Enforcement of regulations: The level of enforcement against illegal activities such as poaching, logging, and
                                encroachment is crucial for effective protection.
                                (d) Community engagement and participation: The involvement of local communities in conservation efforts
                                and benefit-sharing mechanisms can contribute to long-term sustainability.

                             PDO 1a: This sub-indicator captures areas within the targeted micro-catchment comprising individual farmland and
                             communal lands (that is, for grazing).

                             PDO 1b: This sub-indicator aims to assess the area of public lands that are actively and successfully managed to
                             achieve their conservation goals. It goes beyond mere designation on paper and focuses on the actual on-ground
                             protection and preservation of biodiversity and natural resources within these areas.
 World Bank Scorecard
                             Yes
 indicator
                             Ha
 Units and targets




                                                                                                                                                Page 31
          The World Bank
          Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                             PDO 1: Baseline 0, Target: 200,000
                             PDO1a: Baseline 0, Target: 170,000
                             PDO1b: Baseline 0, Target: 30,000
 Frequency                   Every 6 months
                             GIS datasets compiled and maintained by the NPCU showing the extent of the land under different sustainable land
 Data source
                             management practices.
                             Detailed mapping of project activities, including the type, location and spatial extent of where SLWM practices have
 Methodology for Data
                             been applied on private and community lands and publicly managed land and compared against targeted areas
 Collection
                             and planned interventions (i.e. micro-catchment management plans).
 Responsibility for Data
                             NPCU
 Collection



 PDO 2: Net GHG emissions per year
                           This measures the net change in CO2 emissions as a result of the project’s wide range of on-ground land
                           management and use interventions. Changes in the amount of carbon present in soil, crop, rangeland, and
                           forest/trees or mixed or mosaic systems can indicate overall changes in system productivity or degradation, and
                           the extent to which the natural resource is being managed sustainably and can recover from shocks such as
                           drought. The method used is the FAO’s Ex-Ante Carbon balance Tool (ExAct) carbon balance estimation tool, which
 Description
                           calculates carbon accumulation and emissions based on project biophysical output data. Net GHG emissions are
                           calculated as an annual average of the difference between project gross (absolute) emissions aggregated over the
                           economic lifetime of the project and the emissions of a baseline (counterfactual) scenario aggregated over the
                           same time horizon. The indicator value is negative if the project is reducing emissions and positive if the project is
                           increasing emissions.
 World Bank Scorecard
                           Yes
 indicator
                           Metric ton per year (tCO2eq/yr)
 Units and targets
                           Baseline: 0 Target: -377,000
 Frequency                 Every 6 months
                           GIS datasets compiled and maintained by the NPCU showing the extent of the land under different sustainable
 Data source
                           land management practices.
                           The FAO’s Ex-Ante Carbon balance Tool (ExAct) carbon balance estimation tool is used in combination with
 Methodology for Data
                           information collected by the NPCU on the type and area of extent of SLWM practices in combination with
 Collection
                           purchases of inputs to estimate net carbon emissions.
 Responsibility for Data
 Collection                NPCU

PDO Indicators under Improved Livelihoods


 PDO 3: Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (of which female and youth)
    o PDO 3a: Beneficiaries adopting at least one additional SLWM practice (of which female, youth)
    o PDO 3b: Beneficiaries participating in livelihood diversification and income-generating activities (of which female, youth)
                             This indicator measures the number of project beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk. Enhanced
                             resilience to climate risk refers to the improved ability of individuals, communities, or systems to anticipate,
                             prepare for, cope with, and recover from the adverse impacts of climate change. It involves taking proactive
 Description
                             measures to reduce vulnerability and strengthen adaptive capacity in the face of climate-related hazards such as
                             extreme weather events, rising sea levels, and changing precipitation patterns.




                                                                                                                                            Page 32
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                             Several factors can contribute to enhanced resilience. For example, improved ecosystem management
                             encompasses activities like improved vegetation management practices that reduce damage resulting from
                             extreme weather events and make more efficient use of water resources to counter drought events. Additionally,
                             ecosystem protection and restoration cover natural or managed ecosystems, like wetlands, forests, and coastal
                             habitats that enhance the resilience of both terrestrial and aquatic systems, benefiting the people who depend on
                             them for various ecosystem services.

                             Beneficiaries adopting SLWM and accessing livelihood support are tracked separately and reported as sub-
                             indicators. An individual may be an adopter of both SLWM and receive livelihood support but can only be counted
                             once for this indicator. All indicators are disaggregated by gender.

                             Note: All indicators are disaggregated by gender and by youth.

                             PDO 3a: Beneficiaries adopting at least one additional SLWM practice (also female and youth)

                             PDO 3b: Beneficiaries with livelihood support (also female and youth)
World Bank Scorecard
                             Yes
indicator
                             Persons

                             PDO3: Baseline: 0 Target: 750,000
                             Female Target: 375,000
                             Youth Target: 150,000

                             PDO3a: Baseline: 0 Target: 100,000
Units and targets
                             Female Target: 50,000
                             Youth Target: 25,000

                             PDO3b: Baseline: 0 Target: 25,000
                             Female Target: 12,500
                             Youth Target: 6,250

Frequency                    Every 6 months
                             Data sources include project implementation records that track the completeness and implementation status of
Data source                  integrated micro-catchment management plans, alongside community-level information detailing beneficiaries'
                             livelihood support received, their involvement in SLWM adoption, gender, and age group.
                             The NPCU will gather information from the various sources and aggregate it for each supported micro-catchment,
Methodology for Data         carefully avoiding double counting. This is complemented by community and household surveys at mid-term and
Collection                   end of project to assess beneficiaries' awareness of climate risks, adoption of broader climate-resilient practices,
                             and perceived improvements in their resilience and benefits from project activities.
Responsibility for Data
Collection                   NPCU

                             Intermediate Indicators under Foundation for Integrated Long-term Program component
                      Local-level guidelines for participatory watershed and sustainable landscape management developed
                          This indicator captures the creation and implementation of a single, unified set of guidelines that promote participatory
                          approaches to integrated watershed and sustainable landscape management, including the provision of technical details
                          for implementing specific SLWM activities. These guidelines should emphasize the active involvement of local
Description
                          communities and stakeholders in planning, decision-making, and implementation processes related to water resource
                          management and broader landscape considerations. They should offer clear, accessible instructions on SLWM
                          techniques, such as soil conservation, water harvesting, agroforestry, and erosion control, empowering stakeholders to




                                                                                                                                             Page 33
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                           implement these practices effectively. By combining participatory approaches with technical guidance, these updated
                           guidelines contribute to more sustainable, equitable, and locally appropriate landscape management outcomes that
                           improve both ecological health and community livelihoods.

                          These guidelines must be distributed and easily accessible in all KEWASIP implementation areas.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               KEWASIP project documents.
Methodology for Data      NPCU to verify completion, approval, and availability of guidelines in all KEWASIP implementation areas.
Collection
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
Integrated Sustainable Landscape Management Plans developed (Number)
                          This indicator assesses the development of Integrated Sustainable Landscape Management Plans (ISLMPs) specifically
                          tailored to priority areas within a region, including subbasins, water towers and their associated buffer zones. The
                          development of these ISLMPs demonstrates a commitment to place-based conservation and sustainable management
                          of critical ecosystems within the broader landscape. Each ISLMP should provide a comprehensive framework for
Description
                          managing and coordinating activities within its designated priority area among the various stakeholders, considering the
                          unique characteristics and challenges of that area. These plans should integrate restoration and enhancement of natural
                          resources while promoting sustainable resource use, biodiversity conservation, and climate resilience in a coordinated
                          manner.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               KEWASIP project documents.
Methodology for Data      NPCU to verify each plan developed, approved, and made available.
Collection
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
National PES framework developed (Yes/No)
                          This indicator measures the development and implementation of a comprehensive national framework for PES. It
                          assesses the progress made in creating the necessary structures, policies, and mechanisms to enable the widespread
                          adoption and effective functioning of PES programs across the country. The national PES framework will encompass the
                          following:
                                1. Clear definition of ecosystem services: Identifying and prioritizing the specific ecosystem services (for example,
                                      water purification, carbon sequestration, biodiversity conservation) targeted by the framework.
                                2. Valuation methodology: Establishing standardized methods for quantifying and valuing the ecosystem services
                                      being provided.
Description                     3. Payment mechanisms: Developing clear and transparent procedures for determining payment levels,
                                      distributing funds to service providers (for example, landowners, farmers), and ensuring the long-term
                                      financial sustainability of the program.
                                4. Legal and regulatory framework: Creating the necessary laws, regulations, and institutional arrangements to
                                      support PES implementation, including property rights, contract enforcement, and monitoring systems.
                                5. Stakeholder engagement: Ensuring the participation and buy-in of key stakeholders, including government
                                      agencies, local communities, landowners, businesses, and nongovernmental organizations.
                                6. M&E: Establishing a system for tracking the effectiveness of PES programs in achieving their environmental
                                      and socioeconomic goals.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               GoK records and KEWASIP documentation.
Methodology for Data      NPCU verify framework developed and made available.
Collection
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection




                                                                                                                                             Page 34
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Number of private sector contracts and agreements between private investors and public, private, or community landholders facilitated
through project initiatives (Number)
                           This indicator tracks the number of private sector contracts and agreements between private investors and public,
                           private, or community landholders facilitated through project initiatives. It reflects the project's aim to leverage PCM
Description                through ecotourism and forest management contracts on public lands, agroforestry investments on private lands, and
                           facilitating community land registration under the Community Lands Act to enable private sector deals. These efforts
                           align with the MFD approach.
Frequency                  Every 6 months
Data source                KEWASIP project documentation.
Methodology for Data       NPCU to document and verify each contract or agreement
Collection
Responsibility for Data    NPCU
Collection
Intermediate Indicators under Sustainable Landscape and Watershed Management
Hydroshed management and micro-catchment action plans developed and approved (Yes/No)
                           Watershed management operates within a hierarchical framework, beginning at the broad landscape level,
                           encompassing interconnected ecosystems within the five high-level priority areas, where strategic, macro-scale planning
                           takes place. Within these landscapes, and moving to a smaller watershed/catchment unit, is the hydroshed level (that is,
                           WWF hydrosheds level 12). Typically in the range of 10,000–15,000 ha, the hydroshed level is the scale at which
                           coordinated SLWM planning and management take place. Finally, within each hydroshed, the micro-catchment is the
                           lowest level hydrological planning/management unit. The micro-catchment is where community-driven activities take
                           place within localized watersheds, focusing on practical, on-the-ground interventions that directly impact local water
                           resources and livelihoods. The size of a micro-catchment varies by location and local community factors, although they
                           are expected to be in the 500–1,200 ha range. For a hydroshed watershed to be completely covered by a management
                           plan, each of the micro-catchments that comprise the respective hydroshed watershed will have its own participatory
                           watershed management plan.

                          Each hydroshed selected for support under KEWASIP is required to develop and implement a comprehensive plan that
                          addresses the interconnected environmental, social, and economic factors within its watershed. Each hydroshed is
                          covered by a collection of its constituent micro-catchment plans. The plan comprehensively addresses all land uses
Description
                          within the watershed, from forests and agriculture to common lands. It promotes sustainable practices such as
                          conservation tillage, reforestation, and efficient water management to minimize the environmental impact of human
                          activities and ensure the long-term availability of resources. By integrating these diverse perspectives and land uses, the
                          plan creates a holistic framework for sustainable development.

                          Crucially, the plan outlines specific SLWM interventions tailored to the hydroshed's unique challenges. These
                          interventions might include soil conservation measures, water conservation strategies, biodiversity protection
                          initiatives, and climate change adaptation measures. Plans must consider the relevant stakeholders and existing plans as
                          appropriate (for example, SCMPs, PFMPs, Watershed Management Plans, conservancies plans).

                          By proactively addressing these issues, the plan aims to enhance the ecological integrity of the watershed, improve
                          livelihoods, and build resilience to future challenges.

                          For a hydroshed plan to count toward this indicator, substantively all the micro-catchments must have developed and
                          had their respective plans approved.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               KEWASIP project documentation.
Methodology for Data      NPCU to verify each plan has been developed, approved, and made available.
Collection
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection



                                                                                                                                             Page 35
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Degraded land successfully restored to ecological functionality (ha)
                         This indicator assesses the total area of degraded land successfully restored to ecological functionality across different
                         land ownership and management categories. It comprises two sub-indicators: degraded land restored on private and
                         community lands and degraded land restored on publicly managed lands. Ecological functionality refers to the restored
                         ecosystem's capacity to perform key functions like supporting biodiversity, regulating water flows, cycling nutrients, and
Description              sequestering carbon. Restoration encompasses activities such as reforestation, soil conservation, erosion control, and
                         invasive species removal. The indicator, measured in hectares, sums the restored areas across both sub-indicators,
                         providing a comprehensive view of progress toward land degradation neutrality and overall ecosystem health.

                          This indicator comprises two, mutually exclusive, sub-indicators.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
                          GIS datasets compiled and maintained by the NPCU showing the degraded land targeted for restoration and types and
Data source
                          extent of SLWM pratices applied to those areas.
                          Detailed mapping of project activities, including the type, location and spatial extent of where SLWM practices have
Methodology for Data
                          been applied on private and community lands and publicly managed land and compared against targeted areas and
Collection
                          planned interventions (i.e. micro-catchment management plans).
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
    •    Sub-indicator: Degraded land restored on private and community lands (Hectare(Ha))
                           Sub-indicator: Degraded land restored on private and community lands includes areas where overgrazing has led to the
                           loss of vegetation and the formation of gullies or where deforestation has left hillsides exposed and prone to erosion.
Description                Restoration efforts in these areas might involve community-led initiatives like reforestation with native trees and
                           shrubs, the construction of terraces to prevent further erosion, and the implementation of sustainable grazing practices
                           to allow vegetation to recover.
Frequency                  Every 6 months
Data source                Same as primary indicator.
Methodology for Data       Detailed mapping of project activities on private and community lands.
Collection
Responsibility for Data    NPCU
Collection
      •    Sub-indicator: Degraded land restored on publicly managed lands (Hectare(Ha))
                           Sub-indicator: Degraded land restored on publicly managed lands encompasses areas within designated forest areas
                           where deforestation or unsustainable forest management practices have caused significant degradation. Restoration
Description
                           activities could include reforestation efforts with native species, erosion control measures to stabilize slopes and
                           prevent further degradation, and the removal of invasive species that hinder the recovery of natural ecosystems.
Frequency                  Every 6 months
Data source                Same as primary indicator.
Methodology for Data       Detailed mapping of project activities on publicly managed lands.
Collection
Responsibility for Data    NPCU
Collection
Area of wetlands restored (Hectare(Ha))
                           This indicator measures the total area of wetlands that have been successfully restored through targeted interventions.
                           Wetland restoration aims to reestablish the ecological integrity of degraded or lost wetland ecosystems, including their
                           hydrological regime, vegetation communities, and associated biodiversity. This may involve activities such as rewetting
Description
                           drained areas, removing invasive species, replanting native vegetation, and restoring natural water flow patterns. The
                           indicator, measured in hectares, provides a quantifiable measure of progress toward improving the health and extent of
                           wetland ecosystems within a specific region.
Frequency                  Every 6 months
Data source                GIS datasets compiled and maintained by the NPCU showing areas targeted for wetland restoration.




                                                                                                                                           Page 36
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Methodology for Data      NPCU to collect and manage information on wetlands targed for restoration as part of the planning phase and routine
Collection                monitoring.
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
Area of land with invasive species cleared and restored (ha)
                          This indicator quantifies the extent of land where invasive species have been successfully removed and the native
                          ecosystem has been restored. Invasive species, such as Prosopis juliflora (Mathenge), Lantana camara, and Opuntia
                          stricta (prickly pear), pose a significant threat to biodiversity and ecosystem function. They can outcompete native
                          plants, disrupt food chains, and alter habitats. This indicator tracks progress in reclaiming land from these invaders and
Description
                          restoring it to a healthy, functional state. This includes not only the removal of the invasive species but also the
                          implementation of measures to promote the regeneration of native vegetation and restore ecological processes. By
                          measuring the area of land successfully restored, this indicator provides a tangible measure of progress in combating
                          invasive species and enhancing the resilience of ecosystems.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               GIS datasets showing the extent of invasive species targeted
Methodology for Data      The NPCU will manage the creation and compilation of spatially explicit data on the spatial extent of targeted invasive
Collection                species and the progress of treatment and restoration efforts.
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
Number of community members trained on restoration best practices (of which female, youth) (Number of people)
Description               This indicator tracks the number of community members trained on restoration best practices, disaggregated by gender,
                          as a key measure of capacity building and community engagement in SLWM. It reflects the investment in empowering
                          local communities with the knowledge and skills necessary to actively participate in and lead restoration initiatives.

                          This indicator emphasizes the importance of knowledge transfer by equipping individuals with practical skills and
                          understanding of ecological principles for effective restoration in addition to promoting community ownership by
                          fostering local stewardship and responsibility for SLWM practices.

                          By tracking the number of individuals trained, particularly women, this indicator provides valuable insights into the
                          reach and effectiveness of capacity-building programs within SLWM initiatives. It highlights the growing pool of skilled
                          community members who can champion and implement restoration activities, ultimately contributing to the long-term
                          success and sustainability of land restoration efforts.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               Attendance records from project-supported training events on restoration best practices
Methodology for Data      Implementing partners and project staff conducting training on restoration best practices will maintain detailed
Collection                attendance records for each training session, including the gender and age group of community members trained. The
                          NPCU will maintain a dataset on trainings for all supporting communities, taking necessary steps to ensure there is no
                          double-counting.
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
Share of women-led (or owned) nature-based enterprises receiving financial support (Percentage)
                        This indicator measures the proportion of nature-based enterprises that are led or owned by women and have
                        successfully accessed financial support. It focuses specifically on businesses where women have majority ownership or
                        hold key leadership positions, highlighting their agency and control in the enterprise. These enterprises encompass a
                        wide range of environmentally friendly ventures, including ecotourism, sustainable agriculture, forestry, and renewable
Description             energy, all of which rely on natural resources or contribute to environmental conservation. By tracking the share of
                        these women-led businesses receiving financial support, including grants, loans, and investments, this indicator reflects
                        progress toward gender equality in entrepreneurship and assesses the effectiveness of initiatives aimed at increasing
                        women's access to finance.




                                                                                                                                            Page 37
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                                PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                          Ultimately, this indicator is crucial for empowering women in the green economy. It helps to identify disparities in access
                          to finance, inform policies designed to increase women's access to resources, and encourage investment in women-led
                          nature-based enterprises. By fostering the growth of such businesses, this indicator promotes not only environmental
                          conservation and social well-being but also gender equality and sustainable development.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               Same as primary indicator.
Methodology for Data      Same as primary indicator.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
Collection                NPCU
Number of jobs created
Description               The number of jobs created as a result of the KEWASIP project is crucial for comprehensively evaluating the project's
                          contribution to local livelihoods and economic development. Its inclusion is motivated by the need to capture both the
                          immediate, direct employment generated through project activities like infrastructure construction and reforestation,
                          and the broader, indirect employment stimulated within the local economy. This holistic approach aligns with the World
                          Bank's emphasis on "more and better jobs," acknowledging that sustainable development requires understanding the
                          full scope of economic impact. Measurement of direct employment involves meticulous project record-keeping,
                          contractor reporting, and community monitoring, while indirect employment estimation necessitates sophisticated
                          methods like economic multiplier analysis, household surveys, and value chain assessments. By tracking both direct and
                          indirect job creation, the indicator provides a robust metric for assessing the project's overall effectiveness in fostering
                          economic opportunities and improving the well-being of watershed communities.
World Bank scorecard      No
indicator
Frequency                   Every 6 months
Data source                 Same as primary indicator.
Methodology for Data        Same as primary indicator.
Collection
Responsibility for Data     NPCU
Collection
Intermediate Indicators under Project Management, Training & Capacity Building component
Share of beneficiaries satisfied with the participatory process and level of engagement in the project (of which female) (Percentage)

                          This indicator measures the level of satisfaction among individuals in KEWASIP-supported watersheds. It assesses how
                          effectively KEWASIP has engaged beneficiaries in project activities and decision-making processes, ensuring that their
                          voices are heard and their needs considered. The indicator tracks overall satisfaction as the percentage of beneficiaries
                          who express satisfaction with their involvement in KEWASIP, including aspects like communication, transparency, and
                          opportunities to contribute. By monitoring satisfaction levels, particularly among women, KEWASIP can identify areas
                          for improvement in its participatory approaches and ensure that the project remains responsive to the needs and
                          priorities of the communities it serves. This focus on beneficiary feedback fosters a sense of ownership and promotes
                          the long-term sustainability of project interventions.

Description               The sub-indicator, the percentage of female beneficiaries who report satisfaction with their participation in KEWASIP,
                          highlights the project's commitment to gender inclusivity and ensuring women have a voice in shaping project
                          outcomes.

                          To gather this feedback efficiently and cost-effectively, KEWASIP can leverage existing project structures and readily
                          available tools. For example, assessing satisfaction with project engagement, activities, and progress can be integrated
                          into routine community meetings or training sessions already organized by the project. Feedback can be gathered by a
                          show of hands or inferred through voicing concerns and complaints. Also, a short survey could be conducted
                          electronically or on paper using a concise questionnaire and simple rating scales. Additionally, utilizing existing
                          communication channels, such as SMS messaging, to disseminate short surveys and gather feedback from a wider




                                                                                                                                              Page 38
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                              PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                          audience may be feasible. By incorporating these low-cost methods into the project's regular activities, KEWASIP can
                          effectively monitor beneficiary satisfaction without significantly increasing the project's financial or administrative
                          burden.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               NPCU beneficiary dataset.
Methodology for Data      Beneficiary feedback surveys conducted at household and community levels by NPCU as part of routine monitoring and
Collection                suplemented by more formal surveys conducted at mid-term and at project close.
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
Share of women representation in local natural resource management bodies (Percentage)
                        This indicator measures the proportion of women holding positions within CIGs responsible for managing natural
                        resources (forests, water, land, and so on). Women's participation in community natural resource management is
                        essential for achieving gender equality and ensuring the equitable distribution of benefits from those resources. A
                        higher proportion of women in these decision-making roles signifies greater inclusion and a potential for more balanced
                        resource governance that considers diverse needs and priorities. Increased female participation in natural resource
                        management can lead to more inclusive decision-making, improved resource conservation, and a fairer distribution of
Description             benefits, ultimately contributing to more sustainable and equitable outcomes. Examining women's participation in these
                        decision-making roles allows for gauging their empowerment and influence over resource governance. A higher
                        representation of women suggests greater inclusion and a potential for more equitable distribution of benefits from
                        those resources.

                          To measure this indicator, membership records from CIGs, including WRUAs, CFAs, community wildlife conservancies,
                          and other relevant bodies involved in managing local natural resources, will be reviewed.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               Management records from CIGs in supported KEWASIP communities.
Methodology for Data      NPCU review and assess CIG management records from each supported community and assess the share of female
Collection                representation
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
Watershed Monitoring system established and in use (Yes/No)
                        This indicator assesses the development, establishment, and active utilization of a robust and fit-for-purpose watershed
                        monitoring system. It goes beyond merely establishing a system, emphasizing its actual use and contribution to
                        informed decision-making for watershed management. To meet these requirements, the system needs to be
                        comprehensive and user-friendly and actively contribute to practical solutions. It should undergo rigorous testing to
                        ensure it accurately captures relevant data and provides reliable information for analysis and decision-making.
Description
                          The watershed monitoring system will provide various stakeholders with a structured framework for collecting,
                          reporting, analyzing, and interpreting data associated with the project components and activities. The information
                          captured within the monitoring system should be readily available and accessible to stakeholders through appropriate
                          platforms and channels (for example, online dashboards, mobile applications, community meetings).
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               KEWASIP project documentation.
                          NPCU to verify the monitoring system has been developed to meet the necessary functionality. When fucntional, the
Methodology for Data      NPCU will verify the system's active utilization by intended stakeholders, the currentness of information and gather
Collection                evidence of its contribution to informed decision-making for watershed management, potentially through reviewing
                          system usage logs, analyzing reports generated from the system, or collecting user feedback.
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
Percentage of grievances registered in the project's grievance redress system addressed (Percentage)
Description               This indicator tracks the effectiveness of the project's grievance redress system by measuring the percentage of




                                                                                                                                             Page 39
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                               PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                          registered grievances that are successfully addressed. The grievance redress system is established to receive,
                          investigate, and resolve complaints or concerns raised by stakeholders affected by the project. It emphasizes not only
                          the existence of a system for handling complaints but also its ability to provide timely and satisfactory resolutions for
                          stakeholders. The sub-indicator specifically measures the percentage of grievances filed by women that are successfully
                          addressed. It highlights the importance of ensuring that the grievance redress system is equally responsive to the
                          concerns and needs of female stakeholders.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
                          KEWASIP GRM will capture information including details of registered grievances, date of registration, nature of
Data source
                          grievance, complainant gender, and recorded resolution status.
Methodology for Data      NPCU review and analysis of submitted grievances and resolution status.
Collection
Responsibility for Data    NPCU
Collection
      •    Sub-indicator: Percentage of grievances registered by females in the project's grievance redress system addressed
Description
Frequency                  Every 6 months
Data source                Same as primary indicator.
Methodology for Data       Same as primary indicator, focusing on female complainants.
Collection
Responsibility for Data    NPCU
Collection
Micro-catchments where communities are engaged in collecting biophysical data (Number)
                           This pilot activity, focusing on a limited number of micro-catchments, aims to support community-led biophysical and
                           hydrological data collection that can be used to assess project impact. It tracks the micro-catchments with community
Description                engagement in this process, where participants gather data on water quality and flow, runoff, soil erosion, vegetation,
                           and wildlife. Tailored training and locally appropriate monitoring technologies, such as hydromet stations, smartphones,
                           cameras, and water sampling kits, are provided to ensure sustainable participation.
Frequency                  Every 6 months
                           Reports from supported micro-catchments and communities detailing community-led biophysical data collection
Data source                activities; Project records confirming the micro-catchments participating in the pilot activity and documentation of
                           training and equipment provision for community monitoring.
                           The NPCU will review reports submitted by the supported micro-catchments and communities, along with relevant
                           project records, to verify active community engagement in biophysical data collection within the pilot activity. The
Methodology for Data       reports should provide evidence of ongoing monitoring efforts (e.g., records of data collected, descriptions of
Collection                 monitoring activities). The NPCU will count the number of supported micro-catchments for which satisfactory evidence
                           of community-based biophysical data collection is confirmed during the reporting period. This number will be reported
                           every six months.
Responsibility for Data    NPCU
Collection
      •    Sub-indicator: Micro-catchments where a woman leads community-based monitoring efforts, overseeing data collection and
           reporting. (Number)
                           The sub-indicator measures the number of community project watersheds where women are taking leadership roles in
                           community-based environmental monitoring, serving as the primary contact for reporting and managing data collection
                           efforts. It emphasizes the importance of gender inclusivity in citizen science initiatives, recognizing the valuable
Description
                           contributions of women in leading and coordinating local efforts to gather biophysical and hydrological data. By
                           empowering women to take ownership of these activities, this indicator promotes their active participation in decision-
                           making processes related to natural resource management and environmental conservation.
Frequency                  Every 6 months
Data source                Same as primary indicator.
Methodology for Data       In each community the designated community focal person responsible for overseeing the monitoring and reporting will




                                                                                                                                            Page 40
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project (P509738)                                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Collection              be identified and project documentation will explicitly record their gender.
Responsibility for Data
                                                                                   NPCU
Collection
Number of PES agreements reached (Number)
                        This indicator tracks the number of PES agreements negotiated and enacted in KEWASIP-supported community
                        watersheds. Innovative financing mechanisms that allow communities and individuals to receive payments for their
                        actions that protect and enhance natural resources, PES agreements recognize the value of activities like sustainable
                        farming, managed grazing, forest conservation, and water resource management in generating ecosystem services.
Description
                          The PES contracts promoted under the project must align with the as-yet-to-be-developed national PES framework,
                          ensuring that these mechanisms for incentivizing conservation and SLWM practices are consistent with national
                          priorities.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
                          Review of KEWASIP project documentation as necessary (i.e. PES contracts and details, payment records, beneficiary
Data source
                          listing, parties consulted, household surveys)
Methodology for Data      Access and review supporting documentation.
Collection
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection
    •    Sub-indicator: Female share of beneficiaries directly benefiting from PES contracts (Number)
                          The sub-indicator, Female share of beneficiaries directly benefiting from PES contracts, measures the proportion of
                          women among all individuals receiving direct payments through these PES agreements. It specifically monitors the
Description               inclusion and equitable participation of women in accessing the economic benefits generated from their contributions
                          to ecosystem service provision. This highlights the project’s commitment to gender equity and recognizes the important
                          role women play in environmental conservation and SLWM.
Frequency                 Every 6 months
Data source               Same as primary indicator.
Methodology for Data      Access and review project documentation (PES contracts, beneficiary lists, payment records) to identify all individuals
Collection                and their gender receiving direct payments through PES agreements.
Responsibility for Data   NPCU
Collection




                                                                                                                                          Page 41
