Public Disclosure Authorized
                                    The World Bank
                                    Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)




                               Note to Task Team: The following sections are system generated and changes must be made in Data Sheet(s). Delete
                               this note when finalizing the document.


                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Project Information Document (PID)

                                                 Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-Feb-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01221




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID               Operation Name
Kenya                          P509738                    Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN           28-Feb-2025                18-Jun-2025                 Environment, Natural
AFRICA                                                                                Resources & the Blue
                                                                                      Economy
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Republic of Kenya          State Department of
Financing (IPF)                                           Forestry

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable watershed and landscape
management for livelihoods and conservation in the project areas.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                    200.00

  Total Financing                                                                                         200.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                            200.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                              0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                            200.00
      IDA Credit                                                                                          200.00


                                                                                                              Page 1
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                       Concept Review Decision
High                                                               The review did authorize the preparation to continue



    Note to Task Team: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. Delete this note when
    finalizing the document.


    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1. Over the past decade, Kenya has seen substantial economic growth, surpassing other Sub-Saharan African nations
with an average GDP growth of 5 percent from 2010 to 2019, largely fueled by renewable resources like agriculture and
tourism. The agricultural sector's growth has been inconsistent, with a notable downturn due to drought, yet it remains a
significant part of exports, which are mainly natural products, including tea and flowers. Although the composition of
Kenya’s exports has changed over the last decade, they remain primarily composed of natural products. In 2020, 25
percent of total exports comprised tea, cut flowers, fruits, vegetables, meat products, and unroasted coffee, while
services, including tourism, comprised approximately 36 percent.1

2. Yet Kenya is facing headwinds that threaten its sustained successes. Kenya's economic progress is challenged by
various factors, including high debt from low-interest rates, post-global financial crisis and impacts from Covid-19,
droughts, floods, and global economic shifts. These events have highlighted Kenya's structural and fiscal weaknesses2,
such as a reliance on capital and labor without substantial productivity improvements, leading to vulnerability to market
fluctuations and expensive access to international credit3.

3. Kenya’s natural resources underpin the employment, food security, and energy use of its 54 million people. It is
the primary source of livelihood for over 80 percent of the population. It accounts for 35 percent4 of the total wealth in
Kenya, 42 percent of the GDP, and nearly 70 percent of total employment. The latest estimates in the Kenya Continuous
Household Survey (KCHS, 2021) indicate that 48 percent of workers are employed in agriculture, which is highly climate
sensitive. However, the shift of labor from agriculture to other sectors has slowed, impacting the country's ability to build
climate resilience. Natural resources, such as wildlife, are a key contributor to Kenya’s tourism industry, accounting for 10


1
  The World Bank Group, 2023. Kenya Country Climate and Development Report.
2
  World Bank (2023). Kenya Country Economic Memorandum: Seizing Kenya’s Services Momentum.
3
  First Fiscal Sustainability and Resilient Growth Development Policy Financing (P500912)
4
  Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (2016). Land Degradation Assessment in Kenya, Ministry of Environment and
Natural Resources (MENR), Nairobi.


                                                                                                                            Page 2
         The World Bank
         Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)


percent of the GDP and 11 percent of the total formal workforce (GOK, 2018). Several of Kenya’s key tourist attractions
are under pressure and showing signs of degradation (World Bank, 2017). Landscape fragmentation, primarily a result of
agricultural expansion, fencing, and urbanization, is occurring at a significant rate and is considered a driver of wildlife
population decline in Kenya.

  Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. Kenya is grappling with extensive land degradation, affecting over 88 percent of its land area, which undermines
economic and social advancement. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) defines this degradation as a
long-term reduction in biological productivity, ecological integrity, or human value. Key drivers include demographic
growth, agricultural expansion, and climate change, which also contribute to increased drought and flood risks. In 2021,
droughts led to food insecurity for 2.1 million Kenyans, while floods annually impact 68,000 people, heightening health
issues.

5. The importance of managing water, land, and forest for climate-resilient agriculture and rural economies is
presented as a priority in Kenya’s Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR).5 The conversion of forests and dense
vegetation implies a loss of natural regulatory services, such as natural water storage, water flow regulation, and soil
erosion prevention. This can increase the impact of flooding on physical capital, increase siltation in water storage systems,
and lead to the loss of organic matter in topsoil, which is vital for agricultural productivity. Addressing climate change
impacts requires a coordinated and multisectoral approach to managing water, land, and forests for economic purposes
together with sector-specific measures. The CCDR projected that without further climate action, there will be an additional
1.1 million people living in poverty by 2050 under a pessimistic hot/dry climate scenario. Deforestation, particularly in
Kenya's five major water towers, has reduced forest cover from 8 percent in 1990 to 5.9 percent in 2018, affecting 75
percent of the country's renewable surface water and 28 percent of its hydropower generation.

6. Kenya's biodiversity, a vital asset for the country, is facing significant threats that undermine the health of
ecosystems and the services they provide. Despite Kenya's efforts to increase its protected areas, these efforts are
insufficient to meet the "30x30" target of the Global Biodiversity Framework, which aims to protect 30 percent of the
planet's land and oceans by 2030. The country's biodiversity is increasingly at risk due to habitat loss, fragmentation,
unsustainable land use, and human-wildlife conflicts. These issues not only degrade habitats but also disrupt ecological
corridors essential for the survival of various large animal species.

7. Women’s empowerment has been linked with improved agricultural productivity and natural resource
conservation (Diiro et al. 2018; Brisebois et al. 2022). Women are also the primary harvesters and managers of natural
resources, such as water and biofuels, in rural households, putting them at the frontline of sustainable natural resource
management. However, their potential to support improved sustainable agricultural production, land management, and
natural resource management is curtailed by social norms as well as limited access to resources and skills development
opportunities (James et al 2021). Further, women's voices are often neglected in the design and delivery of agricultural
extension, land and natural resources, management, and community-based environmental conservation and restoration
interventions (Nijbroek and Wangui 2018).

8. Kenya, with a low readiness for climate change, ranking 148th on the ND-GAIN Index, must enhance its adaptation
capacity. The Government of Kenya (GoK) has developed the National Landscape and Ecosystem Restoration Programme
Strategy 2023-2032 (NLERS), targeting the planting of 15 billion trees, which lays out a national program to restore, sustain,

5
    The World Bank Group, 2023. Kenya Country Climate and Development Report.



                                                                                                                         Page 3
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)


enhance, protect, and increase the productivity of Kenya’s landscapes and ecosystem services. Implementation of the
NLERS is expected to result in the restoration and conservation of 10.6 million hectares of degraded landscapes and
ecosystems by 2032. These results, in turn, are expected to enhance biodiversity conservation, environmental
sustainability, sustainable livelihoods, climate resilience, and socio-economic development. The NLERS framework
encourages the mainstreaming of actions by providing a roadmap for cross-sectoral coordination within the context of
devolution and local development objectives in an inclusive manner. Through a whole-of-government approach, NLERS
aims to harness analysis, planning, and public investment along with institutional readiness to promote institutional
collaboration across ministries and subnational entities. The EMCA of 1999 provides the legal framework for these
environmental management efforts in Kenya.


 Relationship to CPF
9. The proposed KEWASIP aligns with the Kenya Country Partnership Framework FY23-28 (CPF) discussed by the
Board in November, 2022 (Report No. 172255-KE). The Project will contribute directly to the CPF’s Higher Level Outcome
3 (HLO3), which aims at greater resilience and sustainability of Kenya’s natural capital. In so doing, the proposed Project
will also support efforts to increase household resilience to, and national preparedness for, shocks and reduce Kenya’s
extreme water insecurity in the face of climate change. Moreover, the KEWASIP will support national development plans,
including the draft Kenya’s Vision 2030 strategy and Kenya’s Bottom- Up Economic Transformation Agenda which aim to
accelerate sustainable growth, reduce inequality, and manage resource scarcity.

10. The proposed Project is consistent with the goals of the Paris Agreement and Kenya’s latest NDC. The Project
supports the mitigation commitments outlined in the NDC, including enhancing tree cover, achieving land degradation
neutrality, scaling up nature-based solutions and REDD+ activities, and strengthening climate-smart agriculture. The
project supports the adaptation commitments, including enhancing adaptive capacity and climate resilience across sectors
and at the two levels of government (National and County Governments) and enhancing livelihood strategies for the
climate resilience of local communities. Further, these NDC commitments on mitigation and adaptation are in line with
the national climate plans and strategies and are consistent with the findings of the Kenya CCDR.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 Note to Task Team: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience.
 Keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. Delete this note when finalizing the document.


 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the area under sustainable watershed and landscape
 management for livelihoods and conservation in the project areas.


 Key Results (From PCN)
11.   The proposed PDO level results indicators are:

       •    Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (CRI, Hectare)
       •    The percentage of households reporting improved quality of life due to diversified livelihoods and benefit
            sharing.
       •    Net greenhouse gas emissions (tones/year)


                                                                                                                       Page 4
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)



 D. Concept Description

12. The NLERS provides goals for seven priority ecosystems: agro-ecosystems, forests, wetlands, rangelands, settled
areas, mountain ecosystems, and marine and ocean ecosystems. Interventions to be tailored to each ecosystem include
mapping of degraded sites, tree growing, reseeding, rewilding, protection of natural ecosystems, invasive species control,
soil and water conservation, promotion of sustainable land-use practices, development of ecosystems management units
plans, pollution prevention and control, promotion of sustainable nature-based enterprises their clean value chains, and
stormwater and flood control. To achieve the objectives for each ecosystem, the NLERS provides for various intervention
measures, including awareness creation; capacity building; research, monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge
management; policy advocacy; governance, coordination, and communication; stakeholder participation and
collaboration; and resource mobilization. Activities to be supported under the NLERS include but are not limited to the
identification and mapping of critical landscapes, construction of cold storage and seed centers, establishment of tree
nurseries, erection of fencing and enclosures for protection and natural regeneration, removal of invasive species,
construction of soil erosion control and water conservation, desilting of water pans and reservoirs.

13. The KEWASIP will support a subset of activities presented in the NLERS in a limited geographic area agreed with
the GoK. Key factors being used to inform target areas include land degradation, land cover, water availability, population
density, poverty headcount rate, and climate change vulnerability. Whilst the final selection of target areas is yet to be
agreed upon, consideration is being given to the Tana and Athi Basins, which encompass twenty counties that are
recharged from the Mount Kenya and Mount Aberdare water towers, as well as multiple smaller water towers. Hotspots
within the counties of Murang'a, Nyeri, Embu, Kiambu, Machakos, Makueni, Meru, Tharaka-Nithi (specifically near Chuka),
and the northeastern area of Kitui have also been identified as possible priorities for investment.




 Note to Task Team: The following sections are system generated and changes must be made in Data Sheet(s). Delete
 this note when finalizing the document.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                    Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         TBD
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


14. The KEWASIP will provide technical assistance to Kenya to develop a flexible, national, comprehensive, and
harmonized measurement, reporting, and verification (MRV) system to report on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
landscape restoration and protection monitoring to enable measurement of progress toward national goals and set


                                                                                                                       Page 5
       The World Bank
       Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)


restoration targets while strengthening resilience and improving ecosystem health. In addition, the KEWASIP will fund
key institutional and capacity development interventions targeting the counties and wards. Targeted hotspots include the
Tana and Athi Basins which encompass twenty counties which are recharged from the Mount Kenya and Mount Aberdare
water towers, as well as multiple smaller water towers. Hotspots within the counties of Murang’a, Nyeri, Embu, Kiambu,
Machakos, Makueni, Meru, Tharaka-Nithi (specifically near Chuka), and the northeastern area of Kitui will be selected by
assessing the factors of land degradation, land cover, water availability, population density, and poverty headcount rate.
These activities will be implemented by th`e Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, and Forestry (MoECCF) and
coordinated by the office of the Head of Public Service, to provide necessary communication and capacity support to
county governments and ensure the achievement of Project objectives. The envisaged Technical Assistance (TA) activities
are less likely to have a large footprint, impacts are site-specific, less diverse and complex, and, there is less potential for
strong synergistic or cumulative impacts, therefore, the related E&S risks and impacts are classified as Substantial. The
KEWASIP is expected to result in positive environmental and social impacts by supporting the restoration of degraded
landscapes and improvement of rural livelihoods in selected project areas. The KEWASIP, as guided by the Operations
Environmental and Social Review Committee (OESRC) Advisory Note Technical Assistance and the Environmental and
Social Framework (2019), will include type 2 and 3 activities on supporting the formulation of policies, programs, plans,
strategies or legal frameworks and strengthening government capacity. Potential direct environmental risks and adverse
impacts are related to ecosystem disturbance during field assessments and data collection activities and data inaccuracy
related to greenhouse gas emissions or the status of landscape restoration and protection, as related to the development
of the national MRV system for reporting on greenhouse gas emissions and landscape restoration and protection
monitoring. Potential negative downstream effects are mainly related to inadequate E&S management of activities at the
national level, beneficiary counties and wards; limited E&S support, staff capacity and resources; limited ESHS training and
capacity building; and occupational health and safety (OHS). Key social risks are related to the development of a national
measurement, reporting, and verification (MRV) system for reporting on greenhouse gas emissions and landscape
restoration and protection monitoring include, inaccurate data collection that could lead to misinformed policy decisions
and ineffective management strategies; inadequate stakeholder consultation, untargeted and meaningful engagements,
including with local communities and vulnerable and marginalized groups (VMGs) could lead to conflicts, and resistance
to the MRV system implementation, hindering the effectiveness of the monitoring efforts; the collection, storage, and
sharing of data through the MRV system could pose privacy and data protection risks; the monitoring of landscape
restoration and protection may have implications for local livelihoods, especially those dependent on natural resources;
and, the implementation of restoration strategies could lead to changes in land use practices or displacement of
communities, impacting their economic status and social cohesion. For the key institutional and capacity development
interventions targeting the counties and wards, social risks are related to dependency on capacity development
interventions limiting local ownership and sustainability; and, gender and VMGs/IPs disparities within counties and wards
may not be adequately addressed. The indirect/downstream social risks and potential negative impacts relate mainly to
exclusions of vulnerable groups including IPs and women, sexual exploitation abuse and sexual harassment (SEA/SH) and
labor management. The MoECCF will ensure the planning process for all TAs includes adequate environmental and social
assessments ensuring consistency with the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF) with actions
mainstreamed in TAs, addressing implications consistent with the ESF. In addition, the World Bank’s ESF requirements in
the ESSs will be applied on the TA activities, as relevant. Furthermore, social risks and potential impacts will be managed
through the implementation of a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and an E&S instrument for the KEWASIP.

 Note to Task Team: This summary section is downloaded from the PCN data sheet and is editable. It should match
 the text provided by E&S specialist. If it is revised after the initial download the task team must manually update the
 summary in this section. Delete this note when finalizing the document.



                                                                                                                           Page 6
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)




Note: To view the Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, refer to the Concept Stage ESRS Document. Delete
this note when finalizing the document.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman Mohammed
 Senior Environmental Engineer

 Victor Vazquez Alvarez
 Senior Water Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Kenya

Implementing Agencies
 State Department of Forestry
 Gitonga Mugambi
 PS
 ps@forestry.go.ke

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Hisham Mohammed Salih Osman Mohammed, Victor Vazquez Alvarez

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Paul Jonathan Martin                   18-Feb-2025


                                                                                                                 Page 7
     The World Bank
     Kenya Watershed Services Improvement Project(P509738)



Country Director:                       Anne Margreth Bakilana                 21-Feb-2025




Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
finalizing the document.




                                                                                                            Page 8
